http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Thank you 
for purchasing this e-book.
To receive special offers and news 
about our latest products,  
sign up below.
 
Or visit LWW.com
Sign Up
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Physical 
Examination 
 AND  History Taking
B A T E S
'
Guide to
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Physical 
Examination 
AND  History Taking
B A T E S
'
T W E L F T H  E D I T I O N
Guide to
Lynn S. Bickley, MD, FACP
Clinical Professor of Internal Medicine
School of Medicine
University of New Mexico
Albuquerque, New Mexico
Peter G. Szilagyi, MD, MPH
Professor of Pediatrics and Executive Vice-Chair
Department of Pediatrics
University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA)
Los Angeles, California
Guest Editor 
Richard M. Hoffman, MD, MPH, FACP 
Professor of Internal Medicine and Epidemiology
Director, Division of General Internal Medicine
University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine
Iowa City, Iowa
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Acquisitions Editor: Crystal Taylor
Product Development Editor: Greg Nicholl
Marketing Manager: Michael McMahon
Production Project Manager: Cynthia Rudy
Design Coordinator: Holly McLaughlin
Art Director: Jennifer Clements
Illustrator: Body Scientiﬁc International
Manufacturing Coordinator: Margie Orzech
Prepress Vendor: Aptara, Inc.
Twelfth Edition 
Copyright © 2017 Wolters Kluwer. 
Copyright © 2013, 2009 by Wolters Kluwer Health/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Copyright © 2007, 
2003, 1999 by Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Copyright © 1995, 1991, 1987, 1983, 1979, 1974 by J. B. 
Lippincott Company.  All rights reserved. This book is protected by copyright. No part of this book may be 
reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, including as photocopies or scanned-in or other 
electronic copies, or utilized by any information storage and retrieval system without written permission 
from the copyright owner, except for brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. Materials 
appearing in this book prepared by individuals as part of their ofﬁcial duties as U.S. government employees 
are not covered by the above-mentioned copyright. To request permission, please contact Wolters Kluwer at 
Two Commerce Square, 2001 Market Street, Philadelphia, PA 19103, via email at permissions@lww.com, or 
via our website at lww.com (products and services).
9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1 
Printed in China
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Names: Bickley, Lynn S., author. | Szilagyi, Peter G., author. | Hoffman, 
 Richard M., editor.
Title: Bates’ guide to physical examination and history taking / Lynn S. 
 Bickley, Peter G. Szilagyi ; guest editor, Richard M. Hoffman.
Other titles: Guide to physical examination and history taking
Description: Twelfth edition. | Philadelphia : Wolters Kluwer, [2017] | 
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identiﬁers: LCCN 2016018376 | ISBN 9781469893419 (alk. paper)
Subjects: | MESH: Physical Examination—methods | Medical History 
 Taking–methods
Classiﬁcation: LCC RC76 | NLM WB 205 | DDC 616.07/54—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016018376
This work is provided “as is,” and the publisher disclaims any and all warranties, express or implied, 
including any warranties as to accuracy, comprehensiveness, or currency of the content of this work. 
 
This work is no substitute for individual patient assessment based upon healthcare professionals’ 
examination of each patient and consideration of, among other things, age, weight, gender, current or prior 
medical conditions, medication history, laboratory data and other factors unique to the patient. The publisher 
does not provide medical advice or guidance and this work is merely a reference tool. Healthcare professionals, 
and not the publisher, are solely responsible for the use of this work including all medical judgments and for 
any resulting diagnosis and treatments.
 
Given continuous, rapid advances in medical science and health information, independent professional 
veriﬁcation of medical diagnoses, indications, appropriate pharmaceutical selections and dosages, and 
treatment options should be made and healthcare professionals should consult a variety of sources. When 
prescribing medication, healthcare professionals are advised to consult the product information sheet (the 
manufacturer’s package insert) accompanying each drug to verify, among other things, conditions of use, 
warnings and side effects and identify any changes in dosage schedule or contraindications, particularly if 
the medication to be administered is new, infrequently used or has a narrow therapeutic range. To the 
maximum extent permitted under applicable law, no responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury 
and/or damage to persons or property, as a matter of products liability, negligence law or otherwise, or from 
any reference to or use by any person of this work.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
We would like to dedicate this book to all our  
students, trainees, and mentees who have  
taught us the true value of both  
the science and the  
art of medicine.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
vii
Faculty Reviewers
J.D. Bartleson Jr., MD
Associate Professor of Neurology
Mayo Clinic
Rochester, Minnesota
John D. Bartlett, MD
Assistant Clinical Professor of Ophthalmology
Jules Stein Eye Institute
David Geffen School of Medicine
Los Angeles, California
Amy E. Blatt, MD
Assistant Professor
Department of Medicine
School of Medicine and Dentistry
University of Rochester Medical Center
Rochester, New York
Adam Brodsky, MD
Associate Professor
Medical Director, Geriatric Psychiatry Services 
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences
School of Medicine
University of New Mexico Psychiatric Center &  
Sandoval Regional Medical Center
Albuquerque, New Mexico
Thomas M. Carroll, MD, PhD
Assistant Professor
Department of Medicine and Palliative Care
School of Medicine and Dentistry
University of Rochester Medical Center
Rochester, New York
Adam J. Doyle, MD
Assistant Professor 
Department of Surgery
School of Medicine and Dentistry
University of Rochester Medical Center
Rochester, New York
Amit Garg, MD, FAAD
Associate Professor and Founding Chair
Department of Dermatology
Hofstra Northwell School of Medicine
Northwell Health
Manhasset, New York
Catherine F. Gracey, MD
Associate Professor
Department of Medicine
School of Medicine and Dentistry
University of Rochester Medical Center
Rochester, New York
Carla Herman, MD, MPH 
Chief
Division of Geriatrics and Palliative Medicine 
Professor
Department of Internal Medicine
School of Medicine
University of New Mexico
Albuquerque, New Mexico
Mark Landig, OD
Division of Cataract & Refractive Surgery
Jules Stein Eye Institute
David Geffen School of Medicine
Los Angeles, California
Helen R. Levey, DO, MPH
PGY5 Resident in Urology
School of Medicine and Dentistry
University of Rochester Medical Center
Rochester, New York
Patrick McCleskey, MD 
Dermatologist
Kaiser Permanente Oakland Medical Center
Oakland, California
Jeanne H.S. O’Brien, MD
Associate Professor 
Department of Urology
School of Medicine and Dentistry
University of Rochester Medical Center
Rochester, New York
Alec B. O’Connor, MD, MPH
Director, Internal Medicine Residency
Associate Professor
Department of Medicine 
School of Medicine and Dentistry
University of Rochester Medical Center
Rochester, New York
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
viii 
Faculty Reviewers
A. Andrew Rudmann, MD
Associate Professor
Department of Medicine
School of Medicine and Dentistry
University of Rochester Medical Center
Rochester, New York
Moira A. Szilagyi, MD, PhD
Professor of Pediatrics
University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA)
Los Angeles, California
Loralei Lacina Thornburg, MD
Associate Professor
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
School of Medicine and Dentistry
University of Rochester Medical Center
Rochester, New York
Scott A. Vogelgesang, MD
Director, Division of Immunology
Clinical Professor 
Department of Internal Medicine–Immunology
University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine
Iowa City, Iowa
Brian P. Watkins, MD, MS, FACS
Partner
Genesee Surgical Associates
Rochester, New York
Paula Zozzaro-Smith, DO
Fellow of Maternal-Fetal Medicine 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology 
University of Rochester Medical Center
Rochester, New York 
STUDENT REVIEWERS
Ayala Danzig
University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry
Benjamin Edmonds
University of Central Florida College of Medicine
Nicholas PN Goldstein
University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
ix
Preface
Bates’ Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking is designed for medical, 
physician assistant, nurse practitioner, and other students who are learning to 
interview patients, perform their physical examination, and apply clinical rea-
soning and shared decision making to their assessment and plan, based on a 
sound understanding of clinical evidence. The twelfth edition has many new 
features to facilitate student learning. As with previous editions, these changes 
spring from three sources: the feedback and reviews of students, teachers, and 
faculty; our commitment to making the book easier to read and more efﬁcient to 
use; and the abundant new evidence that supports the techniques of examina-
tion, interviewing, and health promotion.
Throughout the twelfth edition, we emphasize common or important problems 
rather than the rare or esoteric, though at times we include unusual ﬁndings that 
are classic or life threatening. We encourage students to study the strong evi-
dence base that informs each chapter and to carefully review the clinical guide-
lines and citations from the health care literature.
Special Features and Highlights
In this edition we have introduced clinical pearls, printed in blue, to highlight key 
points. We have also used color to highlight textboxes so students and teachers 
can quickly ﬁnd important summaries of clinical conditions and tips for chal-
lenging examination techniques such as inspecting the fundus or measuring the 
jugular venous pressure. Many of the ﬁgures are new or have been updated and, 
for the ﬁrst time, all ﬁgures are numbered with captions to make them easier to 
locate and reference in both the print and electronic editions.
Organization
The book comprises three units: Foundations of Health Assessment, Regional Exam-
inations, and Special Populations. 
Unit 1, Foundations of Health Assessment, includes chapters on clinical proﬁciency, 
assessing clinical evidence, and interviewing and health history. These chapters fol-
low a logical sequence that begins with an overview of the components of patient 
evaluation, followed by important concepts in assessment of clinical evidence and 
clinical decision making, and the artful task of gathering the history. 
■ Chapter 1, Foundations for Clinical Proﬁciency, features an overview of history 
taking, physical examination, and now includes the assessment and plan, 
and a sample patient record. This chapter describes the differences between 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
x 
Preface
subjective and objective data and symptoms and signs, and provides a model 
for sequencing the examination that optimizes patient comfort. It presents 
guidelines for creating a clear, succinct, and well-organized patient record. 
■ Chapter 2, Evaluating Clinical Evidence, has been entirely rewritten in the 
twelfth edition by Dr. Richard Hoffman and clariﬁes key concepts to ensure 
student understanding of the history and physical examination as diagnostic 
tests; tools for evaluating diagnostic tests such as  sensitivity, speciﬁcity, posi-
tive and negative predictive values, and likelihood ratios; types of studies that 
inform recommendations for health promotion; and an approach to critical 
appraisal of the clinical literatures and types of bias.
■ Chapter 3, Interviewing and the Health History, describes the differences 
between a comprehensive and focused health history, and between the ﬂuid 
exchange of the interview and its transformation into the structured format of 
the written health history. It presents the techniques of skilled and advanced 
interviewing, the sequence and context of the interview, including its cultural 
dimensions, and foundational concepts of ethics and professionalism. It clar-
iﬁes the transition from the open-ended interviewing of the Present Illness 
(and Personal and Social History) to the direct questions of the Past Medical 
History and Family History to the closed-ended “yes–no” questions of the 
Review of Systems. This chapter emphasizes the importance of masterful lis-
tening, so easily sacriﬁced to the time pressures of ofﬁce and hospital care. It 
mirrors the precepts of Sir William Osler . . . for therapeutic relationships, 
always “Listen to your patient. He is telling you the diagnosis,” and “The good 
physician treats the disease. The great physician treats the patient who has the 
disease.”
Unit 2, Regional Examinations covers the regional examinations from “head to 
toe.” The 14 chapters in this unit have been thoroughly updated and contain a 
review of anatomy and physiology, the common symptoms encountered in the 
health history, important topics for health promotion and counseling, detailed 
descriptions and images of techniques of examination, a sample written record, 
comparative tables of abnormalities, and conclude with extensive references 
from the recent clinical literature. Chapters with the most signiﬁcant revisions 
are highlighted below.
■ Chapter 4, Beginning the  Physical Examination: General Survey, Vital Signs, and 
Pain, contains updates on obesity and nutrition counseling, and new stan-
dards for measuring blood pressure from the Joint National Committee on 
Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure VII Report 
(JNC 8). 
■ Chapter 5, Behavior and Mental Status, has been substantially revised accord-
ing to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition 
(DSM-5) of 2013.
■ Chapter 6, The Skin, Hair, and Nails, has been entirely rewritten for the twelfth 
edition by Dr. Patrick McCleskey and Dr. Amit Garg to improve the frame-
work for assessing common lesions and abnormalities and the quality of its 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
P r e f a c e  
xi
teaching photographs, and to align this chapter with recommendations of the 
American Academy of Dermatology for student learners.
■ Chapter 9, The Cardiovascular System, has detailed new evidence about risk 
factor screening, new clinical guidelines, and the complexities of assessing 
hypertension.
■ Chapter 16, The Musculoskeletal System, contains a more systematic approach 
to the musculoskeletal examination and an updated classiﬁcation of maneu-
vers to assess the shoulder, with reference to likelihood ratios for abnormali-
ties whenever permitted by the clinical literature.
Other notable features include discussion of new screening guidelines for breast 
cancer, prostate cancer, colon cancer, Papanicolaou smears, and stroke risk fac-
tors as well as updated information on sexually transmitted diseases.
Unit 3, Special Populations includes chapters covering special stages in the life 
cycle—infancy through adolescence, pregnancy, and aging.
■ Chapter 18, Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence, includes an increased 
emphasis on health promotion and child development, as well as the many tables 
and ﬁgures that highlight key concepts.
■ Chapter 19, The Pregnant Woman, updates health promotion and counseling 
topics such as nutrition, weight gain, immunizations, substance abuse, and 
intimate partner violence.
■ Chapter 20, The Older Adult, presents new information on frailty, when to 
screen, immunizations and cancer screening, the spectrum of cognitive 
decline and dementia screening tests, and the new algorithm for falls preven-
tion from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. This chapter and 
Chapter 17, The Nervous System, also explore the challenging complexities of 
distinguishing delirium, dementia, and depression.
Additional Resources
Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking
As a companion to Bates’ twelfth edition, we recommend Bates’ Pocket Guide to 
Physical Examination and History Taking, Eighth edition.  The Pocket Guide is an 
abbreviated version of the Bates’ twelfth edition textbook, which is designed for 
portability and convenience at the bedside. Return to the textbook whenever 
more comprehensive study and understanding are needed.
Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination
The Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (www.batesvisualguide.com), 
reﬁlmed in 2013, is a key adjunct for mastering the many techniques of physical 
examination. This series of 18 videos displays seasoned clinicians conducting 
each of the regional examinations and demonstrates visually the varying tech-
niques of inspection, palpation, percussion, and auscultation in the regional 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
xii 
Preface
examinations and special populations. We encourage students to study the writ-
ten chapters and videos in tandem, often numerous times.
For students preparing for clinical testing, the Visual Guide includes 10 Objec-
tive Structured Clinical Examinations (or OSCEs), which shows students evalu-
ating patients with common clinical problems in standard OSCE formats, 
interspersed with questions to guide learning key points. These OSCEs cover:
 1. Chest Pain
 2. Abdominal Pain
 3. Sore Throat
 4. Knee Pain
 5. Cough
 6. Vomit
 7. Amenorrhea
 8. Falls
 9. Back Pain
10. Shortness of Breath
 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
xiii
Acknowledgments
Bates’ Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, now in its twelfth edition, 
spans an evolution of four decades. Drs. Barbara Bates and Robert Hoekelman, 
colleagues in internal medicine and pediatrics at the University of Rochester 
School of Medicine and Dentistry, launched the ﬁrst edition in 1974 as a hands-
on manual for medical and advanced practice nursing students learning to mas-
ter the physical examination of adults and children. With clear prose and black 
and white drawings, they devoted 18 chapters to the techniques of regional 
examination for adults and children. They devised the classic format of the Bates’ 
Guide still present today—black explanatory text in the major column, examples 
of abnormalities in red in the minor column, and comparative tables of abnor-
malities at the end of each chapter. Dr. Bickley became chief editor and author 
for the seventh edition, joined by Dr. Szilagyi for the eighth edition. By then the 
Bates’ Guide contained additional sections on anatomy and physiology and new 
chapters on interviewing, the approach to symptoms, the mental status examina-
tion, and clinical thinking from data to plan. 
Over the next four editions Drs. Bickley and Szilagyi added many features to 
make Bates’ Guide useful to student learners. They introduced health history and 
health promotion and counseling sections in each chapter, and have increasingly 
accommodated the evidence-based medicine “revolution” with updated health 
promotion and counseling sections in each edition that cite major studies and 
clinical guidelines; examples of abnormalities, tables, and footnotes and refer-
ences reﬂecting advances in the clinical literature; and now a new chapter on 
evaluating clinical evidence. 
In this edition with pleasure and esteem the authors welcome Dr. Richard 
Hoffman, Professor of Internal Medicine and Epidemiology and Director of the 
Division of General Internal Medicine at the University of Iowa Carver College 
of Medicine/Iowa City VA Medical Center, as guest editor. Dr. Hoffman is 
Associate Editor for the American College of Physicians (ACP) Journal Club, and 
has been a peer reviewer for a number of prostate screening guidelines, authored two 
Cochrane reviews, and writes and reviews for UpToDate.
Each edition of the Bates’ Guide builds on an extensive review process, with many 
thanks due. First, the publisher surveys students and faculty about the merits of 
each chapter. Summaries of their responses provide helpful recommendations 
for subsequent revisions. Then the authors elicit intensive chapter critiques and 
updates from faculty at health sciences schools across the country, listed in the 
Reviewers section to follow. For their valuable insights and intense focus on this 
edition, the authors especially commend Dr. Richard Hoffman for his lucid pre-
sentation of the complex concepts governing evaluation of clinical evidence in 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
xiv 
Acknowledgments
Chapter 2, Dr. Patrick McCleskey for rewriting Chapter 6 and presenting a new 
paradigm for assessing skin lesions with many new teaching photographs, 
assisted by Dr. Amit Garg. Drs. John Bartlett and Mark Landig for their review of 
the head and neck examination in Chapter 7, Dr. J.D. Bartleson for reﬁning the 
always challenging fundamentals of the examination of the nervous system in 
Chapter 17, and Drs. Carla Herman and John Robertson for their useful scrutiny 
of new developments in the evaluation of older adults in Chapter 20. We also 
appreciate the assistance of Dr. Alec O’Connor in locating skilled faculty review-
ers for many of the adult examination chapters and making important contribu-
tions to revisions of Chapter 8. Several reviewers made valued additions to the 
assessment of children and adolescents in Chapter 18—Dr. Moira Szilagyi and 
medical students Nicholas Goldstein and Ayala Danzig.
To compose and produce the Bates’ Guide requires the deft touch of a maestro. 
Newly revised chapters must be reviewed, author queries issued and answered, 
and photos and illustrations checked and rechecked for teaching style and accu-
racy. Text, textboxes, examples of abnormalities, and images all must be carefully 
aligned. Each page is designed to hold reader appeal, highlight key points, and 
facilitate student learning. For his untiring craft and dedication, we especially 
thank Greg Nicholl, Senior Product Development Editor at Wolters Kluwer, who 
has woven these many strands into a coherent and exemplary text. We commend 
Kelly Horvath who assisted Greg with line-by-line review and careful annota-
tions to prepare the book for the compositor, and Chris Miller of Aptara who 
turned complex text documents into corrected print proofs ready for publica-
tion. Early in the editing process and preceding Greg Nicholl, Stephanie Roulias 
was a conscientious collaborator who set many of the editing processes for the 
twelfth edition in motion. Crystal Taylor has been an astute manager of acquisi-
tions for the Bates’ Suite of teaching materials, contracting, and marketing. The 
publishing team brings invaluable talent to the tradition of excellence that has 
made the Bates’ Guide a premier text for students learning the time-honored skills 
of patient assessment and care.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
The twelfth edition of Bates’ Guide to Physical Exami-
nation and History Taking is your comprehensive 
guide to learning to effectively conduct the health 
interview and physical examination. This section 
introduces you to the features and learning tools 
that will lead to successful health assessments, 
regional examinations, and working with special 
patient populations. 
At the start of every chapter, you will see a list of 
additional learning resources that complement 
the book in order to build your knowledge and 
conﬁdence in history taking and examination. 
The Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination 
offers over 8 hours of video content and deliv-
ers head-to-toe and systems-based physical 
examination techniques. When used along-
side the book, you have a complete learning 
solution for preparedness for the boards 
and patient encounters. 
How To Use 
Bates’ Guide To Physical Examination 
And History Taking
Clinical Pearls—NEW! 
Be sure to pay special attention to the clinical pearls, 
printed in blue. These clinical comments provide 
practical “pearls” that enhance your understanding 
of the assessment techniques.
because
e a o
a ca appea
a y ocat o .
g
s pat e ts a e t ose
with a personal or family history of multiple or dysplastic nevi or previous 
melanoma. Patients who have a clinical skin examination within the 3 years 
prior to a melanoma diagnosis have thinner melanomas than those who did 
not have a clinical skin examination.20 Both new and changing nevi should be 
closely examined, as at least half of melanomas arise de novo from isolated 
melanocytes rather than pre-existing nevi. Also consider “opportunistic 
screening” as part of the complete physical examination for patients with 
signiﬁcant sun exposure and patients over age 50 years without prior skin 
examination or who live alone.
Since the USPSTF review, an important German study of over 350,000 patients 
reported that full-body primary care screening with dermatology referrals for 
concerning lesions reduced melanoma mortality by more than 47%.21 Survival 
from melanoma strongly correlates with tumor thickness. Two further studies 
demonstrate that patients receiving skin examinations are more likely to have 
thinner melanomas.20,22
Detecting melanoma requires practice and knowledge of how benign nevi 
change over time, often going from ﬂat to raised or acquiring additional brown 
pigment. Studies have shown that even limited clinician training makes a dif-
ference in detection: patients of primary care providers who spent 1.5 hours 
completing an online tutorial improved diagnostic accuracy. Similar studies 
show such training results in thinner melanomas than patients of providers 
without such training.23–26
Screening for Melanoma: The ABCDEs. Clinicians should apply the 
ABCE-EFG method when screening moles for melanoma (this does not apply 
for non-melanocytic lesions like seborrheic keratoses). The sensitivity of this 
tool for detecting melanoma ranges from 43% to 97%, and speciﬁcity ranges 
from 36% to 100%; diagnostic accuracy depends on how many criteria are used 
d ﬁ
b
l
27 f
f h
f
b
Turn to Tables 6-4 through 6-6 on  
pp. 197–203 showing rough, pink,  
and brown nevi and their mimics.
Review the ABCDE-EFG rule and pho-
tographs in Table 6-6, pp. 200–203, 
which provide additional helpful 
identifiers and comparisons of benign 
brown lesions with melanoma.
pp
y
g
p
h
l
f
l
h
f
l
l
d
l
because
e a o
a ca appea
a y ocat o .
g
s pat e ts a e t ose
al Exami-
ehensive 
e health
section 
g tools
ments, 
pecial
ions. 
st of 
ent
nd 
n. 
n 
-
 
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
449
Visualize or palpate the bony landmarks of the abdominal wall and pelvis, as 
shown in Figure 11-1: the xiphoid process, iliac crest, anterior superior iliac spine, 
pubic tubercle, and symphysis pubis. The rectus abdominis muscles become more 
prominent when the patient raises the head and shoulders or lifts the legs from 
the supine position.
C H A P T E R 11
The Abdomen
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate 
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 13: Abdomen)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com
Anatomy and Physiology
Rectus abdominis
muscle
Umbilicus
Inguinal ligament
Pubic tubercle
Xiphoid process
Costal margin
Midline, overlying
linea alba
Anterior superior
iliac spine
Symphysis pubis
Iliac crest
F I G U R E  1 1 - 1 .  Landmarks of the abdomen.
LWBK1481-Ch11_p449-508.indd   449
 
xv
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
785
Table 17-7 Nystagmus
Nystagmus is a rhythmic oscillation of the eyes, analogous to a tremor in other parts of the body. It has multiple causes, 
including impairment of vision in early life, disorders of the labyrinth and the cerebellar system, and drug toxicity. Nystagmus 
occurs normally when a person watches a rapidly moving object (e.g., a passing train). Study the three characteristics of 
nystagmus described in this table so that you can correctly identify the type of nystagmus. Then refer to textbooks of neurology 
for differential diagnoses.
Direction of Gaze in Which Nystagmus Appears
Example: Nystagmus on Right Lateral Gaze
Nystagmus Present (Right Lateral Gaze)
Although nystagmus may be present in all 
directions of gaze, it may appear or become 
accentuated only on deviation of the eyes (e.g., 
to the side or upward). On extreme lateral 
gaze, the normal person may show a few beats 
resembling nystagmus. Avoid making 
assessments in such extreme positions, and 
observe for nystagmus only within the ﬁeld of full 
binocular vision.
Nystagmus Not Present (Left Lateral Gaze)
Direction of the Quick and Slow Phases
Example: Left-Beating Nystagmus—a Quick Jerk to the Left in 
Each Eye, then a Slow Drift to the Right
Nystagmus usually has both slow and fast 
movements, but is deﬁned by its fast phase. 
For example, if the eyes jerk quickly to the 
patient’s left and drift back slowly to the right, 
the patient is said to have left-beating 
nystagmus. Occasionally, nystagmus consists 
only of coarse oscillations without quick and 
slow components, described as pendular.
(continued)
Examples of Abnormalities
Once again, Bates’ Guide to Physical Examination and 
History Taking offers an easy-to-follow two-column 
format with step-by-step examination techniques on 
the left and abnormalities with differential diagnoses 
on the right. As your skills progress, study the 
abnormal variants of common physical ﬁndings in 
the red Examples of Abnormalities column to deepen 
your knowledge of important clinical conditions. 
multipiple causes,
ug tox
oxicity. Nystagmus 
characteristics of 
textbooks of neurology
may be present in all 
may appear or become
deviation of the eyes (e.g., 
) On extreme lateral
ies
n and
umn 
s on 
ses
the
in
en 
s.
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
737
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Cranial Nerves III, IV, and VI—Oculomotor, Trochlear, and Abdu-
cens. Test the extraocular movements in the six cardinal directions of gaze, and 
look for loss of conjugate movements in any of the six directions, which causes 
diplopia. Ask the patient which direction makes the diplopia worse and inspect 
the eye closely for asymmetric deviation of movement. Determine if the diplo-
pia is monocular or binocular by asking the patient to cover one eye, then the 
other.
Check convergence of the eyes.
Identify any nystagmus, an involuntary jerking movement of the eyes with quick 
and slow components. Note the direction of gaze in which it appears, the plane 
of the nystagmus (horizontal, vertical, rotary, or mixed), and the direction of the 
quick and slow components. Nystagmus is named for the direction of the quick 
component. Ask the patient to ﬁx his or her vision on a distant object and 
observe if the nystagmus increases or decreases.
Look for ptosis (drooping of the upper eyelids). A slight difference in the width 
of the palpebral ﬁssures is a normal variant in approximately one third of patients.
Cranial Nerve V—Trigeminal
Motor. While palpating the temporal and masseter muscles in turn, ask the 
patient to ﬁrmly clench the teeth (Figs. 17-9 and 17-10). Note the strength of 
muscle contraction. Ask the patient to open and move the jaw from side to side.
See Chapter 7, Head and Neck (pp. 237–
238) for a more detailed discussion of 
testing extraocular movements. 
See Table 7-11, Dysconjugate Gaze,  
p. 278. Monocular diplopia is seen in 
local problems with glasses or contact 
lenses, cataracts, astigmatism, or pto-
sis. Binocular diplopia occurs in CN III, IV, 
and VI neuropathy (40% of patients), 
and eye muscle disorders from myas-
thenia gravis, trauma, thyroid ophthal-
mopathy, and internuclear 
ophthalmoplegia.86
See Table 17-7, Nystagmus, pp. 785–786. 
Nystagmus is seen in cerebellar dis-
ease, especially with gait ataxia and 
dysarthria (increases with retinal fixa-
tion), and vestibular disorders 
(decreases with retinal fixation); and 
in internuclear ophthalmoplegia. 
Ptosis is seen in 3rd nerve palsy (CN III), 
Horner syndrome (ptosis, miosis, 
 forehead anhidrosis), or myasthenia 
 gravis. 
F I G U R E  1 7 - 9 .  Palpate the 
temporal muscles.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 1 0 .  Palpate the 
masseter muscles.
Difficulty clenching the jaw or moving 
it to the opposite side suggests mas-
seter and lateral pterygoid weakness, 
respectively. Jaw deviation during 
opening points to weakness on the 
deviating side. 
Look for unilateral weakness in CN V 
pontine lesions; bilateral weakness in 
bilateral hemispheric disease.
CNS patterns from stroke include ipsi-
lateral facial and body sensory loss 
from contralateral cortical or thalamic 
lesions; ipsilateral face, but contralat-
eral body sensory loss in brainstem 
lesions.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
K1481-Ch17_p711-796.indd   737
To further sharpen your clinical acumen, turn 
to the end-of-chapter Tables of Abnormalities, 
which allow you to compare and contrast 
clinical conditions in a convenient single table 
format. 
xvi
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
322 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
percuss ﬁrst in one location, then in another. Review the description of per-
cussion notes on p. 323. Healthy lungs are resonant.
 
While the patient keeps both arms crossed in front of the chest, percuss the 
thorax in symmetric locations on each side from the apex to the base.
■ Percuss one side of the chest and then 
the other at each level in a ladder-like 
pattern, as shown in Figure 8-19. 
Omit the areas over the scapulae—
the thickness of muscle and bone 
alters the percussion notes over the 
lungs. Identify and locate the area 
and quality of any abnormal per-
cussion note.
■ Identify the descent of the diaphragm, or diaphragmatic excursion. First, deter-
mine the level of diaphragmatic dullness during quiet respiration. Holding the 
pleximeter ﬁnger above and parallel to the expected level of dullness, percuss 
downward in progressive steps until dullness clearly replaces resonance. 
Conﬁrm this level of change by percussing downward from adjacent areas 
both medially and laterally (Fig. 8-20).
Dullness replaces resonance when fluid 
or solid tissue replaces air-containing 
lung or occupies the pleural space 
beneath your percussing fingers. 
Examples include: lobar pneumonia, in 
which the alveoli are filled with fluid 
and blood cells; and pleural accumula-
tions of serous fluid (pleural effusion), 
blood (hemothorax), pus (empyema), 
fibrous tissue, or tumor. Dullness 
makes pneumonic and pleural  
effusion three to four times more 
likely, respectively.45
Generalized hyperresonance is com-
mon over the hyperinflated lungs of 
COPD or asthma. Unilateral hyperreso-
nance suggests a large pneumothorax 
or an air-filled bulla.
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
6
6
7
7
F I G U R E  8 - 1 9 .  Percuss and 
auscultate in a “ladder” pattern.
Resonant
Level of
diaphragm
Dull
Location
and sequence
of percussion
F I G U R E  8 - 2 0 .  Identify the extent of diaphragmatic excursion.
This technique tends to overestimate 
actual movements of the diaphragm.45
Dull
F I G U R E  8 - 2 1 .  Absent descent 
of the diaphragm can indicate pleural 
effusion.
An abnormally high level suggests a 
pleural effusion or an elevated hemidi-
aphragm from atelectasis or phrenic 
nerve paralysis (Fig. 8-21).
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Examination 
Techniques
The Techniques of Examina-
tion sections are where you 
will learn the crucial and 
relevant examinations you 
will perform every day. 
Additional Special Tech-
niques offer the examina-
tion approach for more 
uncommon conditions 
and special circumstances.
248 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Ask where the patient hears the sound: on one side or both sides? Normally, the 
vibration is heard in the midline or equally in both ears. If nothing is heard, try 
again, pressing the fork more ﬁrmly on the head. Restrict this test to patients with 
unilateral hearing loss since patients with normal hearing may lateralize, and 
patients with bilateral conductive or sensorineural deﬁcits will not lateralize.
■ Compare AC and BC (Rinne test). Place the base of a lightly vibrating tuning fork 
on the mastoid bone, behind the ear and level with the canal (Fig. 7-45). When 
the patient can no longer hear the sound, quickly place the fork close to the ear 
canal and ask if the patient hears a vibration (Fig. 7-46). Here, the “U” of the 
fork should face forward, which maximizes sound transmission for the patient. 
Normally, the sound is heard longer through air than through bone (AC > BC).
In unilateral sensorineural hearing 
loss, sound is heard in the good ear. 
F I G U R E  7 - 4 5 . Test bone conduction.
F I G U R E  7 - 4 6 . Test air conduction.
In conductive hearing loss, sound is 
heard through bone as long as or lon-
ger than it is through air (BC = AC or 
BC > AC). In sensorineural hearing loss, 
sound is heard longer through air  
(AC > BC). 
The Nose and Paranasal Sinuses
Anatomy and Physiology. Review 
the terms that describe the external 
anatomy of the nose (Fig. 7-47).
Approximately the upper third of the 
nose is supported by bone, the lower two 
thirds by cartilage. Air enters the nasal 
cavity through the anterior naris on either 
side, then passes into the widened area 
known as the vestibule and on through 
the narrow nasal passage to the naso-
pharynx.
Ala nasi
Vestibule
Anterior
naris
Tip
Bridge
Dorsum
F I G U R E  7 - 4 7 . External anatomy of the nose.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Photographs 
and Illustrations
The art program includes 
detailed, full-color photo-
graphs, drawings, and dia-
grams, some new or revised, 
to further illustrate key points 
in the text. They will enhance 
your learning potential by 
providing accurate and realis-
tic representations.
And now, each ﬁgure has a 
ﬁgure number and caption to 
make the ﬁgures easier to ﬁnd 
and understand.
TECH
p
cu
W
th
■P
th
p
O
th
al
lu
an
cu
■Id
m
p
d
C
b
320 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Palpate both lungs for symmetric tac-
tile fremitus (Fig. 8-15). Fremitus 
refers to the palpable vibrations 
that are transmitted through the 
bronchopulmonary tree to the 
chest wall as the patient is speaking 
and is normally symmetric. Fremi-
tus is typically more prominent in 
the interscapular area than in the 
lower lung ﬁelds and easier to de-
tect over the right lung than the left. 
It disappears below the diaphragm.
To detect fremitus, use either the 
ball (the bony part of the palm at 
the base of the ﬁngers) or the ulnar 
surface of your hand to optimize the vibratory sensitivity of the bones in 
your hand. Ask the patient to repeat the words “ninety-nine” or “one-one-
one.” Initially practice with one hand until you feel the transmitted vibra-
tions. Use both hands to palpate and compare symmetric areas of the lungs in 
the pattern shown in the photograph. Identify and locate any areas of 
increased, decreased, or absent fremitus. If fremitus is faint, ask the patient 
to speak more loudly or in a deeper voice.
Tactile fremitus is a somewhat imprecise assessment technique, but does 
direct your attention to possible asymmetries. Conﬁrm any disparities by 
listening for underlying breath sounds, voice sounds, and whispered voice 
sounds. All these attributes should increase or decrease together.
Percussion. Percussion is one of the most important techniques of physical 
examination. Percussion sets the chest wall and underlying tissues in motion, 
producing audible sound and palpable vibrations. Percussion helps you estab-
lish whether the underlying tissues are air-ﬁlled, ﬂuid-ﬁlled, or consolidated. 
The percussion blow penetrates only 5 to 7 cm into the chest, however, and will 
not aid in detection of deep-seated lesions.
The technique of percussion can be practiced on any surface. As you practice, 
listen for changes in percussion notes over different types of materials or different 
parts of the body. The key points for good technique, described for a right-
handed person, are detailed below:
■ Hyperextend the middle ﬁnger of 
your left hand, known as the plexim-
eter ﬁnger. Press its distal interpha-
langeal joint ﬁrmly on the lung 
surface to be percussed (Fig. 8-16). 
Avoid surface contact by any other part 
of the hand because this dampens out 
vibrations. Note that the thumb and 
second, fourth, and ﬁfth ﬁngers are 
not touching the chest wall.
Fremitus is decreased or absent when 
the voice is higher pitched or soft or 
when the transmission of vibrations 
from the larynx to the surface of the 
chest is impeded by a thick chest wall, 
an obstructed bronchus, COPD, or 
pleural effusion, fibrosis, air (pneumo-
thorax), or an infiltrating tumor.
1
2
3
1
2
3
4
4
F I G U R E  8 - 1 5 .  Locations for 
palpating fremitus.
Asymmetric decreased fremitus raises 
the likelihood of unilateral pleural 
effusion, pneumothorax, or neoplasm, 
which decreases transmission of low-
frequency sounds; asymmetric 
increased fremitus occurs in unilateral 
pneumonia which increases transmis-
sion through consolidated tissue.44
F I G U R E  8 - 1 6 .  Press the pleximeter 
ﬁnger ﬁrmly on the chest wall.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
hearing
good ear. 
sound is
ng as or lon-
BC = AC or
hearing loss,
ough air
MALITIES
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
249
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The medial wall of each nasal cavity is formed by 
the nasal septum, which, like the external nose, is 
supported by both bone and cartilage (Fig. 7-48). 
It is covered by a mucous membrane well supplied 
with blood. The vestibule, unlike the rest of the 
nasal cavity, is lined with hair-bearing skin, not 
mucosa.
Laterally, the anatomy is more complex (Fig. 7-49). 
Curving bony structures, the turbinates, covered by a 
highly vascular mucous membrane, protrude into the 
nasal cavity. Below each turbinate is a groove, or 
meatus, each named according to the turbinate above 
it. The nasolacrimal duct drains into the inferior 
meatus; most of the paranasal sinuses drain into the 
middle meatus. Their openings are not usually visible.
The additional surface area provided by the turbinates 
and their overlying mucosa aids the nasal cavities in 
their principal functions: cleansing, humidiﬁcation, 
and temperature control of inspired air.
The paranasal sinuses are air-ﬁlled cavities within the bones of the skull. Like the 
nasal cavities into which they drain, they are lined with mucous membrane. 
Their locations are diagrammed in Figure 7-50. Only the frontal and maxillary 
sinuses are readily accessible to clinical examination (Fig. 7-51).
Cranial cavity
Sphenoid sinus
Bony portion
of nasal septum
Soft palate
Hard palate
Cartilaginous portion
of nasal septum
Frontal sinus
F I G U R E  7 - 4 8 . Medial wall—left nasal cavity (mucosa removed).
Cranial cavity
Opening to
eustachian
tube
Hard palate
Vestibule
Inferior turbinate
Middle turbinate
Superior turbinate
Frontal sinus
Nasopharynx
Soft
palate
F I G U R E  7 - 4 9 . Lateral wall—nasal cavity.
Frontal
sinus
Orbit
Middle
turbinate
Maxillary
sinus
Inferior
turbinate
Inferior
meatus
Middle
meatus
Ethmoid
sinus
F I G U R E  7 - 5 0 . Cross-section of nasal cavity—anterior view.
Frontal
sinus
Maxillary
sinus
F I G U R E  7 - 5 1 . Frontal and maxillary sinuses.
 
xvii
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
References
Consult the References at the end of the 
chapters to deepen your knowledge of 
important clinical conditions. The habit 
of searching the clinical literature will 
serve you and your patients well 
throughout your career.
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
773
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
Recording Your Findings
Note that initially you may use sentences to describe your ﬁndings; later you 
will use phrases. The style below contains phrases appropriate for most write-
ups. Note the ﬁve components of the examination and write-up of the nervous 
system.
Recording the Examination—The Nervous System
“Mental Status: Alert, relaxed, and cooperative. Thought process coherent. Ori-
ented to person, place, and time. Detailed cognitive testing deferred. Cranial 
Nerves: I—not tested; II through XII intact. Motor: Good muscle bulk and 
tone. Strength 5/5 throughout. Cerebellar—Rapid alternating movements 
(RAMs), ﬁnger-to-nose (F→N), heel-to-shin (H→S) intact. Gait with normal 
base. Romberg—maintains balance with eyes closed. No pronator drift. 
 Sensory: Pinprick, light touch, position, and vibration intact. Reﬂexes: 2 and 
symmetric with plantar reﬂexes downgoing.”
OR
“Mental Status: The patient is alert and tries to answer questions but has diﬃculty 
ﬁnding words. Cranial Nerves: I—not tested; II—visual acuity intact; visual ﬁelds 
full; III, IV, VI—extraocular movements intact; V motor—temporal and masseter 
strength intact, corneal reﬂexes present; VII motor—prominent right facial 
droop and ﬂattening of right nasolabial fold, left facial movements intact, sen-
sory—taste not tested; VIII—hearing intact bilaterally to whispered voice; IX, 
X—gag intact; XI—strength of sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles 5/5; 
XII—tongue midline. Motor: strength in right biceps, triceps, iliopsoas, gluteals, 
quadriceps, hamstring, and ankle ﬂexor and extensor muscles 3/5 with good 
bulk but increased tone and spasticity; strength in comparable muscle groups 
on the left 5/5 with good bulk and tone. Gait—unable to test. Cerebellar—
unable to test on right due to right arm and leg weakness; RAMs, F→N, H→S 
intact on left. Romberg—unable to test due to right leg weakness. Right prona-
tor drift present. Sensory: decreased sensation to pinprick over right face, arm, 
and leg; intact on the left. Stereognosis and two-point discrimination not 
tested. Reﬂexes (can record in two ways):
RT 
++++ 
++++ 
++++ 
++++ 
++++
LT 
++ 
++ 
++ 
++ 
+ 
OR
Plantar
Biceps
Triceps
Brach
Knee
Ankle
4+
4+
4+
4+
4+
2+
2+
2+
These findings are suspicious for left 
hemispheric cerebral infarction in the 
distribution of the left middle cerebral 
artery, with right-sided hemiparesis. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Recording Your Findings
Constructing a well-organized clinical record 
must clearly display important clinical infor-
mation and your clinical reasoning and plan. 
You will gain this skill and learn the descrip-
tive vocabulary of physical ﬁndings in the 
Recording Your Findings section of each of the 
regional examination and special populations’ 
chapters.
REFERENCES
References
 1. Clark D 3rd, Ahmed MI, Dell’italia LJ, et al. An argument for 
reviving the disappearing skill of cardiac auscultation. Cleve Clin 
J Med. 2012;79:536.
 2. Delora A. The decline of cardiac auscultation: ‘the ball of the 
match point is poised on the net’. J Cardiovasc Med. 2008;9:1173.
 3. Markel H. The stethoscope and the art of listening. N Engl J Med. 
2006;354:551.
 4. Simel DL. Time, now, to recover the fun in the physical examina-
tion rather than abandon it. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166:603.
 5. Vukanovic-Criley JM, Hovanesyan A, Criley SR, et al. Conﬁden-
tial testing of cardiac examination competency in cardiology and 
noncardiology faculty and trainees: a multicenter study. Clin Car-
diol. 2010;33:738.
 6. Wayne DB, Butter J, Cohen ER, et al. Setting defensible standards 
for cardiac auscultation skills in medical students. Acad Med. 
2009;84(10 Suppl):S94.
 7. Marcus G, Vessey J, Jordan MV, et al. Relationship between accu-
rate auscultation of a clinically useful third heart sound and level 
of experience. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166:617.
 8. Vukanovic-Criley JM, Criley S, Warde CM, et al. Competency in 
cardiac examination skills in medical students, trainees, physi-
cians, and faculty. A multicenter study. Arch Intern Med. 
2006;166:610.
 9. March SK, Bedynek JL Jr, Chizner MA. Teaching cardiac ausculta-
tion: effectiveness of a patient-centered teaching conference on 
improving cardiac auscultatory skills. Mayo Clin Proc. 2005; 
80;1443.
 10. RuDusky BM. Auscultation and Don Quixote. Chest. 2005;127: 
1869.
 11. Mangione S. Cardiac auscultatory skills of physicians-in-training: 
a comparison of three English speaking countries Am J Med
 20. Saxena A, Barrett MJ, Patel AR, et al. Merging old school methods 
with new technology to improve skills in cardiac auscultation. 
Semin Med Pract. 2008;11:21.
 21. Vukanovic-Criley JM, Boker JR, Criley SR, et al. Using virtual 
patients to improve cardiac examination competency in medical 
students. Clin Cardiol. 2008;31:334.
 22. Barrett MJ, Lacey CS, Sekara AE, et al. Mastering cardiac mur-
murs. The power of repetition. Chest. 2004;126:470.
 23. Lee E, Michaels AD, Selvester RH, et al. Frequency of diastolic 
third and fourth heart sounds with myocardial ischemia induced 
during percutaneous coronary intervention. J Electrocardiol. 
2009;42:39.
 24. Marcus GM, Gerber IL, McKeown BH, et al. Association between 
phonocardiographic third and four heart sound and objective 
measure of left ventricular function. JAMA. 2005;293:2238.
 25. Shah SJ, Marcus GM, Gerber IL, et al. Physiology of the third heart 
sound: novel insights from tissue Doppler imaging. J Am Soc Echo-
cardiogr. 2008;21:394.
 26. Shah SJ, Nakamura K, Marcus GM, et al. Association of the fourth 
heart sound with increased left ventricular end-diastolic stiffness. 
J Card Fail. 2008;14:431.
 27. Shah SJ, Michaels AD. Hemodynamic correlates of the third heart 
sound and systolic time intervals. Congest Heart Fail. 2006;12(4 
suppl 1):8.
 28. O’Rourke RA, Braunwald E. Ch 209, Physical examination of the 
cardiovascular system. In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. 
16th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2005:1307.
 29. Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2013 AACF/AHA Guideline 
for the Management of Heart Failure. J Am College Cardiol. 2013; 
62:e148.
 30. Vinayak AG, Levitt J, Gehlbach B, et al. Usefulness of the external 
jugular vein examination in detecting abnormal central venous 
pressure in critically ill patients Arch Int Med 2006;166:2132
xviii 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
xix
Contents
Faculty Reviewers 
vii
Preface 
ix
Acknowledgments 
xiii
How To Use Bates’ Guide To Physical 
Examination And History Taking 
xv
UNIT 1
Foundations of Health Assessment 1
C H A P T E R1
Foundations for Clinical Proficiency 3
PATIENT ASSESSMENT: COMPREHENSIVE  
OR FOCUSED 5
Determining the Scope of Your Assessment 5
Subjective Versus Objective Data 6
THE COMPREHENSIVE ADULT HEALTH HISTORY 7
The Comprehensive Adult Health  
History—Further Description 8
THE COMPREHENSIVE PHYSICAL 
EXAMINATION 14
Beginning the Examination: Setting the Stage 14
The Physical Examination—“Head to Toe” 21
CLINICAL REASONING, ASSESSMENT,  
AND PLAN 24
Clinical Reasoning and Assessment 25
Using Shared Decision-Making to Develop a Plan 29
THE QUALITY CLINICAL RECORD:  
THE CASE OF MRS. N. 29
The Importance of the Problem List 37
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS 38
References 42
C H A P T E R2
Evaluating Clinical Evidence 45
THE HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION  
AS DIAGNOSTIC TESTS 46
EVALUATING DIAGNOSTIC TESTS 47
Validity 47
Reproducibility 53
HEALTH PROMOTION 55
CRITICAL APPRAISAL 56
Understanding Bias 56
Results 57
Generalizability 59
Guideline Recommendations 59
LOOKING AHEAD 60
References 64
C H A P T E R  3
Interviewing and the Health History 65
DIFFERENT KINDS OF HEALTH HISTORIES 67
THE FUNDAMENTALS OF SKILLED 
INTERVIEWING 68
THE SEQUENCE AND CONTEXT OF THE 
INTERVIEW 73
Preparation 74
The Sequence of the Interview 75
The Cultural Context of the Interview 82
ADVANCED INTERVIEWING 86
Interviewing the Challenging Patient 86
Sensitive Topics 93
ETHICS AND PROFESSIONALISM 100
References 106
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
xx 
Contents
UNIT 2 
Regional Examinations 109
C H A P T E R  4
Beginning the Physical Examination: General 
Survey, Vital Signs, and Pain 111
THE HEALTH HISTORY 112
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING: 
EVIDENCE AND RECOMMENDATIONS 114
THE GENERAL SURVEY 120
General Appearance 120
THE VITAL SIGNS 123
Blood Pressure 124
Special Situations 131
Heart Rate and Rhythm 132
Respiratory Rate and Rhythm 132
Temperature 133
ACUTE AND CHRONIC PAIN 134
Assessing Acute and Chronic Pain 134
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS 138
References 144
C H A P T E R  5
Behavior and Mental Status 147
SYMPTOMS AND BEHAVIOR 148
Understanding Symptoms: What Do They Mean? 148
Mental Health Screening 150
THE HEALTH HISTORY 153
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING: 
EVIDENCE AND RECOMMENDATIONS 156
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION 158
Appearance and Behavior 158
Speech and Language 160
Mood 161
Thought and Perceptions 161
Cognitive Functions 164
Higher Cognitive Functions 165
Special Techniques 167
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS 168
References 170
C H A P T E R  6
The Skin, Hair, and Nails 173
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY 173
Skin 173
Hair 174
Nails 175
Sebaceous Glands and Sweat Glands 175
THE HEALTH HISTORY 175
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING: 
EVIDENCE AND RECOMMENDATIONS 176
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION 180
Full-Body and Integrated Skin Examinations 180
Preparing for the Examination 181
The Skin Examination 182
Special Techniques 187
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS 189
References 214
C H A P T E R  7
The Head and Neck 215
THE HEALTH HISTORY 215
The Head 216
The Eyes 217
The Ears 219
The Nose and Sinuses 220
The Mouth, Throat, and Neck 221
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING: 
EVIDENCE AND RECOMMENDATIONS 222
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY AND  
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION 224
The Head 224
The Eyes 226
The Ear 242
The Nose and Paranasal Sinuses 248
Mouth and Pharynx 252
The Neck 257
Special Techniques 264
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS 266
References 300
C H A P T E R  8
The Thorax and Lungs 303
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY 303
Locating Findings on the Chest 304
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
C o n t e n t s  
xxi
THE HEALTH HISTORY 310
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING: 
EVIDENCE AND RECOMMENDATIONS 313
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION 317
Initial Survey of Respiration and the Thorax 318
Examination of the Posterior Chest 319
Examination of the Anterior Chest 327
Special Techniques 329
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS 329
References 341
C H A P T E R  9
The Cardiovascular System 343
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY 343
Surface Projections of the Heart and Great Vessels 343
Cardiac Chambers, Valves, and Circulation 345
Events in the Cardiac Cycle 345
The Splitting of Heart Sounds 348
Heart Murmurs 349
Relation of Auscultatory Findings to the  
Chest Wall 350
The Conduction System 351
The Heart as a Pump 352
Arterial Pulses and Blood Pressure 353
Jugular Venous Pressure and Pulsations 354
Changes Over the Life Span 355
THE HEALTH HISTORY 355
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING: 
EVIDENCE AND RECOMMENDATIONS 358
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION 373
Blood Pressure and Heart Rate 373
Jugular Venous Pressure and Pulsations 374
The Carotid Pulse 380
The Heart 382
Inspection 384
Palpation 384
Percussion 389
Auscultation 389
Integrating Cardiovascular Assessment 397
Special Techniques: Maneuvers to Identify  
Murmurs and Heart Failure 397
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS 399
References 413
C H A P T E R  10
The Breasts and Axillae 419
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY 419
The Female Breast 419
The Male Breast 421
Lymphatics 421
THE HEALTH HISTORY 422
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING: 
EVIDENCE AND RECOMMENDATIONS 423
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION 434
The Female Breast 434
The Male Breast 440
The Axillae 440
Special Techniques 441
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS 443
References 446
C H A P T E R  11
The Abdomen 449
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY 449
THE HEALTH HISTORY 453
Patterns and Mechanisms of Abdominal Pain 453
The Gastrointestinal Tract 455
The Urinary Tract 462
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING: 
EVIDENCE AND RECOMMENDATIONS 464
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION 470
The Abdomen 471
The Liver 475
The Spleen 479
The Kidneys 481
The Bladder 483
The Aorta 483
Special Techniques 484
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS 487
References 505
C H A P T E R  12
The Peripheral Vascular System 509
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY 510
Arteries 510
Veins 513
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
xxii 
Contents
The Lymphatic System 515
Transcapillary Fluid Exchange 516
THE HEALTH HISTORY 517
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING: 
EVIDENCE AND RECOMMENDATIONS 519
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION 521
Arms 522
Abdomen 524
Legs 524
Special Techniques 529
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS 532
References 539
C H A P T E R  13
Male Genitalia and Hernias 541
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY 541
Lymphatics 543
Anatomy of the Groin 543
THE HEALTH HISTORY 544
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING: 
EVIDENCE AND RECOMMENDATIONS 547
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION 550
The Penis 551
The Scrotum and its Contents 552
Hernias 553
Special Techniques 555
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS 556
References 562
C H A P T E R  14
Female Genitalia 565
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY 565
THE HEALTH HISTORY 569
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING: 
EVIDENCE AND RECOMMENDATIONS 575
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION 583
External Examination 586
Internal Examination 587
Hernias 594
Special Techniques 594
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS 595
References 604
C H A P T E R  15
The Anus, Rectum, and Prostate 607
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY 607
THE HEALTH HISTORY 609
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING: 
EVIDENCE AND RECOMMENDATIONS 610
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION 616
The Male Patient 616
The Female Patient 619
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS 619
References 624
C H A P T E R  16
The Musculoskeletal System 625
APPROACH TO MUSCULOSKELETAL 
DISORDERS 626
Types of Joints 628
Synovial Joints and Bursae 629
THE HEALTH HISTORY 630
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING: 
EVIDENCE AND RECOMMENDATIONS 636
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS:  
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY AND  
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION 642
Temporomandibular Joint 644
The Shoulder 645
The Elbow 656
The Wrist and Hands 657
The Spine 666
The Hip 674
The Knee 682
The Ankle and Foot 690
Special Techniques 694
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS 695
References 708
C H A P T E R  17
The Nervous System 711
THE CHALLENGES OF NEUROLOGIC 
DIAGNOSIS 712
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY 713
Central Nervous System 713
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
C o n t e n t s  
xxiii
Peripheral Nervous System 714
Motor Pathways 717
Sensory Pathways 719
Spinal Reflexes: The Muscle Stretch Response 720
THE HEALTH HISTORY 721
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING: 
EVIDENCE AND RECOMMENDATIONS 726
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION 733
The Cranial Nerves 735
The Motor System 741
The Sensory System 752
Muscle Stretch Reflexes 758
Cutaneous or Superficial Stimulation Reflexes 763
Special Techniques 764
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS 773
References 794
UNIT3
Special Populations 797
C H A P T E R  18
Assessing Children: Infancy through 
Adolescence 799
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF CHILD 
DEVELOPMENT 800
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING:  
KEY COMPONENTS 801
Assessing the Newborn 803
Immediate Assessment at Birth 804
Assessment Several Hours After Birth 808
Assessing the Infant 809
Development 809
General Guidelines 810
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING: 
EVIDENCE AND RECOMMENDATIONS 812
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION 813
General Survey and Vital Signs 813
The Skin 816
The Head 820
The Eyes 823
The Ears 825
The Nose and Sinuses 826
The Mouth and Pharynx 826
The Neck 828
The Thorax and Lungs 829
The Heart 832
The Breasts 838
The Abdomen 838
Male Genitalia 840
Female Genitalia 841
Rectal Examination 842
The Musculoskeletal System 842
The Nervous System 845
Assessing Young and School-Aged Children 853
Development 853
THE HEALTH HISTORY 855
Assessing Younger Children 855
Assessing Older Children 857
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING: 
EVIDENCE AND RECOMMENDATIONS 860
Children 1 to 4 Years 860
Children 5 to 10 Years 861
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION 862
General Survey and Vital Signs 862
The Skin 865
The Head 865
The Eyes 866
The Ears 867
The Nose and Sinuses 871
The Mouth and Pharynx 872
The Neck 875
The Thorax and Lungs 876
The Heart 877
The Abdomen 879
Male Genitalia 881
Female Genitalia 882
The Rectal Examination 885
The Musculoskeletal System 885
The Nervous System 887
Assessing Adolescents 890
Development: 11 to 20 Years 890
THE HEALTH HISTORY 891
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING: 
EVIDENCE AND RECOMMENDATIONS 893
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION 894
General Survey and Vital Signs 894
The Skin 895
Head, Ears, Eyes, Throat, and Neck 895
The Heart 895
The Breasts 896
The Abdomen 898
Male Genitalia 898
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
xxiv 
Contents
Female Genitalia 900
The Musculoskeletal System 901
The Nervous System 906
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS 906
References 924
C H A P T E R  19
The Pregnant Woman 927
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY 927
Physiologic Hormonal Changes 927
Anatomic Changes 928
THE HEALTH HISTORY 932
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING: 
EVIDENCE AND RECOMMENDATIONS 935
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION 940
Positioning 940
Examining Equipment 941
General Inspection 941
Height, Weight, and Vital Signs 942
Head and Neck 942
Thorax and Lungs 943
Heart 943
Breasts 943
Abdomen 944
Genitalia 945
Anus 947
Rectum and Rectovaginal Septum 947
Extremities 948
Special Techniques 948
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS 951
References 953
C H A P T E R  20
The Older Adult 955
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY 957
THE HEALTH HISTORY 965
Approach to the Patient 965
Special Areas of Concern When Assessing  
Common Symptoms 970
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING: 
EVIDENCE AND RECOMMENDATIONS 976
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION 985
Assessing Functional Status: the “Sixth Vital Sign” 985
Physical Examination of the Older Adult 989
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS 998
References 1004
Index 
1009
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
xxv
List of Tables
C H A P T E R  1 
Foundations for Clinical Proficiency 3
Table 1-1: 
Sample Progress Note 41
C H A P T E R  2 
Evaluating Clinical Evidence 45
Table 2-1: 
 U.S. Preventive Service Task Force Ratings: Grade Definitions and  
Implications for Practice 61
Table 2-2: 
 U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Levels of Certainty Regarding Benefit 62
Table 2-3: 
 American College of Chest Physicians: Grading Recommendations 63
C H A P T E R  3 
Interviewing and the Health History 65
Table 3-1: 
Motivational Interviewing: A Clinical Example 104
Table 3-2: 
 Brief Action Planning (BAP)—A Self-Management Support Tool 105
C H A P T E R  4 
 Beginning the Physical Examination: General Survey, Vital Signs,  
and Pain 111
Table 4-1: 
Obesity-Related Health Conditions 139
Table 4-2: 
Eating Disorders and Excessively Low BMI 140
Table 4-3: 
Nutrition Screening 141
Table 4-4: 
 Obesity: Stages of Change Model and Assessing Readiness 142
Table 4-5: 
Nutrition Counseling: Sources of Nutrients 143
Table 4-6: 
 Patients with Hypertension: Recommended Changes in Diet 143
C H A P T E R  5 
Behavior and Mental Status 147
Table 5-1: 
Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders 169
C H A P T E R  6 
The Skin, Hair, and Nails 173
Table 6-1: 
 Describing Primary Skin Lesions: Flat, Raised, and Fluid-Filled 191
Table 6-2: 
 Additional Primary Lesions: Pustules, Furuncles, Nodules, Cysts,  
Wheals, Burrows 194
Table 6-3: 
Dermatology Safari: Benign Lesions 196
Table 6-4: 
 Rough Lesions: Actinic Keratoses, Squamous Cell Carcinoma, and  
Their Mimics 197
Table 6-5: 
 Pink Lesions: Basal Cell Carcinoma and Its Mimics 198
Table 6-6: 
Brown Lesions: Melanoma and Its Mimics 200
Table 6-7: 
Acne Vulgaris—Primary and Secondary Lesions 204
Table 6-8: 
Vascular and Purpuric Lesions of the Skin 205
Table 6-9: 
Signs of Sun Damage 206
Table 6-10: 
Systemic Diseases and Associated Skin Findings 207
Table 6-11: 
Hair Loss 209
Table 6-12: 
Findings in or Near the Nails 211
Table 6-13: 
Pressure Ulcers 213
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
xxvi 
List of Tables
C H A P T E R  7 
The Head and Neck 215
Table 7-1: 
Primary Headaches 267
Table 7-2: 
Secondary Headaches and Cranial Neuralgias 268
Table 7-3: 
Red Eyes 270
Table 7-4: 
Dizziness and Vertigo 271
Table 7-5: 
Selected Facies 272
Table 7-6: 
Visual Field Defects 273
Table 7-7: 
Variations and Abnormalities of the Eyelids 274
Table 7-8: 
Lumps and Swellings in and Around the Eyes 275
Table 7-9: 
Opacities of the Cornea and Lens 276
Table 7-10: 
Pupillary Abnormalities 277
Table 7-11: 
Dysconjugate Gaze 278
Table 7-12: 
Normal Variations of the Optic Disc 279
Table 7-13: 
Abnormalities of the Optic Disc 280
Table 7-14: 
Retinal Arteries and Arteriovenous Crossings: Normal and Hypertensive 281
Table 7-15: 
Red Spots and Streaks in the Fundi 282
Table 7-16: 
Ocular Fundi: Normal and Hypertensive Retinopathy 283
Table 7-17: 
Ocular Fundi: Diabetic Retinopathy 284
Table 7-18: 
Light-Colored Spots in the Fundi 285
Table 7-19: 
Lumps on or Near the Ear 286
Table 7-20: 
Abnormalities of the Eardrum 287
Table 7-21: 
Patterns of Hearing Loss 289
Table 7-22: 
Abnormalities of the Lips 290
Table 7-23: 
Findings in the Pharynx, Palate, and Oral Mucosa 292
Table 7-24: 
Findings in the Gums and Teeth 295
Table 7-25: 
Findings in or Under the Tongue 297
Table 7-26: 
Thyroid Enlargement and Function 299
Table 7-27: 
Symptoms and Signs of Thyroid Dysfunction 299
C H A P T E R  8 
The Thorax and Lungs 303
Table 8-1: 
Chest Pain 330
Table 8-2: 
Dyspnea 332
Table 8-3: 
Cough and Hemoptysis 334
Table 8-4: 
Abnormalities in Rate and Rhythm of Breathing 335
Table 8-5: 
Deformities of the Thorax 336
Table 8-6: 
Normal and Altered Breath and Voice Sounds 337
Table 8-7: 
 Adventitious (Added) Lung Sounds: Causes and Qualities 338
Table 8-8: 
Physical Findings in Selected Chest Disorders 339
C H A P T E R  9 
The Cardiovascular System 343
Table 9-1: 
Selected Heart Rates and Rhythms 400
Table 9-2: 
Selected Irregular Rhythms 401
Table 9-3: 
Abnormalities of the Arterial Pulse and Pressure Waves 402
Table 9-4: 
 Variations and Abnormalities of the Ventricular Impulses 403
Table 9-5: 
Variations in the First Heart Sound—S1 404
Table 9-6: 
Variations in the Second Heart Sound—S2 405
Table 9-7: 
Extra Heart Sounds in Systole 406
Table 9-8: 
Extra Heart Sounds in Diastole 407
Table 9-9: 
Midsystolic Murmurs 408
Table 9-10: 
Pansystolic (Holosystolic) Murmurs 410
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
L i s t  o f  Ta b l e s  
xxvii
Table 9-11: 
Diastolic Murmurs  411
Table 9-12: 
Cardiovascular Sounds with Both Systolic and Diastolic Components 412
C H A P T E R  10 The Breasts and Axillae 419
Table 10-1: 
Common Breast Masses 444
Table 10-2: 
Visible Signs of Breast Cancer 445
C H A P T E R  11 The Abdomen 449
Table 11-1: 
Abdominal Pain 488
Table 11-2: 
Dysphagia 490
Table 11-3: 
Diarrhea 491
Table 11-4: 
Constipation 494
Table 11-5: 
Black and Bloody Stool 495
Table 11-6: 
Urinary Frequency, Nocturia, and Polyuria 496
Table 11-7: 
Urinary Incontinence 497
Table 11-8: 
Localized Bulges in the Abdominal Wall 499
Table 11-9: 
Protuberant Abdomens 500
Table 11-10: Sounds in the Abdomen 501
Table 11-11: Tender Abdomens 502
Table 11-12: Liver Enlargement: Apparent and Real 504
C H A P T E R  12 The Peripheral Vascular System 509
Table 12-1: 
Types of Peripheral Edema 533
Table 12-2: 
 Painful Peripheral Vascular Disorders and Their Mimics 534
Table 12-3: 
Using the Ankle–Brachial Index 536
Table 12-4: 
Chronic Insufficiency of Arteries and Veins 537
Table 12-5: 
Common Ulcers of the Ankles and Feet 538
C H A P T E R  13 Male Genitalia and Hernias 541
Table 13-1: 
Sexually Transmitted Infections of Male Genitalia 557
Table 13-2: 
Abnormalities of the Penis and Scrotum 558
Table 13-3: 
Abnormalities of the Testis 559
Table 13-4: 
Abnormalities of the Epididymis and Spermatic Cord 560
Table 13-5: 
 Course, Presentation, and Differentiation of Hernias in the Groin 561
C H A P T E R  14 Female Genitalia 565
Table 14-1: 
Lesions of the Vulva 596
Table 14-2: 
Bulges and Swelling of the Vulva, Vagina, and Urethra 597
Table 14-3: 
Vaginal Discharge 598
Table 14-4: 
Variations in the Cervical Surface 599
Table 14-5: 
Shapes of the Cervical Os 600
Table 14-6: 
Abnormalities of the Cervix 600
Table 14-7: 
Positions of the Uterus 601
Table 14-8: 
Abnormalities of the Uterus 602
Table 14-9: 
Adnexal Masses 603
C H A P T E R  15 The Anus, Rectum, and Prostate 607
Table 15-1: 
BPH Symptom Score: American Urological Association 620
Table 15-2: 
Abnormalities of the Anus, Surrounding Skin, and Rectum 621
Table 15-3: 
 Abnormalities of the Prostate 623
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
xxviii 
List of Tables
C H A P T E R  16 The Musculoskeletal System 625
Table 16-1: 
Patterns of Pain in and Around the Joints 696
Table 16-2: 
Pains in the Neck 698
Table 16-3: 
Low Back Pain 699
Table 16-4: 
Painful Shoulders 700
Table 16-5: 
Swollen or Tender Elbows 702
Table 16-6: 
Arthritis in the Hands 703
Table 16-7: 
Swellings and Deformities of the Hands 704
Table 16-8: 
Tendon Sheath, Palmar Space, and Finger Infections 705
Table 16-9: 
Abnormalities of the Feet 706
Table 16-10: Abnormalities of the Toes and Soles 707
C H A P T E R  17 The Nervous System 711
Table 17-1: 
Disorders of the Central and Peripheral Nervous Systems 774
Table 17-2: 
Types of Stroke 776
Table 17-3: 
Syncope and Similar Disorders Problem 778
Table 17-4: 
Seizure Disorders 780
Table 17-5: 
Tremors and Involuntary Movements 782
Table 17-6: 
Disorders of Speech 784
Table 17-7: 
Nystagmus 785
Table 17-8: 
Types of Facial Paralysis 787
Table 17-9: 
Disorders of Muscle Tone 788
Table 17-10: Abnormalities of Gait and Posture 789
Table 17-11: Metabolic and Structural Coma 790
Table 17-12: Glasgow Coma Scale 791
Table 17-13: Pupils in Comatose Patients 792
Table 17-14: Abnormal Postures in Comatose Patients 793
C H A P T E R  18 Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 799
Table 18-1: 
Abnormalities in Heart Rhythm and Blood Pressure 910
Table 18-2: 
Common Skin Rashes and Skin Findings in Newborns and Infants 911
Table 18-3: 
Warts, Lesions That Resemble Warts, and Other Raised Lesions 912
Table 18-4: 
Common Skin Lesions During Childhood 912
Table 18-5: 
Abnormalities of the Head 913
Table 18-6: 
Diagnostic Facies in Infancy and Childhood 914
Table 18-7: 
Abnormalities of the Eyes, Ears, and Mouth 916
Table 18-8: 
Abnormalities of the Teeth, Pharynx, and Neck 917
Table 18-9: 
Cyanosis in Children 918
Table 18-10: Congenital Heart Murmurs 919
Table 18-11: Physical Signs of Sexual Abuse 921
Table 18-12: The Male Genitourinary System 922
Table 18-13:  Common Musculoskeletal Findings in Young Children 922
Table 18-14: The Power of Prevention: Vaccine-Preventable Diseases 923
C H A P T E R  20 The Older Adult 955
Table 20-1: 
Interviewing Older Adults: Enhancing Culturally Appropriate Care 1000
Table 20-2: 
Delirium and Dementia 1001
Table 20-3: 
Screening for Dementia: The Mini-Cog 1002
Table 20-4: 
Screening for Dementia: The Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) 1003
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
UNIT
Foundations of Health 
Assessment
1
C h a p t e r  1
Foundations for Clinical 
Proficiency 3
C h a p t e r  2
Evaluating Clinical Evidence 45
C h a p t e r  3
Interviewing and the Health  
History 65
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  1 |
 
Foundations for Clinical Proficiency  
3
The techniques of physical examination and history taking that you are about to 
learn embody the time-honored skills of healing and patient care. Gathering a 
sensitive and nuanced history and performing a thorough and accurate examina-
tion deepen your relationships with patients, focus your assessment, and set the 
guideposts that direct your clinical decision making (Fig. 1-1). The quality of 
your history and physical examination lays the foundation for patient assess-
ment, your recommendations for care, and your choices for further evaluation 
and testing. As you become an accomplished clinician, you will continually pol-
ish these important relational and clinical skills.
With practice, you will meet the challenge of integrating the essential ele-
ments of clinical care: empathic listening; the ability to interview patients of 
all ages, moods, and backgrounds; the techniques for examining the different 
body systems; levels of illness; and, ﬁnally, the process of clinical reasoning 
leading to your diagnosis and plan. Your experience with history taking and 
physical examination will grow, and will trigger the steps of clinical reasoning 
from the ﬁrst moments of the patient encounter: identifying symptoms and 
abnormal ﬁndings; linking ﬁndings to underlying pathophysiology or psy-
chopathology; and establishing and testing a set of explanatory hypotheses. 
Working through these steps will reveal the multifaceted proﬁle of the patient 
before you. Paradoxically, the skills that allow you to assess all patients also 
shape the clinical portrait of the unique human being entrusted to your care. 
The physical examination is more than a means of gathering data and generat-
ing hypotheses for causality and testing. It is vital to the “formation of the 
[clinician]–patient bond, the beginning of a therapeutic partnership and the 
healing process (Fig. 1-2).”1
This chapter, revised in this edition, provides a guide to clinical proﬁciency 
in four critical areas: the Health History; the Physical Examination; Clinical 
C H A P T E R1
Foundations for  
Clinical Proficiency
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate  
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (All Volumes)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com
F I G U R E  1 - 1 .  The importance of 
establishing rapport.
F I G U R E  1 - 2 .  The skilled physical 
examination.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
4 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
FOUNDATIONS FOR CLINICAL PROFICIENCY
Reasoning, Assessment, and Plan; and The Quality Clinical Record. It describes 
the components of the health history and how to organize the patient’s story; 
and it gives an overview of the physical examination with a sequence for 
ensuring patient comfort that brieﬂy describes techniques of examination for 
each component of the physical examination, from the General Survey 
through the Nervous System. In this edition, the chapter also includes Clini-
cal Reasoning, Assessment, and Plan, and The Quality Clinical Record. The new 
Chapter 2, Evaluating Clinical Evidence, provides the analytic tools for eval-
uating tests, guidelines, and the clinical literature that will ensure best prac-
tices and lifelong clinical learning. Chapter 3, Interviewing and the Health 
History, completes the foundational chapters that prepare you for performing 
the physical examination. You will learn the techniques of physical examina-
tion in Chapters 4 through 17. Each chapter is evidence based and includes 
citations from the clinical literature for easy reference so that you can con-
tinue to expand your knowledge. Beginning with Chapter 4, sections on 
Health Promotion and Counseling: Evidence and Recommendations review cur-
rent clinical guidelines for preventive care.
The Bates’ Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking follows the 
sequence described below:
■ Chapter 2, Evaluating Clinical Evidence, discusses the history and physical 
examination as diagnostic tools, evaluation of the validity and reproducibil-
ity of diagnostic tests, health promotion, critical appraisal of the clinical 
research, and grading criteria for clinical guidelines.
■ Chapter 3, Interviewing and the Health History, expands on the essential, 
varied, and often complex skills of building patient rapport and eliciting 
the patient’s story. It addresses basic and advanced interviewing techniques 
and the approach to challenging patients as well as cultural competence 
and professionalism.
■ Chapters 4 to 17 are regional examination chapters, which detail the pertinent 
anatomy and physiology, health history, evidence-based guidelines for health 
promotion and counseling, techniques of examination, and the written re-
cord, followed by tables comparing common symptoms and physical ﬁnd-
ings and citations from the literature.
■ Chapters 18 to 20 extend and adapt the elements of the adult history and 
physical examination to special populations: newborns, infants, children, 
and adolescents; pregnant women; and older adults.
As you acquire the skills of physical examination and history taking, you will 
move to active patient assessment, gradually at ﬁrst, but then with growing con-
ﬁdence and expertise, and ultimately clinical competence. From mastery of these 
skills and the mutual trust and respect of caring patient relationships emerge the 
timeless rewards of the clinical professions.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  1 |
 
Foundations for Clinical Proficiency  
5
PATIENT ASSESSMENT: COMPREHENSIVE OR FOCUSED
Determining the Scope of Your Assessment
At the outset of each patient encounter, you will face the common questions, 
“How much should I do?” and “Should my assessment be comprehensive or 
focused?” For patients you are seeing for the ﬁrst time in the ofﬁce or hospital, 
you will usually choose to conduct a comprehensive assessment, which includes 
all the elements of the health history and the complete physical examination. In 
many situations, a more ﬂexible focused or problem-oriented assessment is appro-
priate, particularly for patients you know well returning for routine care, or those 
with speciﬁc “urgent care” concerns like sore throat or knee pain. You will adjust 
the scope of your history and physical examination to the situation at hand, 
keeping several factors in mind: the magnitude and severity of the patient’s prob-
lems; the need for thoroughness; the clinical setting—inpatient or outpatient, 
primary or subspecialty care; and the time available. Skill in all the components 
of a comprehensive assessment allows you to select the elements that are most 
pertinent to the patient’s concerns, yet meet clinical standards for best practice 
and diagnostic accuracy.
As you can see, the comprehensive examination does more than assess body sys-
tems. It is a source of fundamental and personalized knowledge about the patient 
that strengthens the clinician–patient relationship. Most people seeking care have 
speciﬁc worries or symptoms. The comprehensive examination provides a more 
complete basis for assessing these concerns and answering patient questions.
The History and Physical Examination: 
Comprehensive or Focused?
Comprehensive Assessment
Focused Assessment
Is appropriate for new patients in the 
office or hospital
Provides fundamental and personal-
ized knowledge about the patient
Strengthens the clinician–patient  
relationship
Helps identify or rule out physical 
causes related to patient concerns
Provides a baseline for future assess-
ments
Creates a platform for health promotion 
through education and counseling
Develops proficiency in the essential 
skills of physical examination
Is appropriate for established patients, 
especially during routine or urgent 
care visits
Addresses focused concerns or symp-
toms
Assesses symptoms restricted to a  
specific body system
Applies examination methods rele-
vant to assessing the concern or 
problem as thoroughly and care-
fully as possible
Patient Assessment: 
Comprehensive or Focused
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
6 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
PATIENT ASSESSMENT: COMPREHENSIVE OR FOCUSED
For the focused examination, you will select the methods relevant to thorough 
assessment of the targeted problem. The patient’s symptoms, age, and health 
history help determine the scope of the focused examination, as does your 
knowledge of disease patterns. Of all the patients with sore throat, for example, 
you will need to decide who may have infectious mononucleosis and warrants 
careful palpation of the liver and spleen and who, by contrast, has a common 
cold amenable to a more focused examination of the head, neck, and lungs. The 
clinical reasoning that underlies and guides such decisions is discussed later in 
this chapter.
What about the routine clinical check-up, or periodic health examination? Numerous 
studies have scrutinized the usefulness of the annual well-patient visit for screen-
ing and prevention of illness, in contrast to evaluation of symptoms, without 
coming to a clear consensus.2–10 A growing body of evidence documents the 
utility of many components of the physical examination, its vital role in decision 
making, and its potential for savings through decreased testing.11–15 Validated 
examination techniques include blood pressure measurement, assessment of 
central venous pressure from the jugular venous pulse, listening to the heart for 
evidence of valvular disease, detection of hepatic and splenic enlargement, and 
the pelvic examination with Papanicolaou (Pap) smears. Various consensus pan-
els and expert advisory groups have further expanded recommendations for 
examination and screening, which will be addressed in the regional examination 
chapters.
What about the newer evidence about the physical examination itself and its 
relationship to advanced diagnostic testing? Recent studies view the physical 
examination ﬁndings themselves as diagnostic tests and have begun to validate 
their value by identifying their test characteristics using Bayes’ theorem and 
the evidence-based tools described in Chapter 2, Evaluating Clinical 
Evidence.16,17 Over time, “the rational clinical examination” is expected to 
improve diagnostic decision making, especially as national competencies and 
best teaching practices for physical examination skills become better under-
stood.11,18 Meanwhile, the physical examination yields “the intangible beneﬁts 
of more time spent … communicating with patients,”18 a unique therapeutic 
relationship, more accurate diagnoses, and more selective assessments and 
plans of care.1,11
Subjective Versus Objective Data
As you acquire the techniques of history taking and physical examination, 
remember the important differences between subjective information and objective 
information, summarized in the table below. Symptoms are subjective concerns, 
or what the patient tells you. Signs are considered one type of objective informa-
tion, or what you observe. Knowing these differences helps you group together 
the different types of patient information. These distinctions are equally impor-
tant for organizing written and oral presentations about patients into a logical 
and understandable format.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  1 |
 
Foundations for Clinical Proficiency  
7
THE COMPREHENSIVE ADULT HEALTH HISTORY 
See Chapter 18, Assessing Children: 
Infancy Through Adolescence, for the 
comprehensive history and examina-
tion of infants, children, and adoles-
cents, pp. 799–925.
Components of the Comprehensive  
Health History
● Identifying data and source of the history; reliability
● Chief complaint(s)
● Present illness
● Past history
● Family history
● Personal and social history
● Review of systems
As you will learn in Chapter 3, Interviewing and the Health History, when you 
talk with patients, the health history rarely emerges in this order. The interview 
is more ﬂuid; you will closely follow the patient’s cues to elicit the patient’s nar-
rative of illness, provide empathy, and strengthen rapport. You will quickly learn 
where to ﬁt different aspects of the patient’s story into the more formal format of 
the oral presentation and written record. You will transform the patient’s lan-
guage and story into the components of the health history familiar to all mem-
bers of the health care team. This restructuring organizes your clinical reasoning 
and provides a template for your expanding clinical expertise.
As you begin your clinical journey, review the components of the adult health 
history, then study the more detailed explanations that follow.
Differences Between Subjective and  
Objective Data
Subjective Data
Objective Data
What the patient tells you
What you detect during the examination, 
laboratory information, and test data
The symptoms and history, from 
Chief Complaint through  
Review of Systems
All physical examination findings, or signs
Example: Mrs. G. is a 54-year-old 
hairdresser who reports pressure 
over her left chest “like an ele-
phant sitting there,” which goes 
into her left neck and arm.
Example: Mrs. G. is an older, overweight 
white female, who is pleasant and coop-
erative. Height 5′4″, weight 150 lbs, BMI 
26, BP 160/80, HR 96 and regular, respi-
ratory rate 24, temperature 97.5 °F
The Comprehensive Adult  
Health History
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
8 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE COMPREHENSIVE ADULT HEALTH HISTORY 
Overview: Components of the Adult  
Health History
Identifying Data
Identifying data—such as age, gender, occupation,  
marital status
Source of the history—usually the patient, but can be  
a family member or friend, letter of referral, or the 
clinical record
If appropriate, establish the source of referral, because a 
written report may be needed
Reliability
Varies according to the patient’s memory, trust, and 
mood
Chief 
Complaint(s)
The one or more symptoms or concerns causing the 
patient to seek care
Present Illness
Amplifies the Chief Complaint; describes how each 
symptom developed
Includes patient’s thoughts and feelings about the illness
Pulls in relevant portions of the Review of Systems, called 
“pertinent positives and negatives” (see p. 11)
May include medications, allergies, and tobacco use and 
alcohol, which are frequently pertinent to the present 
illness
Past History
Lists childhood illnesses
Lists adult illnesses with dates for events in at least four 
categories: medical, surgical, obstetric/gynecologic, 
and psychiatric
Includes health maintenance practices such as immuni-
zations, screening tests, lifestyle issues, and home 
safety
Family History
Outlines or diagrams age and health, or age and cause of 
death, of siblings, parents, and grandparents
Documents presence or absence of specific illnesses in 
family, such as hypertension, diabetes, or type of  
cancer
Personal and 
Social History
Describes educational level, family of origin, current 
household, personal interests, and lifestyle
Review of 
Systems
Documents presence or absence of common symptoms 
related to each of the major body systems
The Comprehensive Adult Health  
History—Further Description
Initial Information
Date and Time of History. The date is always important. Be sure to docu-
ment the time you evaluate the patient, especially in urgent, emergent, or hospital 
settings.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  1 |
 
Foundations for Clinical Proficiency  
9
THE COMPREHENSIVE ADULT HEALTH HISTORY 
Identifying Data. These include age, gender, marital status, and occupa-
tion. The source of history or referral can be the patient, a family member or 
friend, an ofﬁcer, a consultant, or the clinical record. Identifying the source of 
referral helps you assess the quality of the referral information, questions you may 
need to address in your assessment and written response.
Reliability. Document this information, if relevant. This judgment 
reﬂects the quality of the information provided by the patient and is usually 
made at the end of the interview. For example, “The patient is vague when 
describing symptoms, and the details are confusing,” or, “The patient is a reli-
able historian.”
Chief Complaint(s). Make every attempt to quote the patient’s own words. 
For example, “My stomach hurts and I feel awful.” If patients have no speciﬁc 
complaints, report their reason for the visit, such as “I have come for my regular 
check-up” or “I’ve been admitted for a thorough evaluation of my heart.”
Present Illness. This Present Illness is a complete, clear, and chronologic 
description of the problems prompting the patient’s visit, including the onset of 
the problem, the setting in which it developed, its manifestations, and any treat-
ments to date.
■ Each principal symptom should be well characterized, and should include 
the seven attributes of a symptom: (1) location; (2) quality; (3) quantity or 
severity; (4) timing, including onset, duration, and frequency; (5) the setting 
in which it occurs; (6) factors that have aggravated or relieved the symptom; 
and (7) associated manifestations. It is also important to query the “perti-
nent positives” and “pertinent negatives” drawn from sections of the Review 
of Systems that are relevant to the Chief Complaint(s). The presence or 
absence of these additional symptoms helps you generate the differential 
diagnosis, which includes the most likely and, at times, the most serious 
diagnoses, even if less likely, which could explain the patient’s condition.
■ Other information is frequently relevant, such as risk factors for coronary 
artery disease in patients with chest pain, or current medications in patients 
with syncope.
■ The Present Illness should reveal the patient’s responses to his or her symp-
toms and what effect the illness has had on the patient’s life. Always remem-
ber, the data ﬂow spontaneously from the patient, but the task of oral and written 
organization is yours.
■ Patients often have more than one symptom or concern. Each symptom mer-
its its own paragraph and a full description.
■ Medications should be noted, including name, dose, route, and frequency 
of use. Also, list home remedies, nonprescription drugs, vitamins, mineral 
or herbal supplements, oral contraceptives, and medicines borrowed from 
family members or friends. Ask patients to bring in all their medications so 
that you can see exactly what they take.
See discussion of the seven attributes 
of a symptom in Chapter 3, Interview-
ing and the Health History,  
pp. 65–108.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
10 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE COMPREHENSIVE ADULT HEALTH HISTORY 
■ Allergies, including speciﬁc reactions to each medication, such as rash or nau-
sea, must be recorded, as well as allergies to foods, insects, or environmental 
factors.
■ Note tobacco use, including the type. Cigarettes are often reported in pack-
years (a person who has smoked 1½ packs a day for 12 years has an 18-pack/
year history). If someone has quit, note for how long.
■ Alcohol and drug use should always be investigated and is often pertinent 
to the Presenting Illness.
Past History
■ Childhood Illnesses: These include measles, rubella, mumps, whooping 
cough, chickenpox, rheumatic fever, scarlet fever, and polio. Also included 
are any chronic childhood illnesses.
■ Adult Illnesses: Provide information relative to Adult Illnesses in each of the 
four areas:
■ Medical: Illnesses such as diabetes, hypertension, hepatitis, asthma, and 
human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV); hospitalizations; number and 
 gender of sexual partners; and risk-taking sexual practices
■ Surgical: Dates, indications, and types of operations
■ Obstetric/Gynecologic: Obstetric history, menstrual history, methods of 
contraception, and sexual function
■ Psychiatric: Illness and time frame, diagnoses, hospitalizations, and 
treatments
■ Health Maintenance: Cover selected aspects of Health Maintenance, espe-
cially immunizations and screening tests. For immunizations, ﬁnd out 
whether the patient has received vaccines for tetanus, pertussis, diphthe-
ria, polio, measles, rubella, mumps, inﬂuenza, varicella, hepatitis B virus 
(HBV), human papilloma virus (HPV), meningococcal disease, Haemophilus 
inﬂuenzae type B, pneumococci, and herpes zoster. For screening tests, re-
view tuberculin tests, Pap smears, mammograms, stool tests for occult 
blood, colonoscopy and cholesterol tests, together with results and when 
they were last performed. If the patient does not know this information, 
written permission may be needed to obtain prior clinical records.
Family History. Under Family History, outline or diagram the age and health, 
or age and cause of death, of each immediate relative including parents, grand-
parents, siblings, children, and grandchildren. Review each of the following con-
ditions and record whether they are present or absent in the family: hypertension, 
coronary artery disease, elevated cholesterol levels, stroke, diabetes, thyroid or 
renal disease, arthritis, tuberculosis, asthma or lung disease, headache, seizure 
disorder, mental illness, suicide, substance abuse, and allergies, as well as 
See Chapter 3, Interviewing and  
the Health History, for suggested 
questions about alcohol and drug 
use, pp. 65–108.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  1 |
 
Foundations for Clinical Proficiency  
11
THE COMPREHENSIVE ADULT HEALTH HISTORY 
symptoms reported by the patient. Ask about any history of breast, ovarian, 
colon, or prostate cancer. Ask about any genetically transmitted diseases.
Personal and Social History. The Personal and Social History captures the 
patient’s personality and interests, sources of support, coping style, strengths, 
and concerns. It should include occupation and the last year of schooling; home 
situation and signiﬁcant others; sources of stress, both recent and long-term; 
important life experiences such as military service, job history, ﬁnancial situa-
tion, and retirement; leisure activities; religious afﬁliation and spiritual beliefs; 
and activities of daily living (ADLs). Baseline level of function is particularly 
important in older or disabled patients. The Personal and Social History includes 
lifestyle habits that promote health or create risk, such as exercise and diet, includ-
ing frequency of exercise, usual daily food intake, dietary supplements or restric-
tions, and use of coffee, tea, and other caffeinated beverages, and safety measures, 
including use of seat belts, bicycle helmets, sunblock, smoke detectors, and 
other devices related to speciﬁc hazards. Include sexual orientation and practices 
and any alternative health care practices. Avoid restricting the Personal and Social 
History to only tobacco, drug, and alcohol use. An expanded Personal and Social 
History personalizes your relationship with the patient and builds rapport.
You will learn to intersperse personal and social questions throughout the inter-
view to make the patient feel more at ease.
Review of Systems
See pp. 970–971 for the ADLs fre-
quently assessed in older adults.
Tips for Eliciting the Review of Systems
● Understanding and using Review of Systems questions may seem challeng-
ing at first. These “yes-no” questions should come at the end of the inter-
view. Think about asking a series of questions going from “head to toe.” 
It is helpful to prepare the patient by saying, “The next part of the history 
may feel like a hundred questions, but it is important to make sure we 
have not missed anything.” Most Review of Systems questions pertain to 
symptoms, but on occasion, some clinicians include diseases like pneumo-
nia or tuberculosis.
● Note that as you elicit the Present Illness, you may also draw on Review of 
Systems questions related to system(s) relevant to the Chief Complaint to 
establish “pertinent positives and negatives” that help clarify the diagnosis. 
For example, after a full description of chest pain, you may ask, “Do you have 
any history of high blood pressure . . . palpitations . . . shortness of breath . . . 
swelling in your ankles or feet?” or even move to questions from the Respira-
tory or Gastrointestinal Review of Systems.
See Chapter 3, Interviewing and the 
Health History, for discussion of the 
role of pertinent positives and nega-
tives in establishing the differential 
diagnosis, p. 80.
Start with a fairly general question as you address each of the different systems, 
then shift to more speciﬁc questions about systems that may be of concern. 
Examples of starting questions are, “How are your ears and hearing?” “How 
about your lungs and breathing?” “Any trouble with your heart?” “How is your 
digestion?” “How about your bowels?” The need for additional questions will 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
12 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE COMPREHENSIVE ADULT HEALTH HISTORY 
vary depending on the patient’s age, complaints, and general state of health and 
your clinical judgment.
■ The Review of Systems questions may uncover problems that the patient has 
overlooked, particularly in areas unrelated to the Present Illness. Signiﬁcant 
health events, such as past surgery, hospitalization for a major prior illness, or 
a parent’s death, require full exploration. Keep your technique ﬂexible. 
Remember that major health events discovered during the Review of Systems 
should be moved to the Present Illness or Past History in your write-up.
■ Some experienced clinicians do the Review of Systems during the physical 
examination, asking about the ears, for example, as they examine them. If 
the patient has only a few symptoms, this combination can be efﬁcient. If 
there are multiple symptoms, however, this can disrupt the ﬂow of both the 
history and the examination, and necessary note taking becomes awkward.
Listed below is a standard series of Review-of-System questions. As you gain expe-
rience, these “yes or no” questions will take no more than several minutes. For 
each regional “system” ask: “Have you ever had any…?”
The Review of Systems
General: Usual weight, recent weight change, clothing that fits more tightly or 
loosely than before; weakness, fatigue, or fever.
Skin: Rashes, lumps, sores, itching, dryness, changes in color; changes in hair or 
nails; changes in size or color of moles.
Head, Eyes, Ears, Nose, Throat (HEENT):
Head: Headache, head injury, dizziness, lightheadedness.
Eyes: Vision, glasses or contact lenses, last examination, pain, redness, 
excessive tearing, double or blurred vision, spots, specks, flashing lights, 
glaucoma, cataracts.
Ears: Hearing, tinnitus, vertigo, earaches, infection, discharge. If hearing is 
decreased, use or nonuse of hearing aids.
Nose and sinuses: Frequent colds, nasal stuffiness, discharge, or itching, hay 
fever, nosebleeds, sinus trouble.
Throat (or mouth and pharynx): Condition of teeth and gums, bleeding gums, 
dentures, if any, and how they fit, last dental examination, sore tongue, dry 
mouth, frequent sore throats, hoarseness.
Neck: “Swollen glands,” goiter, lumps, pain, or stiffness in the neck.
Breasts: Lumps, pain, or discomfort, nipple discharge, self-examination practices.
Respiratory: Cough, sputum (color, quantity; presence of blood or hemoptysis), 
shortness of breath (dyspnea), wheezing, pain with a deep breath (pleuritic 
pain), last chest x-ray. You may wish to include asthma, bronchitis, emphy-
sema, pneumonia, and tuberculosis.
Cardiovascular: “Heart trouble”; high blood pressure; rheumatic fever; heart mur-
murs; chest pain or discomfort; palpitations; shortness of breath; need to use 
pillows at night to ease breathing (orthopnea); need to sit up at night to ease 
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  1 |
 
Foundations for Clinical Proficiency  
13
THE COMPREHENSIVE ADULT HEALTH HISTORY 
The Review of Systems (continued )
breathing (paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea); swelling in the hands, ankles, or feet 
(edema); results of past electrocardiograms or other cardiovascular tests.
Gastrointestinal: Trouble swallowing, heartburn, appetite, nausea. Bowel move-
ments, stool color and size, change in bowel habits, pain with defecation,  
rectal bleeding or black or tarry stools, hemorrhoids, constipation, diarrhea. 
Abdominal pain, food intolerance, excessive belching or passing of gas.  
Jaundice, liver, or gallbladder trouble; hepatitis.
Peripheral vascular: Intermittent leg pain with exertion (claudication); leg 
cramps; varicose veins; past clots in the veins; swelling in calves, legs, or feet; 
color change in fingertips or toes during cold weather; swelling with redness 
or tenderness.
Urinary: Frequency of urination, polyuria, nocturia, urgency, burning or pain 
during urination, blood in the urine (hematuria), urinary infections, kidney or 
flank pain, kidney stones, ureteral colic, suprapubic pain, incontinence; in 
males, reduced caliber or force of the urinary stream, hesitancy, dribbling.
Genital: Male: Hernias, discharge from or sores on the penis, testicular pain or 
masses, scrotal pain or swelling, history of sexually transmitted infections and 
their treatments. Sexual habits, interest, function, satisfaction, birth control 
methods, condom use, and problems. Concerns about HIV infection. Female: 
Age at menarche, regularity, frequency, and duration of periods, amount of 
bleeding; bleeding between periods or after intercourse, last menstrual period, 
dysmenorrhea, premenstrual tension. Age at menopause, menopausal symp-
toms, postmenopausal bleeding. If the patient was born before 1971, exposure to 
diethylstilbestrol (DES) from maternal use during pregnancy (linked to cervical 
carcinoma). Vaginal discharge, itching, sores, lumps, sexually transmitted infec-
tions and treatments. Number of pregnancies, number and type of deliveries, 
number of abortions (spontaneous and induced), complications of pregnancy, 
birth-control methods. Sexual preference, interest, function, satisfaction, any 
problems, including dyspareunia. Concerns about HIV infection.
Musculoskeletal: Muscle or joint pain, stiffness, arthritis, gout, backache. If 
present, describe location of affected joints or muscles, any swelling, redness, 
pain, tenderness, stiffness, weakness, or limitation of motion or activity; 
include timing of symptoms (e.g., morning or evening), duration, and any  
history of trauma. Neck or low back pain. Joint pain with systemic symptoms 
such as fever, chills, rash, anorexia, weight loss, or weakness.
Psychiatric: Nervousness, tension, mood, including depression, memory 
change, suicidal ideation, suicide plans or attempts. Past counseling, psycho-
therapy, or psychiatric admissions.
Neurologic: Changes in mood, attention, or speech; changes in orientation, 
memory, insight, or judgment; headache, dizziness, vertigo, fainting, black-
outs; weakness, paralysis, numbness or loss of sensation, tingling or “pins and 
needles,” tremors or other involuntary movements, seizures.
Hematologic: Anemia, easy bruising or bleeding, past transfusions, transfusion 
reactions.
Endocrine: “Thyroid trouble,” heat or cold intolerance, excessive sweating, 
excessive thirst or hunger, polyuria, change in glove or shoe size.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
14 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE COMPREHENSIVE PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Beginning the Examination:  
Setting the Stage
Before you begin the adult physical examination, take time to prepare for the 
tasks ahead. Think through your approach to the patient, your professional 
demeanor, and how to make the patient feel comfortable and relaxed. Review the 
measures that promote the patient’s physical comfort and make any adjustments 
needed in the environment.
See Chapter 18, Assessing Children: 
Infancy Through Adolescence, for 
comprehensive pediatric health  
histories, pp. 799–925.
Steps in Preparing for the Physical Examination
1. Reﬂect on your approach to the patient.
2. Adjust the lighting and the environment.
3. Check your equipment.
4. Make the patient comfortable.
5. Observe standard and universal precautions.
6. Choose the sequence, scope, and positioning of examination.
Reﬂect on Your Approach to the Patient. As you greet the patient, iden-
tify yourself as a student. Appear calm and organized even when you feel inex-
perienced. It is common to forget part of the examination, especially at ﬁrst. 
Simply examine that area out of sequence. It is not unusual to go back to the 
patient later and ask to check one or two items that you might have overlooked.
Beginners need to spend more time than seasoned clinicians on selected portions 
of the examination, such as the funduscopic examination or cardiac auscultation. 
To avoid alarming the patient, warn the patient ahead of time by saying, for 
example, “I would like to spend extra time listening to your heart and the heart 
sounds, but this doesn’t mean I hear anything wrong.”
Many patients view the physical examination with some anxiety. They feel vulner-
able, physically exposed, apprehensive about possible pain, and uneasy about 
what the clinician may ﬁnd. At the same time, they appreciate your concern about 
their health and respond to your attention. With this in mind, the skillful clinician 
is thorough without wasting time, systematic but ﬂexible and gentle, yet not afraid 
to cause discomfort should this be required. The skillful clinician examines each 
region of the body, and at the same time senses the whole patient, notes the wince 
or worried glance, and shares information that calms, explains, and reassures.
As a beginner, avoid interpreting your ﬁndings. You are not the patient’s primary 
caregiver, and your views may be premature or wrong. As you grow in experi-
ence and responsibility, sharing ﬁndings will become more appropriate. If the 
patient has speciﬁc concerns, discuss them with your teachers. At times, you 
The Comprehensive Physical 
Examination
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  1 |
 
Foundations for Clinical Proficiency  
15
THE COMPREHENSIVE PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
may discover abnormalities such as an ominous mass or a deep ulceration. 
Always avoid showing distaste, alarm, or other negative reactions.
Adjust the Lighting and the Environment. Several environmental factors 
affect the caliber of your examination. For the best results, it is important to “set 
the stage” so that both you and the patient are comfortable. Awkward positioning 
makes assessing physical ﬁndings more difﬁcult for both you and the patient. 
Take the time to adjust the bed to a convenient height (but be sure to lower it 
when ﬁnished), and ask the patient to move toward you, turn over, or shift posi-
tion whenever this makes the examination of selected areas of the body easier.
Good lighting and a quiet environment enhance what you see and hear but may 
be hard to arrange. Do the best you can. If a television interferes with auscultat-
ing heart sounds, politely ask the nearby patient to lower the volume, and 
remember to thank the patient as you leave.
Tangential lighting is optimal for inspecting structures such as the jugular venous 
pulse, the thyroid gland, and the apical impulse of the heart (Fig. 1-3). It casts light 
across body surfaces that throw contours, elevations, and depressions, whether 
moving or stationary, into sharper relief. When light is perpendicular to the surface 
or diffuse, shadows are reduced and subtle undulations across the surface are lost 
(Fig. 1-4). Experiment with focused tangential lighting across the tendons on the 
back of your hand; try to see the pulsations of the radial artery at your wrist.
Check Your Equipment. Equipment necessary for the physical examination 
includes the following:
F I G U R E  1 - 3 .  Tangential lighting.
F I G U R E  1 - 4 .  Perpendicular 
lighting.
Equipment for the Physical Examination
● An ophthalmoscope and an otoscope. If you are examining children, the  
otoscope could allow pneumatic otoscopy.
● A ﬂashlight or penlight
● Tongue depressors
● A ruler and a ﬂexible tape measure, preferably marked in centimeters
● Often a thermometer
● A watch with a second hand
● A sphygmomanometer
● A stethoscope with the following characteristics:
● Ear tips that ﬁt snugly and painlessly. To get this ﬁt, choose ear tips of the 
proper size, align the ear pieces with the angle of your ear canals, and 
adjust the spring of the connecting metal band to a comfortable tightness.
● Thick-walled tubing as short as feasible to maximize the transmission of 
sound: ∼30 cm (12 inches), if possible, and no longer than 38 cm (15 inches)
● A bell and a diaphragm with a good changeover mechanism
● A visual acuity card
● A reﬂex hammer
● Tuning forks, both 128 Hz and 512 Hz
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
16 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE COMPREHENSIVE PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Make the Patient Comfortable
Patient Privacy and Comfort. Your access to the patient’s body is a unique 
and time-honored privilege of your role as a clinician. Showing sensitivity to pri-
vacy and patient modesty must be ingrained in your professional behavior and 
conveys respect for the patient’s vulnerability. Close nearby doors, draw the cur-
tains in the hospital or examining room, and wash your hands carefully before the 
examination begins.
During the examination, be aware of the patient’s feelings and any discomfort. 
Respond to the patient’s facial expressions and even ask, “Are you okay?” or “Is 
this painful?” to elicit unexpressed worries or sources of pain. Adjusting the 
angle of the bed or examining table, rearranging the pillows, or adding blankets 
for warmth demonstrates that you are attentive to the patient’s well-being.
Draping the Patient. You will acquire the art of draping the patient with 
the gown or draw sheet as you learn each segment of the examination in the 
chapters ahead.
Equipment for the Physical  
Examination (continued )
● Cotton swabs, safety pins, or other disposable objects for testing sensation 
and two-point discrimination
● Cotton for testing the sense of light touch
● Two test tubes (optional) for testing temperature sensation
● Gloves and lubricant for oral, vaginal, and rectal examinations
● Vaginal specula and equipment for cytologic and bacteriologic studies
● Paper and pen or pencil, or desktop or laptop computer
Tips for Draping the Patient
● Your goal is to visualize one area of the body at a time. This preserves the 
patient’s modesty and helps you focus on the area being examined.
● With the patient sitting, for example, untie the gown in back to better listen  
to the lungs.
● For the breast examination, uncover the right breast but keep the left chest 
draped. Redrape the right chest, then uncover the left chest and proceed to 
examine the left breast and heart.
● For the abdominal examination, only the abdomen should be exposed. Adjust 
the gown to cover the chest and place the sheet or drape at the inguinal level. To 
help the patient prepare for potentially awkward segments of the examination, 
brieﬂy describe your plans before starting, for example, “Now I am going to 
move your gown so I can check the pulse in your groin area,” or “Because you 
mentioned irritation, I am going to inspect your perirectal area.”
Courteous Clear Instructions. Make sure your instructions to the patient 
at each step in the examination are courteous and clear. For example, “I would like 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  1 |
 
Foundations for Clinical Proficiency  
17
THE COMPREHENSIVE PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
to examine your heart now, so please lie down,” or “Now I am going to check your 
abdomen.” Let the patient know if you anticipate embarrassment or discomfort.
Keeping the Patient Informed. As you proceed with the examination, 
talk with the patient to see if he or she wants to know about your ﬁndings. Is the 
patient curious about the lung ﬁndings or your method for assessing the liver or 
spleen?
When you have completed the examination, tell the patient your general impres-
sions and what to expect next. For hospitalized patients, make sure the patient is 
comfortable and rearrange the immediate environment to the patient’s satisfaction. 
Be sure to lower the bed to avoid risk of falls and raise the bedrails. As you leave, 
wash your hands, clean your equipment, and dispose of any waste materials.
Observe Standard and Universal Precautions. The Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC) have issued several guidelines to protect patients 
and examiners from the spread of infectious disease. All clinicians examining 
patients are advised to study and observe these precautions at the CDC websites. 
Advisories for standard and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) 
precautions and for universal precautions are summarized below.19–23
Standard and MRSA precautions. Standard precautions are based on the principle 
that all blood, body ﬂuids, secretions, excretions (except sweat), nonintact skin, 
and mucous membranes may contain transmissible infectious agents. Standard 
precautions apply to all patients in any setting. They include hand hygiene 
(Fig. 1-5); use of personal protective equipment (gloves; gowns; and mouth, nose, 
and eye protection) (Fig. 1-6); safe injection practices; safe handling of contami-
nated equipment or surfaces; respiratory hygiene and cough etiquette; patient 
isolation criteria; and precautions relating to equipment, toys, solid surfaces, and 
laundry handling. Because hand hygiene practices have been shown to reduce the 
transmission of multidrug-resistant organisms, especially MRSA and vancomycin-
resistant enterococcus (VRE),19 the CDC hygiene recommendations are repro-
duced below. White coats and stethoscopes also harbor bacteria and should be 
cleaned frequently.24,25
F I G U R E  1 - 5 .  Handwashing is a 
standard precaution.
F I G U R E  1 - 6 .  Personal protective 
equipment.
CDC Recommendations for Hand Hygiene
1. Key situations where hand hygiene should be performed include:
a. before touching a patient, even if gloves are worn;
b. before exiting the patient’s care area after touching the patient or the 
patient’s  immediate environment;
c. after contact with blood, body ﬂuids, or excretions, or wound dressings;
d. prior to performing an aseptic task (e.g., placing an intravenous drip, pre-
paring an injection);
e. if hands are moving from a contaminated-body site to a clean-body site 
during patient care; and
f. after glove removal.
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
18 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE COMPREHENSIVE PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Universal precautions. Universal precautions are a set of guidelines designed to 
prevent parenteral, mucous membrane, and noncontact exposures of health care 
workers to bloodborne pathogens, including HIV and HBV. Immunization with 
the HBV vaccine for health care workers with exposure to blood is an important 
adjunct to universal precautions. The following ﬂuids are considered potentially 
infectious: all blood and other body ﬂuids containing visible blood, semen, and 
vaginal secretions and cerebrospinal, synovial, pleural, peritoneal, pericardial, 
and amniotic ﬂuids. Protective barriers include gloves, gowns, aprons, masks, and 
protective eyewear. All health care workers should follow the precautions for safe 
injections and prevention of injury from needlesticks, scalpels, and other sharp 
instruments and devices. Report to your health service immediately if such 
injury occurs.
Choose the Sequence, Scope, and Positioning  
of the Examination
The Cardinal Techniques of Examination. As you begin the examina-
tion, study the four cardinal techniques of examination. Plan your sequence and 
scope of examination and how you will position the patient.
The physical examination relies on four classic techniques: inspection, palpation, 
percussion, and auscultation. You will learn in later chapters about additional 
maneuvers that are important in amplifying physical diagnosis, such as having the 
patient lean forward to better detect the murmur of aortic regurgitation or ballot-
ing the patella to check for joint effusion.
CDC Recommendations for  
Hand Hygiene (continued )
2. Use soap and water when hands are visibly soiled (e.g., blood, body ﬂuids),  
or after caring for patients with known or suspected infectious diarrhea  
(e.g., Clostridium diﬃcile, norovirus). Otherwise, the preferred method of 
hand decontamination is with an alcohol-based hand rub.
Source: CDC. Guide to infection prevention in outpatient settings. Minimum expectations for safe 
care. May 2011. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/HAI/settings/outpatient/outpatient-care-guide-
lines.html. Accessed March 1, 2015.
Cardinal Techniques of Examination
Inspection
Close observation of the details of the patient’s appearance, 
behavior, and movement such as facial expression, mood, 
body habitus and conditioning, skin conditions such as 
petechiae or ecchymoses, eye movements, pharyngeal 
color, symmetry of thorax, height of jugular venous pulsa-
tions, abdominal contour, lower extremity edema, and gait.
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  1 |
 
Foundations for Clinical Proficiency  
19
THE COMPREHENSIVE PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Sequence of Examination. The key to a thorough and accurate physi-
cal examination is developing a systematic sequence of examination. Organize 
your comprehensive or focused examination around three general goals:
■ Maximize the patient’s comfort.
■ Avoid unnecessary changes in position.
■ Enhance clinical efﬁciency.
In general, move from “head to toe.” Avoid examining the patient’s feet, for exam-
ple, before checking the face or mouth. You will quickly see that some segments of 
the examination are best assessed when the patient is sitting, such as examination 
of the head and neck and the thorax and lungs, whereas others are best obtained 
with the patient supine, such as the cardiovascular and abdominal examinations.
As you review the Techniques of Examination on the following pages, note 
that clinicians vary in where they place different segments of the examination, 
especially examinations of the musculoskeletal system and the nervous sys-
tem. Some of these options are indicated in red in the right-hand column. 
Suggestions for patient positioning during the different segments of the exam-
ination are also indicated in the right-hand column in red.
With practice, you will develop your own sequence of examination, keeping the 
need for thoroughness and patient comfort in mind. At ﬁrst, you may need notes 
to remind you what to look for, but over time, this sequence will become habit-
ual and remind you to return to segments of the examination you may have 
skipped, helping you to be complete.
Cardinal Techniques of Examination (continued )
Palpation
Tactile pressure from the palmar ﬁngers or ﬁngerpads to 
assess areas of skin elevation, depression, warmth, or ten-
derness, lymph nodes, pulses, contours and sizes of organs 
and masses, and crepitus in the joints.
Percussion
Use of the striking or plexor ﬁnger, usually the third, to deliver 
a rapid tap or blow against the distal pleximeter ﬁnger, usu-
ally the distal third ﬁnger of the left hand laid against the 
surface of the chest or abdomen, to evoke a sound wave 
such as resonance or dullness from the underlying tissue or 
organs. This sound wave also generates a tactile vibration 
against the pleximeter ﬁnger.
Auscultation
Use of the diaphragm and bell of the stethoscope to detect the 
characteristics of heart, lung, and bowel sounds, including 
location, timing, duration, pitch, and intensity. For the 
heart, this involves sounds from closure of the four valves, 
extra sounds from blood ﬂow into the atria and ventricles, 
and murmurs. Auscultation also permits detection of bruits 
or turbulence over arterial vessels.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
20 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE COMPREHENSIVE PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Examining from the Patient’s Right Side. This book recommends 
examining the patient from the patient’s right side, moving to the opposite side or 
foot of the bed or examining table as necessary. This is the standard position for the 
 physical examination and has several advantages compared with the left side: Esti-
mates of jugular venous pressure are more reliable, the palpating hand rests more 
comfortably on the apical impulse, the right kidney is more frequently palpable 
than the left, and examining tables are frequently positioned to accommodate a 
right-handed approach.
Left-handed students are encouraged to adopt right-sided positioning, even it 
may seem awkward. The left hand can still be used for percussing or for holding 
instruments such as the otoscope or reﬂex hammer.
Review the proposed physical examination sequence in Figure 1-6, which meets 
the three goals of patient comfort, minimal changes in positioning, and efﬁciency.
The Physical Examination: Suggested Sequence and Positioning
Head and neck, including thyroid and lymph nodes
Musculoskeletal as indicated: upper extremities
Cardiovascular, including jugular venous pressure (JVP),
carotid upstrokes and bruits, point of maximal
impulse (PMI), S1, S2; murmurs, extra sounds
Cardiovascular, for S3 and murmur of
mitral stenosis
Cardiovascular, for murmur of aortic insuﬃciency
Peripheral vascular
Optional: thorax and lungs—anterior
Abdomen
Breasts and axillae
Optional: nervous system (mental status,
cranial nerves, upper extremity  motor
strength, bulk, tone, cerebellar function)
General survey
Vital signs
Thorax and lungs
Breasts
Skin: upper torso, anterior and posterior
Optional: skin—lower torso and extremities
Each symbol pertains until a new one 
appears. Two symbols separated by 
a slash indicate either or both positions. 
Sitting
Lying supine, with head 
of bed raised 30 degrees
Same, turned partly to
left side
Sitting, leaning forward
Lying supine
Standing
Lying supine, with hips
ﬂexed, abducted, and
externally rotated, and 
knees ﬂexed (lithotomy
position)
Lying on the left side 
(left lateral decubitus)
Key to the Symbols for the Patient's Position
Nervous system: lower extremity 
motor strength, bulk, tone,
sensation; reﬂexes; Babinski reﬂex
Musculoskeletal, as indicated
Optional: skin, anterior and posterior
Optional: nervous system,  including gait
Optional: musculoskeletal, comprehensive
Women: pelvic and rectal examination
Men: prostate and rectal examination
Examining the Patient at Bedrest. Often you will need to examine a 
patient at bedrest, especially in the hospital, where patients frequently cannot sit up 
in bed or stand. This often dictates changes in your sequence of examination. You 
can examine the head, neck, and anterior chest with the patient lying supine. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  1 |
 
Foundations for Clinical Proficiency  
21
THE COMPREHENSIVE PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Then, roll the patient onto each side to listen to the lungs, examine the back, and 
inspect the skin. Roll the patient back and ﬁnish the rest of the examination with 
the patient again supine.
The Physical Examination—“Head to Toe”
General Survey. Observe the patient’s general state of health, height, build, 
and sexual development. Obtain the patient’s height and weight. Note posture, 
motor activity, and gait; dress, grooming, and personal hygiene; and any odors 
of the body or breath. Watch the patient’s facial expressions and note manner, 
affect, and reactions to people and the environment. Listen to the patient’s 
speech, and note the state of awareness or level of consciousness.
Vital Signs. Measure the blood pressure. Count the pulse and respiratory 
rate. If indicated, measure the body temperature.
Skin. Observe the skin of the face and its characteristics. Assess skin moisture 
or dryness and temperature. Identify any lesions, noting their location, distribu-
tion, arrangement, type, and color. Inspect and palpate the hair and nails. Study 
both surfaces of the patient’s hands. Continue your assessment of the skin as you 
examine the other body regions.
Head, Eyes, Ears, Nose, Throat (HEENT). Head: Examine the hair, scalp, 
skull, and face. Eyes: Check visual acuity and screen the visual ﬁelds. Note the 
position and alignment of the eyes. Observe the eyelids and inspect the sclera 
and conjunctiva of each eye. With oblique lighting, inspect each cornea, iris, and 
lens. Compare the pupils, and test their reactions to light. Assess the extraocular 
movements. With an ophthalmoscope, inspect the ocular fundi. Ears: Inspect 
the auricles, canals, and drums. Check auditory acuity. If acuity is diminished, 
check lateralization (Weber test) and compare air and bone conduction (Rinne 
test). Nose and sinuses: Examine the external nose; using a light and a nasal 
speculum, inspect the nasal mucosa, septum, and turbinates. Palpate for tender-
ness of the frontal and maxillary sinuses. Throat (or mouth and pharynx): 
Inspect the lips, oral mucosa, gums, teeth, tongue, palate, tonsils, and pharynx. 
(You may wish to assess the cranial nerves during this portion of the examination.)
Neck. Inspect and palpate the cervical lymph nodes. Note any masses or 
unusual pulsations in the neck. Feel for any deviation of the trachea. Observe the 
sound and effort of the patient’s breathing. Inspect and palpate the thyroid gland.
Back. Inspect and palpate the spine and muscles of the back. Observe shoul-
der height for symmetry.
Posterior Thorax and Lungs. Inspect and palpate the spine and muscles of 
the upper back. Inspect, palpate, and percuss the chest. Identify the level of dia-
phragmatic dullness on each side. Listen to the breath sounds; identify any 
adventitious (or added) sounds, and, if indicated, listen to the transmitted voice 
sounds (see pp. 326–327).
Close observation begins at the out-
set of the patient encounter and con-
tinues throughout the history and 
physical examination.
The patient is sitting on the edge of 
the bed or examining table. Stand in 
front of the patient, moving to either 
side as needed.
The room should be darkened for 
the ophthalmoscopic examination. 
This promotes pupillary dilation and 
visibility of the fundi.
Move behind the sitting patient to 
feel the thyroid gland and to examine 
the back, posterior thorax, and lungs.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
22 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE COMPREHENSIVE PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Breasts, Axillae, and Epitrochlear Nodes. In a woman, inspect the breasts 
with her arms relaxed, then elevated, and then with her hands pressed on her 
hips. In either sex, inspect the axillae and feel for the axillary nodes. Feel for the 
epitrochlear nodes.
A Note on the Musculoskeletal System. By this time, you have made 
preliminary observations of the musculoskeletal system. You have inspected 
the hands, surveyed the upper back, and, in women, made a fair estimate of 
the shoulders’ range of motion. If indicated, with the patient still sitting, exam-
ine the hands, arms, shoulders, neck, and temporomandibular joints. Inspect 
and palpate the joints and check their range of motion. (You may choose to 
examine upper extremity muscle bulk, tone, strength, and reﬂexes at this time, or 
wait until later.)
Palpate the breasts, while at the same time continuing your inspection.
Anterior Thorax and Lungs. Inspect, palpate, and percuss the chest. Listen 
to the breath sounds, any adventitious sounds, and, if indicated, transmitted 
voice sounds.
Cardiovascular System. Observe the jugular venous pulsations and mea-
sure the jugular venous pressure in relation to the sternal angle. Inspect and 
palpate the carotid pulsations. Listen for carotid bruits.
Elevate the head of the bed to ∼30º for the cardiovascular examination, adjust-
ing as necessary to see the jugular venous pulsations.
Inspect and palpate the precordium. Note the location, diameter, amplitude, and 
duration of the apical impulse. Listen at each auscultatory area with the dia-
phragm of the stethoscope. Listen at the apex and the lower sternal border with 
the bell. Listen for the ﬁrst and second heart sounds and for physiologic splitting 
of the second heart sound. Listen for any abnormal heart sounds or murmurs.
Abdomen. Inspect, auscultate, and percuss the abdomen. Palpate lightly, then 
deeply. Assess the liver and spleen by percussion and then palpation. Try to pal-
pate the kidneys. Palpate the aorta and its pulsations. If you suspect kidney infec-
tion, percuss posteriorly over the costovertebral angles.
Lower Extremities. Examine the legs, assessing three systems while the 
patient is still supine. Each of these three systems can be further assessed when 
the patient stands.
With the patient supine:
■ Peripheral vascular system. Palpate the femoral pulses and, if indicated, the 
popliteal pulses. Palpate the inguinal lymph nodes. Inspect for lower extrem-
ity edema, discoloration, or ulcers. Palpate for pitting edema.
The patient is still sitting. Move to the 
front again.
The patient position is supine. Ask 
the patient to lie down. You should 
stand at the right side of the patient’s 
bed.
Ask the patient to roll partly onto the 
left side while you listen at the apex 
for an S3 or mitral stenosis. The patient 
should sit, lean forward, and exhale 
while you listen for the murmur of 
aortic regurgitation.
Lower the head of the bed to the flat 
position. The patient should be supine.
The patient is supine.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  1 |
 
Foundations for Clinical Proficiency  
23
THE COMPREHENSIVE PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
■ Musculoskeletal system. Note any deformities or enlarged joints. If indicated, 
palpate the joints, check their range of motion, and perform any necessary 
maneuvers.
■ Nervous system. Assess lower extremity muscle bulk, tone, and strength; also 
assess sensation and reﬂexes. Observe any abnormal movements.
With the patient standing:
■ Peripheral vascular system. Inspect for varicose veins.
■ Musculoskeletal system. Examine the alignment of the spine and its range of 
motion, the alignment of the legs, and the feet.
■ Genitalia and hernias in men. Examine the penis and scrotal contents and 
check for hernias.
■ Nervous system. Observe the patient’s gait and ability to walk heel-to-toe, 
walk on the toes, walk on the heels, hop in place, and do shallow knee 
bends. Do a Romberg test and check for pronator drift.
Nervous System. The complete examination of the nervous system can 
also be done at the end of the examination. It consists of the ﬁve segments: 
mental status, cranial nerves (including funduscopic examination), motor sys-
tem, sensory system, and reﬂexes.
Mental Status. If indicated and not done during the interview, assess the 
patient’s orientation, mood, thought process, thought content, abnormal percep-
tions, insight and judgment, memory and attention, information and vocabulary, 
calculating abilities, abstract thinking, and constructional ability.
Cranial Nerves. If not already examined, check sense of smell, strength of 
the temporal and masseter muscles, corneal reﬂexes, facial movements, gag 
reﬂex, and strength of the trapezia and sternocleidomastoid muscles.
Motor System. Assess muscle bulk, tone, and strength of major muscle 
groups. Cerebellar function: rapid alternating movements (RAMs), point-to-point 
movements, such as ﬁnger-to-nose (F → N) and heel-to-shin (H → S), gait.
Sensory System. Assess pain, temperature, light touch, vibration, and 
discrimination. Compare right with left sides and distal with proximal areas on 
the limbs.
Reﬂexes. Including biceps, triceps, brachioradialis, patellar, Achilles deep 
tendon reﬂexes; also plantar reﬂexes or Babinski response (see pp. 758–764).
Additional Examinations. The rectal and genital examinations are often 
 performed at the end of the physical examination. Patient positioning is as 
 indicated.
The patient is standing. You can sit on 
a chair or stool.
The patient is sitting or supine.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
24 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
CLINICAL REASONING, ASSESSMENT, AND PLAN
Genital and Rectal Examination in Men. Inspect the sacrococcygeal 
and perianal areas. Palpate the anal canal, rectum, and prostate. If the patient 
cannot stand, examine the genitalia before doing the rectal examination.
Genital and Rectal Examinations in Women. Examine the external 
genitalia, vagina, and cervix, with a chaperone when needed. Obtain a Pap 
smear. Palpate the uterus and adnexa bimanually. Perform the rectal examination 
if indicated.
F I G U R E  1 - 7 .  Discuss the 
assessment.
F I G U R E  1 - 8 .  Share the plan.
The patient is lying on his left side for 
the rectal examination (or standing 
and bending forward).
The patient is supine in the lithotomy 
position. You should be seated during 
examination with the speculum, then 
standing during bimanual examination 
of the uterus, adnexa (and rectum as 
indicated).
Clinical Reasoning, 
Assessment, and Plan
After completing the history and physical examination, you reach the critical 
step of formulating your Assessment and Plan (Figs. 1-7 and 1-8). Using sound 
clinical reasoning, you must analyze your ﬁndings and identify the patient’s 
problems. You must share your impressions with the patient, eliciting any con-
cerns and making sure that he or she understands and agrees to the steps ahead. 
Finally, you must document your ﬁndings in the patient’s record in a succinct 
legible format that communicates the patient’s story and physical ﬁndings, and 
the rationale for your assessment and plan, to other members of the health care 
team. As you make clinical decisions, you will turn to clinical evidence, calling 
on your knowledge of sensitivity, speciﬁcity, predictive value, and the analytical 
tools detailed in Chapter 2, Evaluating Clinical Evidence.
The comprehensive health history and physical examination form the foundation 
of your clinical Assessment. The subjective data of the health history and the objec-
tive data from the physical examination and testing are primarily descriptive and 
factual. As you move to Assessment, you go beyond description and observa-
tion to analysis and interpretation. You select and cluster relevant pieces of 
information, analyze their signiﬁcance, and try to explain them logically using 
principles of biopsychosocial and bioclinical science. Your clinical reasoning 
process is pivotal to how you interpret the patient’s history and physical examina-
tion, single out problems identiﬁed in the Assessment, and move from each prob-
lem to its action plan (Fig. 1-9).
The Plan is often wide ranging and incorporates patient education, changes in 
medications, needed tests, referrals to other clinicians, and return visits for 
counseling and support. However, a successful Plan does more than just 
describe the approach to a problem. It includes the patient’s responses to the 
problems identiﬁed and to the diagnostic and therapeutic interventions that 
you recommend. It requires good interpersonal skills and sensitivity to the 
patient’s goals, economic means, competing responsibilities, and family struc-
ture and dynamics.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  1 |
 
Foundations for Clinical Proficiency  
25
CLINICAL REASONING, ASSESSMENT, AND PLAN
Clinical Reasoning and Assessment
Because assessment takes place in the clinician’s mind, the process of clinical 
reasoning may seem opaque and even mysterious to beginning students. 
 Experienced clinicians often think quickly, with little overt or conscious effort. 
They differ widely in personal style, communication skills, clinical training, 
experience, and expertise. Some clinicians may ﬁnd it difﬁcult to explain the 
logic behind their clinical thinking. As an active learner, you will be expected to 
ask teachers and clinicians to elaborate on the ﬁne points of their clinical reason-
ing and decision making.26,27
Cognitive psychologists have shown that clinicians use three types of reasoning 
for clinical problem solving: pattern recognition, development of schemas, and 
application of relevant basic and clinical science.29–34 As you gain experience, 
your clinical reasoning will begin at the outset of the patient encounter, not at 
the end. Study the steps described here, then apply them to the Case of Mrs. N. 
that follows. Think about these steps as you see your ﬁrst patients. As with all 
patients, focus on determining “What explains this patient’s concerns?” and 
“What are the ﬁndings, problems, and diagnoses?”17,35
F I G U R E  1 - 9 .  Apply clinical 
reasoning.
For clinical examples of excellent 
and faulty reasoning and strategies 
to avoid cognitive errors, turn to 
Kassirer et al., Learning Clinical  
Reasoning.28
Steps for Identifying Problems and  
Making Diagnoses
1. Identify abnormal ﬁndings.
2. Localize ﬁndings anatomically.
3. Cluster the clinical ﬁndings.
4. Search for the probable cause of the ﬁndings.
5. Cluster the clinical data.
6. Generate hypotheses about the causes of the patient’s problems.
7. Test the hypotheses and establish a working diagnosis.
Identify Abnormal Findings. Make a list of the patient’s symptoms, the signs 
you observed during the physical examination, and any laboratory reports avail-
able to you.
Localize These Findings Anatomically. Often, this step is straightfor-
ward. The symptom of scratchy throat and the sign of an erythematous inﬂamed 
posterior pharynx, for example, clearly localize the problem to the pharynx. A 
complaint of headache leads you quickly to the structures of the skull and 
brain. Other symptoms, however, may present greater difﬁculty. Chest pain, 
for example, can originate in the coronary arteries, the stomach and esopha-
gus, or the muscles and bones of the thorax. If the pain is exertional and 
relieved by rest, either the heart or the musculoskeletal components of the 
chest wall may be involved. If the patient notes pain only when carrying gro-
ceries with the left arm, the musculoskeletal system becomes the likely culprit.
When localizing ﬁndings, be as speciﬁc as your data allow; however, you may 
have to settle for a body region, such as the chest, or a body system, such as the 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
26 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
CLINICAL REASONING, ASSESSMENT, AND PLAN
musculoskeletal system. On the other hand, you may be able to deﬁne the exact 
structure involved, such as the left pectoral muscle. Some symptoms and signs 
are constitutional and cannot be localized, such as fatigue or fever, but are useful 
in the next set of steps.
Cluster the Clinical Findings. It is often challenging to decide whether 
clinical data ﬁt into one problem or several problems. If there is a relatively long 
list of symptoms and signs, and an equally long list of potential explanations, one 
approach is to tease out separate clusters of observations and analyze one cluster at a 
time. Several clinical characteristics may help.
■ Patient age: The patient’s age may help; younger adults are more likely to have 
a single disease, whereas older adults tend to have multiple diseases.
■ Timing of symptoms: The timing of symptoms is often useful. For example, an 
episode of pharyngitis 6 weeks ago is probably unrelated to the fever, chills, 
pleuritic chest pain, and cough that prompted an ofﬁce visit today. To use 
timing effectively, you need to know the natural history of various diseases 
and conditions. A yellow penile discharge followed 3 weeks later by a pain-
less penile ulcer suggests two problems: gonorrhea and primary syphilis. In 
contrast, a penile ulcer followed in 6 weeks by a maculopapular skin rash 
and generalized lymphadenopathy suggest two stages of the same problem: 
primary and secondary syphilis.
■ Involvement of different body systems: Involvement of the different body systems 
may help group clinical data. If symptoms and signs occur in a single system, 
one disease may explain them. Problems in different, apparently unrelated, 
systems often require more than one explanation. Again, knowledge of dis-
ease patterns is necessary. For example, you might decide to group a patient’s 
high blood pressure and sustained apical impulse together with ﬂame-
shaped retinal hemorrhages, place them in the cardiovascular system, and 
label the constellation “hypertensive cardiovascular disease with hyperten-
sive retinopathy.” You would develop another explanation for the patient’s 
mild fever, left lower quadrant tenderness, and diarrhea.
■ Multisystem conditions: With experience, you will become increasingly adept 
at recognizing multisystem conditions and building plausible explanations that 
link manifestations that are seemingly unrelated. To explain cough, hemop-
tysis, and weight loss in a 60-year-old plumber who has smoked cigarettes 
for 40 years, you would rank lung cancer high in your differential diagnosis. 
You might support your diagnosis with your observation of the patient’s 
cyanotic nailbeds. With experience and continued reading, you will recog-
nize that his other symptoms and signs fall under the same diagnosis. Dys-
phagia would reﬂect extension of the cancer to the esophagus, pupillary 
asymmetry would suggest pressure on the cervical sympathetic chain, and 
jaundice could result from metastases to the liver. In another example of 
multisystem disease, a young man who presents with odynophagia, fever, 
weight loss, purplish skin lesions, leukoplakia, generalized lymphadenopa-
thy, and chronic diarrhea is likely to have acquired immune deﬁciency syn-
drome (AIDS). Related risk factors should be explored promptly.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  1 |
 
Foundations for Clinical Proficiency  
27
CLINICAL REASONING, ASSESSMENT, AND PLAN
■ Key questions: You can also ask a series of key questions that may steer your 
thinking in one direction and allow you to temporarily ignore the others. For 
example, you may ask what produces and relieves the patient’s chest pain. If 
the answer is exercise and rest, you can focus on the cardiovascular and 
musculoskeletal systems and set the gastrointestinal (GI) system aside. If the 
pain is more epigastric, burning, and occurs only after meals, you can logi-
cally focus on the GI tract. A series of discriminating questions helps you 
analyze the clinical data and reach logical explanations.
Search for the Probable Cause of the Findings. Patient complaints often 
stem from a pathologic process involving diseases of a body system or structure. 
These processes are commonly classiﬁed as congenital, inﬂammatory or infec-
tious, immunologic, neoplastic, metabolic, nutritional, degenerative, vascular, 
traumatic, and toxic. Possible pathologic causes of headache, for example, 
include sinus infection, concussion from trauma, subarachnoid hemorrhage, 
or even compression from a brain tumor. Fever and stiff neck, or nuchal rigidity, 
are two of the classic signs of headache from meningitis. Even without 
other signs, such as rash or papilledema, they strongly suggest an infectious 
process.
Other problems are pathophysiologic, reﬂecting derangements of biologic func-
tions, such as heart failure or migraine headache. Still other problems are psycho-
pathologic, such as disorders of mood like depression or headache as an expression 
of a somatic symptom disorder.
Generate Hypotheses About the Causes of the Patient’s Problem. 
Draw on the full range of your knowledge and experience, and read widely. It 
is at this point that reading about diseases and abnormalities is most useful. By 
consulting the clinical literature, you embark on the lifelong goal of evidence-
based decision making and clinical practice.14,36–39 At ﬁrst, your hypotheses may 
not be highly speciﬁc, but proceed as far as your knowledge and available data 
allow, observing the steps below.
Steps for Generating Clinical Hypotheses
1. Select the most speciﬁc and critical ﬁndings to support your hypothesis. If the 
patient reports “the worst headache of her life,” nausea, and vomiting, for 
example, and you ﬁnd altered mental status, papilledema, and meningismus, 
build your hypothesis around elevated intracranial pressure rather than GI 
disorders.
2. Match your ﬁndings against all the conditions that can produce them. Using 
your knowledge of the structures and processes involved, you can match 
your patient’s papilledema with a list of conditions aﬀecting intracranial 
pressure. Or you can compare the symptoms and signs associated with the 
patient’s headache with the various infectious, vascular, metabolic, or neo-
plastic conditions that might produce this clinical picture.
3. Eliminate the diagnostic possibilities that fail to explain the findings. You 
might consider cluster headache as a cause of Mrs. N.’s headaches (see 
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
28 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
CLINICAL REASONING, ASSESSMENT, AND PLAN
Test Your Hypotheses. Now that you have made a hypothesis about the 
patient’s problem, you are ready to test your hypothesis. You are likely to need 
further history, additional maneuvers on physical examination, or laboratory 
studies or x-rays to conﬁrm or rule out your tentative diagnosis or to clarify 
which of two or three possible diagnoses are most likely. When the diagnosis 
seems clear-cut—a simple upper respiratory infection or a case of hives, for 
example—these steps may not be necessary.
Establish a Working Diagnosis. Establish a working deﬁnition of the prob-
lem at the highest level of explicitness and certainty that the data allow. You may 
be limited to a symptom, such as “tension headache, cause unknown.” At other 
times, you can deﬁne a problem more speciﬁcally based on its anatomy, disease 
process, or cause. Examples include “bacterial meningitis, pneumococcal,” “sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage, left temporoparietal lobe,” or “hypertensive cardiovascu-
lar disease with left ventricular dilatation and heart failure.”
Although most diagnoses are based on the identiﬁcation of abnormal structures, 
disease processes, and clinical syndromes, patients frequently have clinically unex-
plained symptoms. You may not be able to move beyond simple descriptive cate-
gories such as “fatigue” or “anorexia.” Other problems relate to stressful events in 
See Chapter 2, Evaluating Clinical  
Evidence, pp. 45–64.
Steps for Generating Clinical Hypotheses (continued )
The Case of Mrs. N., pp. 30–36), but eliminate this hypothesis because it 
fails to explain the patient’s throbbing bifrontal localization with associ-
ated nausea and vomiting. Also, the pain pattern is atypical for cluster 
headache—it is not unilateral, boring, or occurring repetitively at the 
same time over a period of days, nor is it associated with lacrimation or 
rhinorrhea.
4. Weigh the competing possibilities and select the most likely diagnosis. You are 
looking for a close match between the patient’s clinical presentation and 
a typical case of a given condition. Other clues help in this selection. The 
statistical probability of a given disease in a patient of this age, sex, ethnic 
group, habits, lifestyle, and locality should greatly inﬂuence your selec-
tion. You should consider the possibilities of osteoarthritis and metastatic 
prostate cancer in a 70-year-old man with back pain, for example, but not 
in a 25-year-old woman with the same complaint. The timing of the patient’s 
illness also makes a diﬀerence. Headache in the setting of fever, rash, and 
stiﬀ neck that develops suddenly over 24 hours suggests quite a diﬀerent 
problem than recurrent headache over a period of years associated with 
stress, visual scotoma, and nausea and vomiting relieved by rest.
5. Give special attention to potentially life-threatening conditions. Your goal is to 
minimize the risk of missing unusual or infrequent conditions such as menin-
gococcal meningitis, bacterial endocarditis, pulmonary embolus, or subdural 
hematoma that are particularly ominous. One rule of thumb is always to 
include “the worst case scenario” in your diﬀerential diagnosis and make 
sure you have ruled out this possibility based on your ﬁndings and patient 
assessment.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  1 |
 
Foundations for Clinical Proficiency  
29
THE QUALITY CLINICAL RECORD: THE CASE OF MRS. N.
the patient’s life such as losing a job or a family member that increase the risk for 
subsequent illness. Identifying these events and helping the patient develop coping 
strategies are just as important as managing a headache or a duodenal ulcer.
Another increasingly prominent item on problem lists is Health Maintenance. 
Routinely listing Health Maintenance helps you track several important health 
concerns more effectively: immunizations, screening tests such as mammograms 
or colonoscopies, instructions regarding nutrition and breast or testicular self-
examinations, recommendations about exercise or use of seat belts, and responses 
to important life events.
Using Shared Decision-Making to  
Develop a Plan
Identify and record a Plan for each patient problem. Your Plan ﬂows logically 
from the problems or diagnoses you have identiﬁed. Specify the next steps for 
each problem. These steps range from tests and procedures to subspecialty con-
sultations to new or changed medications to arranging a family meeting. You will 
ﬁnd that you follow many of the same diagnoses over time; however, your Plan 
is often more ﬂuid, encompassing changes and modiﬁcations that emerge from 
each patient visit. The Plan should make reference to diagnosis, treatments, and 
patient education. It is important to discuss your assessment with the patient 
before ﬁnalizing the Plan and proceeding with further testing or evaluation, 
ensuring the patient’s active participation in the plan of care (Fig. 1-10). It is 
critical to both obtain patient agreement and encourage patient participation 
in decision-making whenever possible. These practices promote optimal ther-
apy, adherence to treatment, and patient satisfaction, especially since there is 
often no single “right” plan, but a range of variations and options. You may need 
to explain your recommendations several times to make sure the patient agrees 
to and understands what lies ahead.
F I G U R E  1 - 1 0 .  Make sure the 
patient agrees with the plan.
See Chapter 5, Behavior and Mental 
Status, section on “Medically Unex-
plained Symptoms,” pp. 149–150.
The Quality Clinical Record: 
The Case of Mrs. N.
The clinical record serves a dual purpose—it reﬂects your analysis of the patient’s 
health status, and it documents the unique features of the patient’s history, 
examination, laboratory and test results, assessment, and plan in a formal writ-
ten format (Fig. 1-11). In a well-constructed record, each problem in the 
Assessment is listed in order of priority with an explanation of supporting ﬁnd-
ings and a differential diagnosis, followed by a Plan for addressing that prob-
lem. The patient record facilitates clinical reasoning, promotes communication 
and coordination among the professionals who care for your patient, and doc-
uments the patient’s problems and management for medicolegal purposes.
Compose the clinical record as soon after seeing the patient as possible, before 
your ﬁndings fade from memory. At ﬁrst you may take notes, but work toward 
recording each segment of the health history during the interview, leaving spaces 
F I G U R E  1 - 1 1 .  Compose a well-
constructed record.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
30 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE QUALITY CLINICAL RECORD: THE CASE OF MRS. N.
for ﬁlling in details later. Jot down blood pressure, heart rate, and key abnormal 
ﬁndings to prompt your recall when you complete the record later.
Almost all clinical information is subject to error. Patients forget to mention 
symptoms, confuse the events of their illness, avoid recounting embarrassing 
facts, and may slant their stories to what they believe the clinician wants to hear. 
Clinicians misinterpret patient statements, overlook information, fail to ask “the 
one key question,” jump prematurely to conclusions and diagnoses, or forget an 
important part of the examination, such as the funduscopic examination in a 
woman with headache, leading to diagnostic errors.40–48 You can avoid some of 
these errors by acquiring the habits summarized below.
Tips for Ensuring Quality Patient Data
● Ask open-ended questions and listen carefully to the patient’s story.
● Craft a thorough and systematic sequence to history taking and physical 
examination.
● Keep an open mind toward both the patient and the clinical data.
● Always include “the worst-case scenario” in your list of possible explanations 
of the patient’s problem, and make sure it can be safely eliminated.
● Analyze any mistakes in data collection or interpretation.
● Confer with colleagues and review the pertinent clinical literature to clarify 
uncertainties.
● Apply the principles of evaluating clinical evidence to patient information and 
testing.
Study the case of Mrs. N. and scrutinize the history, physical examination, assess-
ment, and plan. Note the standard format of the clinical record. Apply your own 
clinical reasoning to the ﬁndings presented and begin to analyze the patient’s 
concerns. See if you agree with the Assessment and Plan and the priority of the 
problems listed.
The Case of Mrs. N.
8/25/16 11:00 am
Mrs. N. is a pleasant, 54-year-old widowed saleswoman residing in Espanola, 
New Mexico.
Referral. None
Source and Reliability. Self-referred; seems reliable.
Chief Complaint
“My head aches.”
Present Illness
Mrs. N. reports increasing problems with frontal headaches over the past 3 
months. These are usually bifrontal, throbbing, and mild to moderately severe. 
She has missed work on several occasions because of associated nausea and 
vomiting. Headaches now average once a week, usually related to stress, and 
(continued )
See Table 1-1, p. 41, for a Sample 
Progress Note for the follow-up visit 
of Mrs. N.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  1 |
 
Foundations for Clinical Proficiency  
31
THE QUALITY CLINICAL RECORD: THE CASE OF MRS. N.
The Case of Mrs. N. (continued )
last 4 to 6 hours. They are relieved by sleep and putting a damp towel over her 
forehead. There is little relief from aspirin. There are no associated visual 
changes, motor-sensory deﬁcits, or paresthesias.
She had headaches with nausea and vomiting beginning at age 15 years. 
These recurred throughout her mid-20s, then decreased to one every 2 or  
3 months, and almost disappeared.
The patient reports increased pressure at work from a demanding supervisor; 
she is also worried about her daughter (see Personal and Social History). She thinks 
her headaches may be like those in the past, but wants to be sure because her 
mother had a headache just before she died of a stroke. She is concerned because 
her headaches interfere with her work and make her irritable with her family. She 
eats three meals a day and drinks three cups of coﬀee a day and tea at night.
Medications. Acetominophen, 1 to 2 tablets every 4 to 6 hours as needed. 
“Water pill” in the past for ankle swelling, none recently.
Allergies. Ampicillin causes rash.
Tobacco. About 1 pack of cigarettes per day since age 18 (36 pack-years).
Alcohol/drugs. Wine on rare occasions. No illicit drugs.
Past History
Childhood Illnesses: Measles, chickenpox. No scarlet fever or rheumatic fever.
Adult Illnesses: Medical: Pyelonephritis, 1998, with fever and right flank 
pain; treated with ampicillin; developed generalized rash with itching sev-
eral days later. Reports x-rays were normal; no recurrence of infection.  
Surgical: Tonsillectomy, age 6; appendectomy, age 13. Sutures for lacera-
tion, 2001, after stepping on glass. Ob/Gyn: 3–3–0–3, with normal vaginal 
deliveries. Three living children. Menarche age 12. Last menses 6 months 
ago. Little interest in sex, and not sexually active. No concerns about HIV 
infection. Psychiatric: None.
Health Maintenance: Immunizations: Oral polio vaccine, year uncertain; teta-
nus shots × 2, 1982, followed with booster 1 year later; ﬂu vaccine, 2000, no reac-
tion. Screening tests: Last Pap smear, 2014, normal. No mammograms to date.
Train accident
Stroke, varicose veins, headaches
43 
 
  67
High 
blood 
pressure
Heart 
attack
Infancy
67 
 
 58 
 
 
     54
33 
 
    31 
 
        27
Headaches
Migraine
headaches
Indicates patient
Deceased male
Deceased female
Living male 
Living female 
(continued )
Gravida (G)-Parity (# of deliveries)  
(P)-Miscarriages (M)-Living (L), or  
G-P-M-L 3–3–0–3
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
32 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE QUALITY CLINICAL RECORD: THE CASE OF MRS. N.
The Case of Mrs. N. (continued )
Family History
The family history is depicted above.
Father died at age 43 years in a train accident. Mother died at age 67 years from 
stroke; had varicose veins, headaches.
One brother, age 61 years, with hypertension, otherwise well; one brother, age 58 
years, well except for mild arthritis; one sister, died in infancy of unknown cause.
Husband died at age 54 of heart attack
Daughter, age 33 years, with migraine headaches, otherwise well; son, age  
31 years, with headaches; son, age 27 years, well.
No family history of diabetes, tuberculosis, heart or kidney disease, cancer,  
anemia, epilepsy, or mental illness.
Personal and Social History
Born and raised in Las Cruces, ﬁnished high school, married at age 19 years. 
Worked as sales clerk for 2 years, then moved with husband to Espanola, had three 
children. Returned to work 15 years ago to improve family ﬁnances. Children all 
married. Four years ago Mr. N. died suddenly of a heart attack, leaving little sav-
ings. Mrs. N. has moved to a small apartment to be near daughter, Isabel. Isabel’s 
husband, John, has an alcohol problem. Mrs. N.’s apartment is now a haven for Isa-
bel and her two children, Kevin, age 6 years, and Lucia, age 3 years. Mrs. N. feels 
responsible for helping them; she feels tense and nervous, but denies depression. 
She has friends, but rarely discusses family problems: “I’d rather keep them to 
myself. I don’t like gossip.” No church or other organizational support. She is  
typically up at 7:00 am, works 9:00 am to 5:30 pm, and eats dinner alone.
Exercise and diet. Gets little exercise. Diet high in carbohydrates.
Safety measures. Uses seat belt regularly. Uses sunblock. Medications kept in 
an unlocked medicine cabinet. Cleaning solutions in unlocked cabinet 
below sink. Mr. N.’s shotgun and box of shells in unlocked closet upstairs.
Review of Systems
General: Has gained 10 lbs in the past 4 years.
Skin: No rashes or other changes.
Head, Eyes, Ears, Nose, Throat (HEENT): See Present Illness. Head: No history of 
head injury. Eyes: Reading glasses for 5 years, last checked 1 year ago. No symptoms. 
Ears: Hearing good. No tinnitus, vertigo, infections. Nose, sinuses: Occasional mild 
cold. No hay fever, sinus trouble. Throat (or mouth and pharynx):  Some bleeding of 
gums recently. Last dental visit 2 years ago. Occasional canker sore.
Neck: No lumps, goiter, pain. No swollen glands.
Breasts: No lumps, pain, discharge. Does breast self-examination sporadically.
Respiratory: No cough, wheezing, shortness of breath. Last chest x-ray, 1986, 
St. Mary’s Hospital; unremarkable.
Cardiovascular: No known heart disease or high blood pressure; last blood 
pressure taken in 2007. No dyspnea, orthopnea, chest pain, palpitations. Has 
never had an electrocardiogram (ECG).
Gastrointestinal: Appetite good; no nausea, vomiting, indigestion. Bowel move-
ment about once daily, though sometimes has hard stools for 2 to 3 days when espe-
cially tense; no diarrhea or bleeding. No pain, jaundice, gallbladder or liver problems.
(continued )
The Family History can be recorded as 
a diagram or a narrative. The diagram 
is more helpful for tracing genetic dis-
orders. The negatives from the family 
history should follow either format.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  1 |
 
Foundations for Clinical Proficiency  
33
THE QUALITY CLINICAL RECORD: THE CASE OF MRS. N.
The Case of Mrs. N. (continued )
Urinary: No frequency, dysuria, hematuria, or recent ﬂank pain; nocturia × 1, 
large volume. *Occasionally loses urine when coughing.
Genital: No vaginal or pelvic infections. No dyspareunia.
Peripheral vascular: Varicose veins appeared in both legs during ﬁrst preg-
nancy. For 10 years, has had swollen ankles after prolonged standing; wears light 
elastic support hose; tried “water pill” 5 months ago, but it didn’t help much; no 
history of phlebitis or leg pain.
Musculoskeletal: Mild low backaches, often at the end of the workday; no radia-
tion into the legs; used to do back exercises, but not now. No other joint pain.
Psychiatric: No history of depression or treatment for psychiatric disorders. 
(See also Present Illness and Personal and Social History.)
Neurologic: No fainting, seizures, motor or sensory loss. Memory good.
Hematologic: Except for bleeding gums, no easy bleeding. No anemia.
Endocrine: No known thyroid disorders or heat or cold intolerance. No symp-
toms or history of diabetes.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Mrs. N. is a short, overweight, middle-aged woman, who is animated and 
responds quickly to questions. She is somewhat tense, with moist, cold hands. 
Her hair is well groomed. Her color is good, and she lies ﬂat without discomfort.
Vital signs: Ht (without shoes) 157 cm (5′2″). Wt (dressed) 65 kg (143 lb). BMI 
26. BP 164/98 right arm, supine; 160/96 left arm, supine; 152/88 right arm, supine 
with wide cuﬀ. Heart rate (HR) 88 and regular. Respiratory rate (RR) 18. Temper-
ature (oral) 98.6 °F.
Skin: Palms cold and moist, but color good. Scattered cherry angiomas over 
upper trunk. Nails without clubbing, cyanosis.
Head, Eyes, Ears, Nose, Throat (HEENT): Head: Hair of average texture. Scalp 
without lesions, normocephalic/atraumatic (NC/AT). Eyes: Vision 20/30 in each 
eye. Visual ﬁelds full by confrontation. Conjunctiva pink; sclera white. Pupils 4 
mm constricting to 2 mm, round, regular, equally reactive to light. Extraocular 
movements intact. Disc margins sharp, without hemorrhages, exudates. No 
arteriolar narrowing or A-V nicking. Ears: Wax partially obscures right tympanic 
membrane (TM); left canal clear, TM with good cone of light. Acuity good to 
whispered voice. Weber midline. AC > BC. Nose: Mucosa pink, septum midline. 
No sinus tenderness. Mouth: Oral mucosa pink. Several interdental papillae red, 
slightly swollen. Dentition good. Tongue midline, with 3 × 4 mm shallow white 
ulcer on red base on undersurface near tip; tender but not indurated.  Tonsils 
absent. Pharynx without exudates.
Neck: Neck supple. Trachea midline. Thyroid isthmus barely palpable, lobes 
not felt.
Lymph nodes: Small (<1 cm), soft, nontender, and mobile tonsillar and poste-
rior cervical nodes bilaterally. No axillary or epitrochlear nodes. Several small 
inguinal nodes bilaterally, soft and nontender.
Thorax and lungs: Thorax symmetric with good excursion. Lungs resonant. 
Breath sounds vesicular with no added sounds. Diaphragms descend 4 cm 
bilaterally.
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
34 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE QUALITY CLINICAL RECORD: THE CASE OF MRS. N.
The Case of Mrs. N. (continued )
Cardiovascular: Jugular venous pressure 1 cm above the sternal angle, with 
head of examining table raised to 30º. Carotid upstrokes brisk, without bruits. 
Apical impulse discrete and tapping, barely palpable in the 5th left interspace, 8 
cm lateral to the midsternal line. Good S1, S2; no S3 or S4. A II/VI medium-pitched 
midsystolic murmur at the 2nd right interspace; does not radiate to the neck. No 
diastolic murmurs.
Breasts: Pendulous, symmetric. No masses; nipples without discharge.
Abdomen: Protuberant. Well-healed scar, right lower quadrant. Bowel sounds 
active. No tenderness or masses. Liver span 7 cm in right midclavicular line; 
edge smooth, palpable 1 cm below right costal margin (RCM). Spleen and  
kidneys not felt. No costovertebral angle tenderness (CVAT).
Genitalia: External genitalia without lesions. Mild cystocele at introitus on 
straining. Vaginal mucosa pink. Cervix pink, parous, and without discharge. 
Uterus anterior, midline, smooth, not enlarged. Adnexa not palpated due to 
obesity and poor relaxation. No cervical or adnexal tenderness. Pap smear 
taken. Rectovaginal wall intact.
Rectal: Rectal vault without masses. Stool brown, negative for fecal blood.
Extremities: Warm and without edema. Calves supple, nontender.
Peripheral vascular: Trace edema at both ankles. Moderate varicosities of 
saphenous veins both in lower extremities. No stasis pigmentation or ulcers. 
Pulses (2+ = brisk, or normal):
Radial
Femoral
Popliteal
Dorsalis 
Pedis
Posterior 
Tibial
RT
2+
2+
2+
2+
2+
LT
2+
2+
2+
Absent
2+
Musculoskeletal: No joint deformities. Good range of motion in hands, wrists, 
elbows, shoulders, spine, hips, knees, ankles.
Neurologic: Mental Status: Tense, but alert and cooperative. Thought coher-
ent. Oriented to person, place, and time. Cranial nerves: II to XII intact.
Motor: Good muscle bulk and tone. Strength 5/5 throughout. Cerebellar: 
RAMs, point-to-point movements intact. Gait stable, ﬂuid. Sensory: Pinprick, 
light touch, position sense, vibration, and stereognosis intact. Romberg  
negative.
Reﬂexes:
Biceps Triceps
Brachio-
radialis
Patellar Achilles Plantar
RT
2+
2+
2+
2+
1+
↓
LT
2+
2+
2+
2+/2+
1+
↓
See Muscle Strength Grading, p. 743.
Two methods for recording reflexes 
may be used: a tabular form or a 
stick picture diagram; 2+ = brisk, or 
normal. See p. 758 for system for 
grading reflexes.
(continued )
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
_ _
OR
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  1 |
 
Foundations for Clinical Proficiency  
35
THE QUALITY CLINICAL RECORD: THE CASE OF MRS. N.
The Case of Mrs. N. (continued )
ASSESSMENT AND PLAN
1. Migraine headaches: A 54-year-old woman with migraine headaches since 
childhood, with a throbbing vascular pattern and frequent nausea and vomit-
ing. Headaches are associated with stress and relieved by sleep and cold 
compresses. There is no papilledema, and there are no motor or sensory 
deﬁcits on the neurologic examination. The diﬀerential diagnosis includes 
tension headache, also associated with stress, but there is no relief with 
massage, and the pain is more throbbing than aching. There are no fever, stiﬀ 
neck, or focal ﬁndings to suggest meningitis, and the lifelong recurrent pat-
tern makes subarachnoid hemorrhage unlikely (usually described as  
“the worst headache of my life”).
 
Plan:
● Discuss features of migraine versus tension headaches.
● Discuss biofeedback and stress management.
● Advise patient to avoid caﬀeine, including coﬀee, colas, and other carbon-
ated beverages.
● Start nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for headache, as 
needed.
● If needed next visit, begin prophylactic medication if headaches are occur-
ring more than 2 days a week or 8 days a month.
2. Elevated blood pressure: Systolic hypertension is present. May be related 
to anxiety from ﬁrst visit. No evidence of end-organ damage to retina or 
heart.
 
Plan:
● Discuss standards for assessing blood pressure.
● Recheck blood pressure in 1 month.
● Check basic metabolic panel; review urinalysis.
● Discuss weight reduction and exercise programs (see #4).
● Reduce salt intake.
3. Cystocele with occasional stress incontinence: Cystocele on pelvic exami-
nation, probably related to bladder relaxation. Patient is perimenopausal. 
Incontinence reported with coughing, suggesting alteration in bladder neck 
anatomy. No dysuria, fever, ﬂank pain. Not taking any contributing medica-
tions. Usually involves small amounts of urine, no dribbling, so doubt urge or 
overﬂow incontinence.
 
Plan:
● Explain cause of stress incontinence.
● Review urinalysis.
● Recommend Kegel exercises.
● Consider topical estrogen cream to vagina during next visit if no 
improvement.
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
36 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE QUALITY CLINICAL RECORD: THE CASE OF MRS. N.
The Case of Mrs. N. (continued )
 4. Overweight: Patient 5′2″, weighs 143 lbs. BMI is ∼26.
 
Plan:
● Explore diet history, ask patient to keep food intake diary.
● Explore motivation to lose weight, set target for weight loss by next 
visit.
● Schedule visit with dietitian.
● Discuss exercise program, speciﬁcally, walking 30 minutes most days a 
week.
 5. Family stress: Son-in-law with alcohol problem; daughter and grandchildren 
seeking refuge in patient’s apartment, leading to tensions in these relation-
ships. Patient also has ﬁnancial constraints. Stress currently situational. No 
current evidence of major depression.
 
Plan:
● Explore patient’s views on strategies to cope with stress.
● Explore sources of support, including Al-Anon for daughter and ﬁnan-
cial counseling for patient.
● Continue to monitor for depression.
 6. Occasional musculoskeletal low back pain: Usually with prolonged stand-
ing. No history of trauma or motor vehicle accident. Pain does not radiate; 
no tenderness or motor-sensory deﬁcits on examination. Doubt disc or nerve 
root compression, trochanteric bursitis, sacroiliitis.
 
Plan:
● Review beneﬁts of weight loss and exercises to strengthen low back  
muscles.
 7. Tobacco abuse: 1 pack per day for 36 years.
 
Plan:
● Check peak ﬂow or FEV1/FVC on oﬃce spirometry.
● Give strong warning to stop smoking.
● Oﬀer referral to tobacco cessation program.
● Oﬀer patch, current treatment to enhance abstinence.
 8. Varicose veins, lower extremities: No complaints currently.
 9. History of right pyelonephritis: 1998.
10. Ampicillin allergy: Developed rash, but no other allergic reaction.
11. Health maintenance: Last Pap smear 2014; has never had a mammogram.
 
Plan:
● Schedule mammogram.
● Pap smear sent today.
● Provide three cards to test for fecal blood; next visit, discuss screening 
colonoscopy.
● Suggest dental care for mild gingivitis.
● Advise patient to move medications and caustic cleaning agents to locked 
cabinet above shoulder height. Urge patient to move gun and cartridges 
to a locked gun cabinet.
See Chapter 3, Interviewing and the 
Health History, section on Motivational 
Interviewing, p. 81, and Table 3-1, 
Motivational Interviewing: A Clinical 
Example, p. 104.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  1 |
 
Foundations for Clinical Proficiency  
37
THE QUALITY CLINICAL RECORD: THE CASE OF MRS. N.
The Importance of the Problem List
After you complete the clinical record, it is good clinical practice to generate a 
Problem List that summarizes the patient’s problems that can be placed in the 
front of the ofﬁce or hospital chart. List the most active and serious problems ﬁrst, 
and record their date of onset. Some clinicians make separate lists for active or inac-
tive problems; others make one list in order of priority. A good Problem List helps 
you to individualize the patient’s care. On follow-up visits, the Problem List pro-
vides a quick summary of the patient’s clinical history and a reminder to review 
the status of problems the patient may not mention. An accurate Problem List 
allows better population management of patients, by using EHRs to track patients 
with speciﬁc problems, recall patients who are behind on appointments, and 
follow up on speciﬁc issues. The Problem List also allows other members of the 
health care team to learn about the patient’s health status at a glance.
A sample Problem List for Mrs. N. is provided below. You may wish to number each 
problem and use the number to refer to speciﬁc problems in subsequent notes.
Clinicians organize problem lists differently, even for the same patient. Problems 
can be symptoms, signs, past health events such as a hospital admission or surgery, 
or diagnoses. You might choose different entries from those above. Good lists vary 
in emphasis, length, and detail, depending on the clinician’s philosophy, specialty, 
and role as a provider. Some clinicians would ﬁnd this list too long. Others would 
be more explicit about “family stress” or “varicose veins.”
Problem List: The Case of Mrs. N.
Date
Problem No.
Problem
8/25/16
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Migraine headaches
Elevated blood pressure
Cystocele with occasional stress  
incontinence
Overweight
Family stress
Low back pain
Tobacco abuse since age 18 years
Varicose veins
History of right pyelonephritis: 1998
Allergy to ampicillin
Health maintenance
The list illustrated here includes problems that need attention now, like Mrs. N.’s 
headaches, as well as problems that need future observation and attention, such 
as her blood pressure and cystocele. Listing the allergy to ampicillin reminds you 
not to prescribe medications in the penicillin family. Some symptoms such as 
canker sores and hard stools do not appear on this list because they are minor 
concerns and do not require attention during this visit. Problem lists with too 
many relatively insigniﬁcant items are distracting. If these symptoms increase in 
importance, they can be added at a later visit.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
38 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
Checklist to Ensure a Quality Clinical Record
Is the Order Clear?
Order is imperative. Make sure that readers can easily ﬁnd speciﬁc points of 
information. Keep the subjective items of the history, for example, in the  
history; do not let them stray into the physical examination. Did you:
● Make the headings clear?
● Accent your organization with indentations and spacing?
● Arrange the Present Illness in chronologic order, starting with the current  
episode, then ﬁlling in relevant background information?
Do the Data Included Contribute Directly to the Assessment?
Spell out the supporting evidence, both positive and negative, for each problem 
or diagnosis. Make sure there is suﬃcient detail to support your diﬀerential 
diagnosis and plan.
Are Pertinent Negatives Speciﬁcally Described?
Often, portions of the history or examination suggest that an abnormality might 
exist or develop in that area. For example, for the patient with notable bruises, 
record the “pertinent negatives,” such as the absence of injury or violence, 
familial bleeding disorders, or medications or nutritional deﬁcits that might lead 
to bruising. For the patient who is depressed but not suicidal, recording both 
facts is important. In the patient with a transient mood swing, on the other 
hand, a comment on suicide is unnecessary.
Are There Overgeneralizations or Omissions of Important Data?
Remember that data not recorded are data lost. No matter how vividly you can 
recall clinical details today, you will probably not remember them in a few 
months. The phrase “neurologic exam negative,” even in your own handwrit-
ing, may leave you wondering in a few months’ time, “Did I really check the 
reﬂexes?”
A clear, well-organized clinical record is one of the most important adjuncts to 
patient care. Your goal is a clear, concise, but comprehensive report that docu-
ments key ﬁndings and communicates your assessment in a succinct and legible 
format to clinicians, consultants, and other members of the health care team.
Regardless of your experience, adopting certain principles will help you organize 
a good record. Think especially about the order and readability of the record and 
the amount of detail needed. How much detail to include often varies at different 
points in training. As a student, you may wish (or be required) to be quite 
detailed. This builds your descriptive skills, vocabulary, and speed. Later, the 
pressures of workload and time management will lead to less but more focused 
detail. A good record always provides sufﬁcient evidence from the history, phys-
ical examination, and laboratory ﬁndings to support all the problems or diagno-
ses identiﬁed.
(continued )
Recording Your Findings
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  1 |
 
Foundations for Clinical Proficiency  
39
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
Checklist to Ensure a Quality  
Clinical Record (continued )
Is There Too Much Detail?
Is there excess information or redundancy? Is important information buried in a 
mass of detail, to be discovered by only the most persistent reader? Make your 
descriptions concise. “Cervix pink and smooth” indicates you saw no redness, 
ulcers, nodules, masses, cysts, or other suspicious lesions, but this description is 
shorter and more easily read. You can omit unimportant structures even though 
you examined them, such as normal eyebrows and eyelashes.
Omit most of your negative ﬁndings unless they relate directly to the patient’s 
complaints or speciﬁc exclusions in your diﬀerential diagnosis. Instead, concen-
trate on major negative ﬁndings such as “no heart murmurs.”
Is the Written Style Succinct? Are Phrases, Short Words, and Abbreviations 
Used Appropriately? Is Data Unnecessarily Repeated?
Omit repetitive introductory phrases such as “The patient reports no . . . ” 
because readers assume the patient is the source of the history unless other-
wise speciﬁed.
● Using words or brief phrases instead of whole sentences is common, but 
abbreviations and symbols should be used only if they are readily understood. 
Use shorter words when possible such as “felt” for “palpated” or “heard” for 
“auscultated.” Omit unnecessary words, such as those in parentheses in the 
examples below. This saves valuable time and space. For example, “Cervix is 
pink (in color).” “Lungs are resonant (to percussion).” “Liver is tender (to pal-
pation).” “Both (right and left) ears with cerumen.” “II/IV systolic ejection 
murmur (audible).” “Thorax symmetric (bilaterally).”
● Describe what you observed, not what you did. “Optic discs seen” is less 
informative than “disc margins sharp.”
Are Diagrams and Precise Measurements Included Where Appropriate?
Diagrams add greatly to the clarity of the record.
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
40 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
Checklist to Ensure a Quality  
Clinical Record (continued )
To ensure accurate evaluations and future comparisons, make measurements 
in centimeters, not in fruits, nuts, or vegetables.
● “1 × 1 cm lymph node” versus a “pea-sized lymph node . . .”
● Or “2 × 2 cm mass on the left lobe of the prostate” versus a “walnut-sized 
prostate mass.”
Is the Tone of the Write-up Neutral and Professional?
It is important to be objective. Hostile or disapproving comments have no 
place in the patient’s record. Never use inﬂammatory or demeaning words or 
punctuation.
Comments such as “Patient DRUNK and LATE TO CLINIC AGAIN!!” are 
unprofessional and set a bad example for other clinicians reading the chart. 
They also might prove diﬃcult to defend in a legal setting.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  1 |
 
Foundations for Clinical Proficiency  
41
A month later, Mrs. N. returns for a follow-up visit. The format of the ofﬁce or hospital progress note is quite variable, but it should 
meet the same standards as the initial assessment. The note should be clear, sufﬁciently detailed, and easy to follow. It should reﬂect 
your clinical reasoning and delineate your assessment and plan. Be sure to learn the documentation standards for billing in your 
institution, because this can affect the detail and type of information needed in your progress notes.
The note below follows the SOAP format: Subjective, Objective, Assessment, and Plan. You will see many other styles, some focused 
on the “patient-centered” record.49 The four categories of the SOAP note are often implied and not spelled out, as in the note below.
9/25/16
Mrs. N. returns for follow-up of her migraine headaches. She 
has had fewer headaches since reducing her intake of caffeine. 
She is now drinking decaffeinated coffee and has stopped drink-
ing tea. She has joined a support group and started exercising to 
reduce stress. She is still having one to two headaches a month 
with some nausea, but they are less severe and generally relieved 
with NSAIDs. She denies any fever, stiff neck, associated visual 
changes, motor-sensory deﬁcits, or paresthesias.
She has been checking her blood pressure at home. It is run-
ning about 150/90. She is walking 30 minutes three times a 
week in her neighborhood and has reduced her daily caloric 
intake. She has been unable to stop smoking. She has been 
doing the Kegel exercises, but still has some leakage with cough-
ing or laughing.
Medications: Motrin 400 mg up to three times daily as needed for 
headache.
Allergies: Ampicillin causes rash.
Tobacco: 1 pack per day since age 18 years.
Physical Examination: Pleasant, overweight, middle-aged 
woman, who is animated and somewhat tense. Ht 157 cm (5′ 
2″). Wt 63 kg (140 lbs). BMI 26. BP 150/90. HR 86 and regular. 
RR 16. Afebrile.
Skin: No suspicious nevi. HEENT: Normocephalic, atrau-
matic. Pharynx without exudates. Neck: Supple, without thyro-
megaly. Lymph nodes: No lymphadenopathy. Lungs: Resonant 
and clear. CV: JVP 6 cm above the right atrium; carotid up-
strokes brisk, no bruits. Good S1, S2. No murmurs heard today. 
No S3, S4. Abdomen: Active bowel sounds. Soft, nontender, no 
hepatosplenomegaly. Extremities: Without edema.
Labs: Basic metabolic panel and urinalysis from 8/25/16 un-
remarkable. Pap smear normal.
Impression and Plan
1. Migraine headaches—now down to one to two per month 
due to reductions in caffeinated beverages and stress. 
Headaches are responding to NSAIDs.
■  Will defer daily prophylactic medication for now because 
patient is having fewer than three headaches per month 
and feels better.
■  Afﬁrm need to stop smoking and to continue exercise 
program.
■  Afﬁrm patient’s participation in support group to reduce 
stress.
2. Elevated blood pressure—BP remains elevated at 150/90.
■ Will initiate therapy with a diuretic.
■  Patient to take blood pressure three times a week at home 
and bring recordings to next ofﬁce visit.
3. Cystocele with occasional stress incontinence—stress incon-
tinence improved with Kegel exercises but still with some 
urine leakage. Urinalysis from last visit—no infection.
■ Initiate vaginal estrogen cream.
■ Continue Kegel exercises.
4. Overweight—has lost ∼4 lbs.
■ Continue exercise.
■ Review diet history; afﬁrm weight reduction.
5. Family stress—patient handling this better. See Plans above.
6. Occasional low back pain—no complaints today.
7. Tobacco abuse—see Plans above. Will start medication.
8. Health maintenance—Pap smear sent last visit. Mammogram 
scheduled. Colonoscopy recommended.
Table 1-1 Sample Progress Note
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
42 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
References
 1. Verghese A, Horwitz RI. In praise of the physical examination. BMJ. 
2009;339:b5448.
 2. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Guide to Clinical Preventive 
Services 2014. Recommendations of the U.S. Preventive Services 
Task Force. June 2014. Available at http://www.ahrq.gov/profes-
sionals/clinicians-providers/guidelines-recommendations/guide/. 
See also U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: Recommendations for 
Primary Care Practice. December 2013. Available at http://www.
uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name/recommendations 
Accessed February 27, 2015.
 3. Sussman J, Beyth RJ. Society of General Internal Medicine, Choos-
ing Wisely: Five Things Physicians and Patients Should Question, 
Don’t Perform Routine General Health Checks for Asymptomatic 
Adults. ABIM Foundations Choosing Wisely Campaign Published 
online http://www.choosingwisely.org/doctor-patient-lists/society-
of-general-internal-medicine/, 2013. Available at https://www.
google.com/#q=Society+of+general+internal+medicine+-+ 
choosing+wisely+Sussman+Beyth. Accessed March 18, 2015.
 4. Krogsboll LT, Jorgensen KJ, Gronhoj Larsen C, et al. General health 
checks in adults for reducing morbidity and mortality from 
disease: Cochrane systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 
2012;345:e7191.
 5. Chacko KM, Anderson RJ. The annual physical examination: 
important or time to abandon? Am J Med. 2007;120:581.
 6. Boulware LE, Marinopoulos S, Phillips KA, et al. Systematic review: 
the value of the periodic health evaluation. Ann Intern Med. 2007; 
146:289.
 7. Culica D, Rohrer J, Ward M, et al. Medical check-ups: who does 
not get them. Am J Public Health. 2002;92:88.
 8. Laine C. The annual physical examination: needless ritual or nec-
essary routine? Ann Intern Med. 2002;136:701.
 9. Oboler SK, Prochazka AV, Gonzales R, et al. Public expectations 
and attitudes for annual physical examinations and testing. Ann 
Intern Med. 2002;136:652.
 10. Hesrud DD. Clinical preventive medicine in primary care: back-
ground and practice. Rational and current preventive practice. 
Mayo Clin Proc. 2000;75:165.
 11. Mookherjee S, Pheatt MA, Ranji SR, et al. Physical examination 
education in graduate medical education—a systematic review of 
the literature. J Gen Int Med. 2013;28:1090.
 12. Reilly BM. Physical examination in the care of medical inpatients: 
an observational study. Lancet. 2003;362:1100.
 13. Simel DL, Rennie D. The clinical examination. An agenda to make 
it more rational. JAMA. 1997;277:572.
 14. Sackett DL. A primer on the precision and accuracy of the clinical 
examination. JAMA. 1992;267:2638.
 15. Evidence-Based Working Group. Evidence-based medicine. A new 
approach to teaching the practice of medicine. JAMA. 1992;268:2420.
 16. Herrie SR, Corbett EC, Fagan MJ, et al. Bayes’ theorem and the 
physical examination: probability assessment and diagnostic 
decision-making. Acad Med. 2011;85:618.
 17. McGee S. Evidence-based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, 
PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012.
 18. Smith MA, Burton WM, Mackay M. Development, impact, and 
measurement of enhanced physical diagnosis skills. Adv Health Sci 
Educ Theory Pract. 2009;14:547.
 19. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Standard 
precautions. Guidelines for isolation precautions: preventing 
transmission of infectious agents in healthcare settings 2007. 
Updated October 2007. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/hicpac/
2007IP/007isolationPrecautions.html. Accessed March 1, 2015.
 20. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Guide to infection 
prevention in outpatient settings. Minimum expectations for safe 
care. May 2011. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/HAI/settings/
outpatient/outpatient-care-guidelines.html. Accessed March 1, 
2015.
 21. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Hand Hygiene in 
Healthcare Settings. Updated January 2015. At http://www.cdc.
gov/handhygiene/. Accessed March 1, 2015.
 22. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Precautions to prevent 
the spread of MRSA in healthcare settings. Updated September 
2014. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/mrsa/healthcare/clinicians/
precautions.html. Accessed March 1, 2015.
 23. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Bloodborne infectious 
diseases: HIV/AIDS, Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C. Universal precau-
tions for the prevention for transmission of bloodborne infections, 
p. 66. Updated December 2011. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/
niosh/topics/bbp/universal.html. Accessed March 1, 2105.
 24. Bearman G, Bryant K, Leekha S, et al. Healthcare personnel attire 
in non-operating-room settings. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 
2014;35:107.
 25. Treakle AM, Thom KA, Furuno JP, et al. Bacterial contamination 
of health care workers’ white coats. Am J Infect Control. 2009; 
37:101.
 26. Peterson MC, Holbrook JH, Von Hales DE, et al. Contributions of 
the history, physical examination, and laboratory investigation in 
making medical diagnoses. West J Med. 1992;156:163.
 27. Hampton JR, Harrison MJ, Mitchell JR, et al. Relative contributions 
of history-taking, physical examination, and laboratory investiga-
tion to diagnosis and management of medical outpatients. Br Med 
J. 1975;2(5969):486.
 28. Kassirer JP. Teaching clinical reasoning: case-based and coached. 
Acad Med. 2010;85:1118.
 29. Kassirer J, Wong J, Kopelman R. Learning Clinical Reasoning.  
2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams 
& Wilkins; 2010.
 30. Norman GR, Eva KW. Diagnostic error and clinical reasoning. Med 
Educ. 2010;44:94.
 31. Bowen J. Educational strategies to promote clinical diagnostic rea-
soning. New Engl J Med. 2006;355:2217.
 32. Coderre S, Mandin H, Harasym P, et al. Diagnostic reasoning strat-
egies and diagnostic success. Med Educ. 2003;37:695.
 33. Elstein A, Schwarz A. Clinical problem solving and diagnosis deci-
sion making: selective review of the cognitive literature. Br Med J. 
2002;324(7339):729.
 34. Norman G. Research in clinical reasoning: past history and current 
trends. Med Educ. 2005;39:418.
 35. Schneiderman H, Peixoto AJ. Bedside Diagnosis. An Annotated Bibli-
ography of Literature on Physical Examination and Interviewing, 3rd ed. 
Philadelphia, PA: American College of Physicians; 1997.
 36. Simel DL, Rennie D. The Rational Clinical Examination: Evidence-
Based Clinical Diagnosis. New York: McGraw Hill; 2009.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  1 |
 
Foundations for Clinical Proficiency  
43
REFERENCES
 37. Guyatt G, Rennie D, Meade M. Users’ Guide to the Medical Litera-
ture: A Manual for Evidence-Based Clinical Practice. New York: 
McGraw-Hill Medical; 2008.
 38. Fletcher RH, Fletcher SW, Fletcher G. Clinical Epidemiology: The Essen-
tials. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014.
 39. Sackett DL. Evidence-based Medicine: How to Practice and Teach 
EBM. 2nd ed. New York: Churchill Livingstone; 2000.
 40. Montiero SM, Norman G. Diagnostic reasoning: where we’ve been, 
where we’re going. Teach Learn Med. 2013;25(Suppl 1):S26.
 41. Ely JW, Graber ML, Croskerry P. Checklists to reduce diagnostic 
errors. Acad Med. 2011;86:307.
 42. Reilly JB, Odgie AR, Von Feldt JM, et al. Teaching about how doc-
tors think: a longitudinal curriculum in cognitive bias and diag-
nostic error for residents. BMJ Qual Saf. 2013;22:1044.
 43. Dubeau CE, Voytovich AE, Rippey RM. Premature conclusions in 
the diagnosis of iron-deﬁciency anemia: cause and effect. Med 
Decis Making. 1986;6:169.
 44. Kuhn GJ. Diagnostic errors. Acad Emerg Med. 2002;9:740.
 45. Graber ML, Franklin N, Gordon R. Diagnostic error in internal 
medicine. Arch Intern Med. 2005;165:1493.
 46. Redelmeier DA. Improving patient care: the cognitive psychology 
of missed diagnoses. Ann Intern Med. 2005;142:115.
 47. Berner ES, Graber ML. Overconﬁdence as a cause of diagnostic 
error in medicine. Am J Med. 2008;121:S2.
 48. Newman-Toker DE, Pronovost PJ. Diagnostic errors—the next 
frontier for patient safety. JAMA. 2009;301:1060.
 49. Donnelly WJ. Viewpoint: patient-centered medical care requires a 
patient-centered medical record. Acad Med. 2005;80:33.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  2 |
 
Evaluating Clinical Evidence 
45
Excellence in clinical care requires integrating clinical expertise, patient prefer-
ences, and the best available clinical evidence.1
Carefully study the clear descriptions of how the history and physical examina-
tion can be viewed as diagnostic tests; how to assess the accuracy of laboratory 
tests, radiographic imaging, and diagnostic procedures; and how to evaluate 
clinical research studies and disease prevention guidelines. Mastering these ana-
lytic skills will improve your clinical practice and ensure that your assessments 
and recommendations are based on the best clinical evidence (Fig. 2-1).
C H A P T E R2
Evaluating Clinical Evidence
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate  
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (All Volumes)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com
Clinical
expertise
Patient
preferences
Research
evidence
F I G U R E  2 - 1 . Evidence-based clinical practice Venn diagram. (Adapted with permission from 
Haynes RB, Sackett DL, Gray JM, et al. Transferring evidence from research into practice: 1. The role of clinical care research 
evidence in clinical decisions. ACP J Club. 1996;125:A14–A16.)
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
THE HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AS DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
46 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
You will develop your clinical expertise as you learn about and practice your 
clinical discipline, enabling you to more efﬁciently make diagnoses and identify 
potential interventions. Chapter 3 addresses strategies for engaging patients in 
health care decisions, recognizing that patients bring individualized preferences, 
concerns, and expectations to the clinical encounter. Elements of the history and 
physical examination can be considered diagnostic tests, whose accuracy can be 
evaluated according to criteria presented later in this chapter. Throughout the 
regional examination chapters, you will ﬁnd evidence-based recommendations 
for health promotion interventions, especially screening and prevention. These 
recommendations are also based on evidence from the clinical literature that can 
be evaluated according to criteria presented in this chapter.
Test
Threshold
0%
Probability of Diagnosis
Probability below
test threshold;
no testing warranted
Treatment
Threshold
100%
Probability between
test and treatment threshold;
further testing required
Probability above treatment 
threshold; testing completed;
treatment commences
F I G U R E  2 - 2 . Probability revisions. (Adapted with permission from Guyatt G, Rennie D, Meade M, et al. 
Users’ Guides to the Medical Literature. 2nd ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Company; 2008; Chapter 14, Figure 14-2.)
The History and Physical 
Examination as Diagnostic 
Tests
The process of diagnostic reasoning begins with the history. As you learn about 
your patient, you will start to develop a differential diagnosis. This is a list of 
potential causes for the patient’s problems and the length of the list will reﬂect 
your uncertainty about the possible explanation for a given problem. Your list 
will start with the most likely explanation, but will also include other plausible 
diagnoses, particularly those that have serious consequences if undiagnosed and 
untreated. You will assign probabilities to the various diagnoses that correspond 
to how likely you consider them to be explanations for your patient’s problem. 
For now, these probabilities will be based on what you have learned from text-
books and lectures. In time, these probability estimates will also reﬂect your 
clinical experience.
When you begin approaching clinical problems your goal is to determine 
whether you need to perform additional testing (Fig. 2-2).2
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EVALUATING DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
 
C H A P T E R  2 |
 
Evaluating Clinical Evidence 
47
If your probability for a disease based on your history and examination is very 
high (i.e., exceeds the treatment threshold), then you can move ahead and 
initiate treatment. Conversely, if your probability for a disease is very low (i.e., 
below the test threshold), then you do not need further testing. The area 
between the test and treatment thresholds represents clinical uncertainty, and 
you need further testing to revise probabilities and guide your clinical man-
agement. The expectation is that test results will enable you to cross a test-
treatment threshold. You should understand that these test-treatment 
thresholds are not set in stone and will vary based on the potential adverse 
effects of the treatment and the seriousness of the condition. For example, you 
will require a much higher treatment threshold (conﬁdence that the patient 
has a high probability of having the disease) for initiating cancer chemother-
apy compared to prescribing an antibiotic for a urinary tract infection. You 
would require a much lower test threshold (conﬁdence that the patient has a 
low probability of having the disease) when excluding ischemic heart disease 
than bacterial sinusitis. However, knowing whether a test result will achieve 
that effect can be challenging and requires you to understand how to evaluate 
the performance of a diagnostic test.
Evaluating Diagnostic Tests
You can turn to the clinical literature to determine how results from diagnostic 
tests—which include elements of the clinical history and physical examina-
tion, as well as laboratory tests, radiographic imaging, and procedures—can be 
used to revise probabilities. Two concepts in evaluating diagnostic tests will be 
explored: the validity of the ﬁndings and the reproducibility of the test results.
Validity
The initial step in evaluating a diagnostic test is to determine whether it provides 
valid results. Does the test accurately identify whether a patient has a disease? This 
involves comparing the test against a gold standard—the best measure of whether 
a patient has disease. This could be a biopsy to evaluate a lung nodule, a struc-
tured psychiatric examination to evaluate a patient for depression, or a colonos-
copy to evaluate a patient with a positive stool blood test.
The 2 × 2 table is the basic format for evaluating the performance characteristics 
of a diagnostic test, which means how much the test results revise probabilities 
for disease.
There are two columns—patients with disease present and patients with dis-
ease absent. These categorizations are based on the gold standard test. The two 
rows correspond to positive and negative test results. The four cells (a, b, c, d) 
correspond to true positives, false positives, false negatives, and true negatives, 
respectively.3
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EVALUATING DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
48 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Sensitivity and Speciﬁcity. The ﬁrst test statistics to estimate are sensitivity 
and speciﬁcity.
Sensitivity and Speciﬁcity
● Sensitivity is the probability that a person with disease has a positive test. 
This is represented as a/(a + c) in the disease present column of the 2 × 2 
table. Sensitivity is also known as the true positive rate.
● Speciﬁcity is the probability that a non-diseased person has a negative test, 
represented as d/(b + d) in the disease absent column of the 2 × 2 table.  
Speciﬁcity is also known as the true negative rate.
● Examples. An example of these statistics would be the probability that spleno-
megaly (see Chapter 11, p. 479) is associated with percussion dullness below 
the left costal margin (sensitivity). Conversely, the probability that a patient 
without splenomegaly will have percussion dullness is the false positive rate 
(1 − speciﬁcity) for this physical maneuver.
Setting up the 2 ¥ 2 Table
Gold Standard: 
Disease Present
Gold Standard: 
Disease Absent
Test positive
a
True positive
b
False positive
Test negative
c
False negative
d
True negative
Knowing the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of a test does not necessarily help you 
make clinical decisions because they are statistics based on knowing whether the 
patient has disease. However, there are two exceptions. A negative result from a 
test with a high sensitivity (i.e., a very low false-negative rate) usually excludes 
disease.  This is represented by the acronym SnNOUT—a Sensitive test with a 
Negative result rules OUT disease. Conversely, a positive result in a test with 
high speciﬁcity (e.g., a very low false-positive rate) usually indicates disease. 
This is represented by the acronym SpPIN—a Speciﬁc test with a Positive 
result rules IN disease.4
Positive and Negative Predictive Values. The typical clinical scenario 
faced by clinicians involves determining whether a patient actually has disease 
based on a test result that is either positive or negative. The relevant test statis-
tics here are the positive and negative predictive values.3
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EVALUATING DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
 
C H A P T E R  2 |
 
Evaluating Clinical Evidence 
49
Prevalence of Disease. Although the predictive value statistics seem intu-
itively useful, they will vary substantially according to the prevalence of disease 
(i.e., the proportion of patients in the disease present column). The prevalence 
is based on the characteristics of the patient population and the clinical setting. 
For example, the prevalence of many diseases will usually be higher among 
older patients and among patients being seen in specialist clinics or at referral 
hospitals.
The box below shows a 2 × 2 table where both the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of 
the diagnostic test are 90% and the prevalence (proportion of subjects that 
have the disease) is 10%. The positive predictive value calculated from the test 
positive row of the table would be 90/180 = 50%. This means that half of the 
people with a positive test have disease.
Positive and Negative Predictive Values
● The positive predictive value (PPV) is the probability that a person with a 
positive test has disease, represented as a/(a + b) from the test positive row  
in the 2 × 2 table.
An example of this statistic is found in prostate cancer screening (see 
Chapter 15, p. 612), where a man with a PSA value greater than 4.0 ng/mL 
has only a 30% probability of having prostate cancer found on biopsy.5
● The negative predictive value (NPV) is the probability that a person with a 
negative test does not have disease, represented as d/(c + d) in the test nega-
tive row in the 2 × 2 table. 
Among men with a PSA level of 4.0 ng/mL or below, 85% are found to be 
cancer-free on biopsy.6
Predictive Values: Prevalence of 10% with 
Sensitivity and Speciﬁcity = 90%
Disease Present
Disease Absent
Total
Test positive
a
90
b
90
 180
Test negative
c
10
d
810
 820
Total
100
900
1,000
However, if the sensitivity and speciﬁcity remained the same, but prevalence was 
only 1%, then the cells would look very different.
Sensitivity = a/(a + c) = 90/100 or 90%; speciﬁcity = d/(b + d) = 810/900 = 90%
Positive predictive value = a/(a + b) = 90/180 = 50%
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EVALUATING DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
50 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Now the positive predictive value calculated from the test positive row of the 
table would be 9/108 = 8.3%. The consequence is that the great majority of 
positive tests are false positives—meaning that most of the subjects who undergo 
gold standard tests (which are usually invasive, expensive, and potentially harm-
ful) will not have disease. This has implications for patient safety and resource 
allocation because clinicians want to limit the number of non-diseased patients 
who undergo gold standard tests. However, as shown by the example, predictive 
values will not necessarily provide us with sufﬁcient guidance for using tests 
across populations with differing disease prevalence.
Likelihood Ratios. Fortunately, there are other ways to evaluate the perfor-
mance of a diagnostic test that can account for the varying disease prevalence 
observed in different patient populations. One way uses likelihood ratio statis-
tics, deﬁned as the probability of obtaining a given test result in a diseased 
patient divided by the probability of obtaining a given test result in a non-
diseased patient.3,7 The likelihood ratio tells us how much a test result changes 
the pre-test disease probability (prevalence) to the post-test disease probability.
In the simplest case, we will assume that the test result is either positive or nega-
tive. Therefore, the likelihood ratio for a positive test is the ratio of getting a positive 
test result in a diseased person divided by the probability of getting a positive test 
result in a non-diseased person. From the 2 × 2 table, we see that this is the same 
as saying the ratio of the true positive rate (sensitivity) over the false positive rate 
(1 − speciﬁcity). A higher value (much >1) indicates that a positive test is much 
more likely to be coming from a diseased person than from a non-diseased per-
son, increasing our conﬁdence that a person with a positive result has disease.
The likelihood ratio for a negative test is the ratio of the probability of getting a 
negative test result in a diseased person divided by the probability of getting a 
negative test result in a non-diseased person.7 From the 2 × 2 table, we see that 
this is the same as saying the ratio of the false negative rate (1 − sensitivity) 
divided by the true negative rate (speciﬁcity). A lower value (much <1) indi-
cates that the negative test is much more likely to be coming from a non- 
diseased person than from a diseased person, increasing our conﬁdence that a 
person with a negative result does not have disease.
Predictive Values: Prevalence of 1% with 
Sensitivity and Speciﬁcity = 90%
Disease Present
Disease Absent
Total
Test positive
a
9
b
99
108
Test negative
c
1
d
891
892
Total
10
990
1,000
Sensitivity = a/(a + c) = 9/10 or 90%; speciﬁcity = d/(b + d) = 891/990 = 90%
Positive predictive value = a/(a + b) = 9/108 = 8.3%
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EVALUATING DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
 
C H A P T E R  2 |
 
Evaluating Clinical Evidence 
51
The box below shows how to interpret likelihood ratios based on how much a 
test result changes the pre- to post-test probabilities for disease.8
Interpreting Likelihood Ratios
Likelihood Ratiosa
Effect on Pre- to Post-Test Probability
LRs > 10 or < 0.1
Generate large changes
LRs 5–10 or 0.1–0.2
Generate moderate changes
LRs 2–5 and 0.5–0.2
Generate small (sometimes important) changes
LRs 1–2 and 0.5–1
Alter the probability to a small degree (rarely 
important)
aLikelihood ratios >1 are associated with positive results and an increased probability for disease. 
Likelihood ratios <1 are associated with negative results and a decreased probability of disease. A test 
with a likelihood ratio of 1 provides no additional information about the probability of disease.
We will show how likelihood ratios can be used to revise probabilities for disease 
with the example of breast cancer screening.
How Likely Is It That a Woman with Abnormal 
Mammogram Has Breast Cancer?
A 57-year-old woman at average risk for breast cancer has an abnormal mammo-
gram. She wants to know the probability that she has breast cancer. The literature 
states that the baseline risk (prevalence) is 1%, the sensitivity of mammography is 
90%, and the speciﬁcity is 91%.
Bayes Theorem. One way to use likelihood ratios to revise probabilities for 
disease is with the Bayes theorem.4 This theorem requires converting the esti-
mated prevalence (pre-test probability) to odds using the equation:
Pre-test odds = pre-test probability/(1 − pre-test probability)
The pre-test odds are multiplied by the likelihood ratio to estimate the post-test 
odds using the following equation:
Post-test odds = pre-test odds × likelihood ratio
The post-test odds are then converted to a probability using the equation:
Post-test probability = post-test odds/(1 + post-test odds)
For the example, the 1% prevalence represents the pre-test probability; this 
means that the pre-test odds are 0.01/0.99 or 0.01. The likelihood ratio for a 
positive test is sensitivity/(1 − speciﬁcity), which is 90%/9% = 10. The pre-test 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EVALUATING DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
52 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
odds are multiplied by this likelihood ratio (0.01 × 10) to give post-test odds of 
0.10. The post-test odds are converted [0.1/(1 + 0.1)] to a post-test probability 
of about 9%.
Fagan Nomogram. If you are more comfortable thinking in terms of proba-
bility of having disease, then the Fagan nomogram may be an easier way for you 
to use likelihood ratios (Fig. 2-3).9 With this nomogram, you read the pre-test 
probabilities from the line on the left, then take a straight edge and draw a line 
from the pre-test probability through the likelihood ratio in the middle line, and 
then read the post-test probability on the line on the right.
You can also use the Fagan nomogram to answer the mammography question 
(Fig 2-3). The pre-test probability (prevalence) = 1% and the likelihood for a 
2000
1000
500
200
100
50
20
10
5
2
1
0.002
0.005
0.01
0.02
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.5
0.001
0.0005
0.1
Pre-test
Probability (%)
Likelihood
Ratio
0.2
0.5
1
2
5
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
95
98
99
0.1
0.2
0.5
1
2
5
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
95
98
99
Post-test
Probability (%)
F I G U R E  2 - 3 . Fagan nomogram. (Adapted with permission from Fagan TJ. Letter: nomogram for Bayes 
theorem. N Engl J Med. 1975;293:257.)
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EVALUATING DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
 
C H A P T E R  2 |
 
Evaluating Clinical Evidence 
53
positive test [sensitivity/(1 − speciﬁcity)] = 10. The blue line corresponds to the 
case of a positive test with a post-test probability of about 9%. If the mammogram 
result was negative (red line), then the likelihood ratio for a negative test 
[(1 − sensitivity)/speciﬁcity] would be 10%/91% = 0.11 and the post-test prob-
ability for breast cancer would be 0.1%.
Natural Frequencies. Using frequency statements is another, perhaps more 
intuitive, alternative to likelihood ratios for determining how a test result will 
change the probability of disease.9,10 Natural frequencies represent the joint 
frequency of two events, such as the number of patients with disease and the 
number who have a positive test result. Start by taking a large number of 
people (e.g., 100 or 1,000, depending upon the prevalence) and break the 
number down into natural frequencies (i.e., how many of the people have 
disease, how many with disease will test positive, how many without disease 
will test positive).
Natural Frequencies to Answer the 
Mammography Question
We can use natural frequencies to answer the mammography question by creat-
ing a 2 × 2 table based on a population of 1,000 women. The 1% prevalence 
means that 10 women will have breast cancer. The sensitivity of 90% means that 
9 of the women with breast cancer will have an abnormal mammogram. The 
speciﬁcity of 91% means that 89 of the 990 women without breast cancer will 
still have an abnormal mammogram. The probability that a woman with an 
abnormal mammogram will have breast cancer is 9/(9 + 89) = about 9%.
Mammogram 
Result
Breast 
Cancer
No Breast  
Cancer
Total
Positive
 9
 89
  98
Negative
 1
901
 902
10
990
1,000
Data compiled from Gigerenzer G. What are natural frequencies? BMJ. 2011;343:d6386.
Reproducibility
Kappa Score. Another characteristic of a diagnostic test is reproducibility.3 
An important aspect of evaluating diagnostic elements of the history or physi-
cal examination is determining the reproducibility of the ﬁndings for diagnos-
ing a clinical disorder. When, for example, two clinicians examine a patient, 
they may not always agree upon the presence of a given ﬁnding. This raises the 
question of whether this ﬁnding is useful for diagnosing a clinical disorder. 
By chance, if many patients are being examined, there will be a certain amount 
of agreement between the two clinicians. Understanding whether there is 
agreement well beyond chance, though, is important in knowing whether the 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EVALUATING DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
54 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ﬁnding is useful enough to support clinical decision making. The kappa score 
measures the amount of agreement that occurs beyond chance (Fig. 2-4).12 The 
box shows how to interpret Kappa values.
Understanding Measure of Agreement between Different Observ-
ers. The clinicians agree 75% of the time that a patient has an abnormal phys-
ical ﬁnding. The expected agreement based on chance is 50%. This means that 
the potential agreement beyond chance is 50% and the actual observer agree-
ment beyond chance is 25%. The kappa level is then 25%/50% = 0.5, which 
indicates moderate agreement.
Precision. In the context of reproducibility, precision refers to being able to 
apply the same test to the same unchanged person and obtain the same results.4 
Precision is often used when referring to laboratory tests. For example, when 
measuring a troponin level for cardiac ischemia, clinicians might use a particu-
lar cutoff level to decide whether to admit a patient to a coronary care unit. If 
the test results are imprecise, this could lead to admitting a patient without 
Agreement expected by chance
Possible agreement above chance
75%
25%
50%
Observed agreement:
Observed agreement above chance:
kappa = 25/50 = 0.5 (moderate agreement)
F I G U R E  2 - 4 . Kappa scores. (Adapted with permission from McGinn T, Wyer PC, Newman TB, et al. Tips for 
learners of evidence-based medicine: 3. Measures of observer variability [kappa statistic]. CMAJ. 2004;171:1369–1379.)
Interpreting Kappa Values
Value of Kappa
Strength of Agreement
<0.20
Poor
0.21–0.40
Fair
0.41–0.60
Moderate
0.61–0.80
Good
0.81–1.00
Excellent
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION
 
C H A P T E R  2 |
 
Evaluating Clinical Evidence 
55
Health Promotion
Throughout the book you will ﬁnd health promotion sections that make recom-
mendations for primary prevention (interventions designed to prevent disease) 
as well as secondary prevention (screening tests designed to ﬁnd disease or dis-
ease processes at an early, asymptomatic stage). The rationale for secondary 
prevention is that treatment for early-stage disease is often more effective than 
treatment for later-stage disease. These health promotion recommendations are 
based on guidelines issued by professional organizations. We highlight guide-
lines that are evidence-based, such as those produced by the U.S. Preventive 
Services Task Force (USPSTF).13 Such guidelines consider the quality of the 
evidence and the strength of the recommendation to either provide or withhold 
the intervention.14 The strongest health promotion recommendations are based 
on results from randomized controlled trials (or syntheses of multiple such tri-
als) of therapy or prevention.
The randomized controlled trial design reduces bias, thereby increasing the 
validity of the results. Observational studies are more likely to have biased 
results, and expert opinions may be offered in the absence of evidence. When 
searching for evidence-based information, you should select the highest level of 
available evidence (e.g., systematic reviews of high-quality randomized con-
trolled studies) (Fig. 2-5).15
ischemic heart disease or sending a patient home with an ischemic event. A 
statistical test used to characterize precision is the coefﬁcient of variation, deﬁned 
as the standard deviation divided by the mean value. Lower values indicate 
greater precision.
Systematic
Reviews
Randomized Control Trials
Cohort Studies
Case-Control Studies
Case Series, Case Reports
Editorials, Expert Opinion
F I G U R E  2 - 5 . Evidence pyramid. (Adapted with permission from Sackett DL, Straus SE, Richardson WS,  
et al. Evidence-Based Medicine: How to Practice and Teach EBM. 2nd ed. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 2000.)
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
CRITICAL APPRAISAL
56 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
During your health care training, it is essential that you learn the process of 
critically appraising the clinical literature in order to be able to interpret new stud-
ies and guidelines as they appear throughout your professional career.
A widely accepted process for critically appraising the clinical literature has been 
developed by The Evidence Based Working Group.16 These experts in epidemi-
ology, or the study of disease in populations, created a rigorous and standardized 
approach for evaluating studies. This approach has been applied to a wide range 
of clinical topics, including therapeutic and prevention trials, diagnostic tests, 
meta-analysis, cost-effectiveness analyses, and practice guidelines. This approach 
asks three basic questions:
1. Are the results valid (can you believe them)?
2. What are the results (magnitude and precision)?
3. How can you apply the results to patient care?
Understanding Bias
When evaluating study results, it is important to have a thorough understanding 
of bias, which is a systematic error in conducting a study that threatens the valid-
ity of the results. Studies with a low risk of bias provide the most valid evidence 
for clinical decision making and health promotion interventions. The key sources 
of bias in clinical research are selection bias, performance bias, detection bias, 
and attrition bias.17
Critical Appraisal
Types of Biases Affecting Evidence
Selection Bias
● Occurs when comparison groups have systematic diﬀerences in their baseline 
characteristics that can aﬀect the outcome of the study
● Creates problems in interpreting observed diﬀerences in outcomes because 
they could result from the interventions or the baseline diﬀerences between 
groups
● Randomly allocating subjects to the intervention is the best approach to mini-
mizing this bias
Performance Bias
● Occurs when there are systematic diﬀerences in the care received between 
comparison groups (other than the intervention)
● Creates problems in interpreting outcome diﬀerences
● Blinding subjects and providers to the intervention is the best approach to 
minimizing this bias
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
CRITICAL APPRAISAL
 
C H A P T E R  2 |
 
Evaluating Clinical Evidence 
57
Detection Bias
● Occurs when there are systematic diﬀerences in eﬀorts to diagnose or ascer-
tain an outcome
● Blinding outcomes assessors (ensuring that they are unaware of the interven-
tion received by the subject) is the best approach to minimizing this bias
Attrition Bias
● Occurs when there are systematic diﬀerences in the comparison groups in the 
number of subjects who do not complete the study
● Failing to account for these diﬀerences can lead to incorrectly estimating the 
eﬀectiveness of an intervention
● Using an intention-to-treat analysis, where all analyses consider all subjects 
who were assigned to a comparison group, regardless of whether they received 
or completed the intervention, can minimize this bias
Results
Assessing Performance of a Treatment or Prevention Intervention. 
Other issues to consider in evaluating the quality of the literature include results 
and generalizability. We have discussed the results found in studies of diagnostic 
tests. Guidelines for health promotion are usually based on clinical trials of ther-
apy or prevention. Results from these studies are also calculated from a 2 × 2 
table where the columns correspond to whether the subject developed the out-
come and the rows correspond to whether the subject received (or was exposed 
to) the intervention. The statistics used to characterize the performance of a 
treatment or prevention intervention include relative risks, relative risk differ-
ences (can be a reduction or increase, reﬂecting beneﬁt or harm), absolute risk 
differences (can be a reduction or increase, reﬂecting beneﬁt or harm), numbers 
needed to treat, and numbers needed to harm.18
2 ¥ 2 Tables for Evaluating Studies  
of Treatment or Prevention
Event Occurred
No Event
Total
Experimental group
a
b
a + b
Control group
c
d
c + d
Calculating these statistics from the 2 × 2 table begins with determining proba-
bilities for outcomes.
■ The probability that an intervention subject had the outcome is described by 
a/(a + b) from row 1 (experimental group); this also called the experimental 
event rate (EER).
Types of Biases Affecting Evidence (continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
CRITICAL APPRAISAL
58 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
■ The probability that a control subject had the outcome is c/(c + d) from row 
2 (control group), or the control event rate (CER).
■ The relative risk, the probability of an outcome in the intervention group 
compared to the probability of an outcome in the control group, is expressed 
as the EER/CER.
■ The relative risk difference is deﬁned as |CER − EER|/CER × 100% or 100% − 
the relative risk, which describes the proportion of baseline risk is reduced/
increased by the therapy.
■ The absolute risk difference, the difference in outcome rates between the com-
parisons groups, is expressed by the |CER − EER|.
■ The reciprocal of the absolute risk difference (reported as a fraction) is the 
number of subjects who need to be treated over a speciﬁc period of time to pre-
vent one outcome. If the intervention actually increases the risk for a bad 
outcome, then this statistic becomes the number needed to harm.
Measuring Treatment Effectiveness. An example of these calculations 
is based on the hypothetical results of a study comparing the effects of a new 
drug, CardioProtect (CP) versus a widely used drug, CareStandard (CS) 
shown below. This 1-year randomized controlled trial compared patients who 
survived a recent myocardial infarction to see whether the new drug would 
reduce the outcome of a cardiovascular event, deﬁned as fatal or non-fatal 
myocardial infarction or cerebrovascular event. The drugs were coated so that 
patients and providers could not tell them apart. Subjects receiving the CP are 
the experimental group, and the EER = 10 events among 100 subjects = 0.10. 
The control group received CS and the CER was 30 events among 100 sub-
jects = 0.30. The relative risk of having a cardiovascular event among the CP 
group compared to the CS group is 0.10/0.30 = 0.33, or 33%. The relative risk 
reduction is 1 – 0.33 = 0.67, or 67%, meaning that the risk of a cardiovascu-
lar event among the CP group is 67% lower than in the CS group. CP led to a 
reduction in cardiovascular events, so we use the absolute risk reduction, 
which is reported as a decimal: 0.3 − 0.1 = 0.2. The reciprocal of this value 
(1/0.2) gives us a number needed to treat of 5—meaning that for every 5 
patients who receive CP instead of CS there will be one fewer event. The num-
ber needed to treat is always based on a speciﬁc period of time, so that we 
should say that we need to treat 5 patients for 1 year with CP compared to CS 
to prevent one cardiovascular event.
Example of 2 ¥ 2 Tables for Evaluating Studies 
of Treatment or Prevention
Cardiovascular Event
No Event
Total
CardioProtect
10
90
100
CareStandard
30
70
100
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
CRITICAL APPRAISAL
 
C H A P T E R  2 |
 
Evaluating Clinical Evidence 
59
Generalizability
The ﬁnal point to consider when evaluating the quality of the literature is 
whether the results are generalizable (e.g., whether the study results can be 
applied to your patients). To make this determination, you need to ﬁrst look at 
the demographics of the study subjects (e.g., age, gender, race/ethnicity, socioeco-
nomic status, clinical conditions). Then, you need to determine whether the 
demographics are similar enough to your patient to make the results applicable. 
You also need to determine whether the intervention is feasible in your setting. 
Do you have the clinical expertise, technology, and capacity to offer the intervention? 
Most importantly, you need to consider the range of potential beneﬁts and harm 
associated with the intervention and decide whether the intervention is accept-
able for your patient.
Guideline Recommendations
There are many approaches for rating the strength of recommendations and we 
will discuss several grading systems.
United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) Approach. The 
USPSTF assigns 1 of 5 ratings to its recommendations (Table 2-1). It also assigns 
a level of certainty regarding net beneﬁt (Table 2-2).
Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and 
Evaluation (GRADE). The GRADE process rates the quality of the evidence 
and grades the strength of recommendations in clinical guidelines.19 Developed 
by an international group of guideline writers and evidence experts, the primary 
goals of GRADE are to (1) clearly separate the quality of the evidence and the 
strength of the recommendations and (2) provide clear, pragmatic interpreta-
tions of strong versus weak recommendations.
High-quality evidence that the beneﬁt of an intervention outweighs the harm 
warrants a strong recommendation and suggests that further research is unlikely 
to change conﬁdence in the estimated effect. Meanwhile, uncertainty about the 
trade-offs between beneﬁts and harm (e.g., due to low-quality evidence or closely 
balanced risks and beneﬁts) warrants a weak recommendation.
The American College of Chest Physicians (AACP) also developed a grading sys-
tem used by many organizations.20 The system classiﬁes the quality of evidence 
as high (grade A), moderate (grade B), or low (grade C) based on study design, 
consistency of the results, and directness of the evidence. The system classiﬁes the 
strength of the recommendation as strong (grade 1) or weak (grade 2) based on 
the estimated balance between beneﬁts, risks, burdens, cost, and the degree of 
conﬁdence in the estimates. Table 2-3 provides more detail on the criteria and 
deﬁnitions.
The health promotion sections will indicate the level of evidence behind the 
various recommendations.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
LOOKING AHEAD
60 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Looking Ahead
This chapter introduces the concept of evidence-based clinical practice, showing 
how to bring clinical evidence to patient care. Physical examination maneuvers 
and elements of the clinical history can be seen as diagnostic tests and we have 
shown how to evaluate their diagnostic performance. Information on diagnostic 
performance will be further provided throughout the book. We also discussed 
the evidence behind clinical guidelines and how a good guideline should char-
acterize that evidence and indicate the strength of recommendations to imple-
ment an intervention. We will provide this information when describing 
guidelines in the Health Promotion and Counseling sections of each of the 
regional examination chapters.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  2 |
 
Evaluating Clinical Evidence 
61
Table 2-1 
Grade
Deﬁnition
Suggestions for Practice
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the 
net beneﬁt is substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that  
the net beneﬁt is moderate or there is moderate certainty that the net 
beneﬁt is moderate to substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends selectively offering or providing this service 
to individual patients based on professional judgment and patient 
preferences. There is at least moderate certainty that the net beneﬁt is 
small.
Offer or provide this service for selected 
patients depending on individual 
circumstances.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or  
high certainty that the service has no net beneﬁt or that the harms 
outweigh the beneﬁts.
Discourage the use of this service.
I
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufﬁcient to  
assess the balance of beneﬁts and harms of the service. Evidence is 
lacking, of poor quality, or conﬂicting, and the balance of beneﬁts and 
harms cannot be determined.
If the service is offered, patients should 
understand the uncertainty about the 
balance of beneﬁts and harms.
The USPSTF deﬁnes certainty as the “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net beneﬁt of a preventive service is correct.” The net beneﬁt is deﬁned as 
beneﬁt minus harm of the preventive service as implemented in a general, primary care population.
Source: Grade Deﬁnitions. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. October 2014. http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name/grade-deﬁnitions.
U.S. Preventive Service Task Force Ratings: 
Grade Deﬁnitions and Implications for Practice
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
62 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 2-2  U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Levels  
of Certainty Regarding Beneﬁt
Level of Certainty
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted 
studies in representative primary care populations. These studies assess the effects of the 
preventive service on health outcomes. This conclusion is therefore unlikely to be strongly 
affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufﬁcient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health 
outcomes, but conﬁdence in the estimate is constrained by such factors as:
■ The number, size, or quality of individual studies.
■ Inconsistency of ﬁndings across individual studies.
■ Limited generalizability of ﬁndings to routine primary care practice.
■ Lack of coherence in the chain of evidence.
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could 
change, and this change may be large enough to alter the conclusion.
Low
The available evidence is insufﬁcient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufﬁcient 
because of:
■ The limited number or size of studies.
■ Important ﬂaws in study design or methods.
■ Inconsistency of ﬁndings across individual studies.
■ Gaps in the chain of evidence.
■ Findings not generalizable to routine primary care practice.
■ Lack of information on important health outcomes.
More information may allow estimation of effects on health outcomes.
Source: Update on Methods: Estimating Certainty and Magnitude of Net Beneﬁt. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. February 2014.  
http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name/update-on-methods-estimating-certainty-and-magnitude-of-net-beneﬁt.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  2 |
 
Evaluating Clinical Evidence 
63
Table 2-3 American College of Chest Physicians: 
Grading Recommendations
Grade of  
Recommendation/ 
Description
Beneﬁt vs. Risk 
and Burdens
Methodological Quality 
of Supporting Evidence
Implications
1A/Strong recommendation; 
high-quality evidence
Beneﬁts clearly outweigh 
risk and burdens, or vice 
versa
RCTs without important 
limitations or overwhelming 
evidence from observational 
studies
Strong recommendation; can 
apply to most patients in most 
circumstances without 
reservation
1B/Strong recommendation; 
moderate-quality evidence
Beneﬁts clearly outweigh 
risk and burdens, or vice 
versa
RCTs with important limitations 
(inconsistent results, 
methodological ﬂaws, indirect, 
or imprecise) or exceptionally 
strong evidence from 
observational studies
Strong recommendation; can 
apply to most patients in most 
circumstances without 
reservation
1C/Strong recommendation; 
low-quality or very low-quality 
evidence
Beneﬁts clearly outweigh 
risk and burdens, or vice 
versa
Observational studies or case 
series
Strong recommendation but 
may change when higher-
quality evidence becomes 
available
2A/Weak recommendation; 
high-quality evidence
Beneﬁts closely balanced 
with risk and burdens
RCTs without important 
limitations or overwhelming 
evidence from observational 
studies
Weak recommendation; best 
action may differ depending 
on circumstances or patients’ 
societal values
2B/Weak recommendation; 
moderate-quality evidence
Beneﬁts closely balanced 
with risk and burdens
RCTs with important limitations 
(inconsistent results, 
methodological ﬂaws, indirect, 
or imprecise) or exceptionally 
strong evidence from 
observational studies
Weak recommendation; best 
action may differ depending 
on circumstances or patients’ 
societal values
2C/Weak recommendation; 
low-quality or very-low-quality 
evidence
Uncertainty in the 
estimates of beneﬁts, 
risks, and burden; 
beneﬁts, risks, and 
burdens may be closely 
balanced
Observational studies or case 
series
Very weak recommendation; 
other alternatives may be 
equally reasonable
Source: Guyatt G, Gutterman D, et al. Grading strength of recommendations and quality of evidence in clinical guidelines: report from an American college of 
chest physicians task force. Chest. 2006;129(1):174.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
64 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
References
 1. Haynes RB, Sackett DL, Gray JM, et al. Transferring evidence from 
research into practice: 1. The role of clinical care research evidence 
in clinical decisions. ACP J Club. 1996;125(3):A14.
 2. Richardson WS, Wilson M, Guyatt G. The process of diagnosis. In: 
Guyatt G, Rennie D, eds. Users’ Guides to the Medical Literature. 2nd 
ed. Chicago, IL: American Medical Association; 2008.
 3. Jaeschke R, Guyatt G, Lijmer J. Diagnostic tests. In: Guyatt G, 
Rennie D, eds. Users’ Guides to the Medical Literature. 2nd ed. 
Chicago, IL: American Medical Association; 2008.
 4. Sackett DL, Haynes RB, Guyatt GH, et al. Clinical Epidemiology. A 
Basic Science for Clinical Medicine. 2nd ed. Boston, MA: Little, 
Brown and Company; 1991.
 5. Wolf AM, Wender RC, Etzioni RB, et al; American Cancer Society 
Prostate Cancer Advisory Committee. American Cancer Society 
guideline for the early detection of prostate cancer: update 2010. 
CA Cancer J Clin. 2010;60(2):70.
 6. Thompson IM, Pauler DK, Goodman PJ, et al. Prevalence of pros-
tate cancer among men with a prostate-speciﬁc antigen level < or 
= 4.0 ng per milliliter. N Engl J Med. 2004;350(22):2239.
 7. Richardson WS, Wilson MC, Keitz SA, et al. Tips for teachers of 
evidence-based medicine: making sense of diagnostic test results 
using likelihood ratios. J Gen Intern Med. 2008;23(1):87.
 8. Jaeschke R, Guyatt GH, Sackett DL. Users’ Guides to the Medical 
Literature. III. How to use an article about a diagnostic test. B. What 
are the results and will they help me in caring for my patients? The 
Evidence-Based Medicine Working Group. JAMA. 1994;271(9):703.
 9. Fagan TJ. Nomogram for Bayes theorem. N Engl J Med. 1975; 
293:257.
 10. Gigerenzer G. What are natural frequencies? BMJ. 2011;343:d6386.
 11. Gigerenzer G, Gaissmaier W, Kurz-Milcke E, et al. Helping doctors 
and patients make sense of health statistics. Psychol Sci Public Interest. 
2008;8(2):53.
 12. McGinn T, Guyatt G, Cook R, et al. Diagnosis. Measuring agreement 
beyond chance. In: Guyatt  G, Rennie D, eds. AMA’s Users’ Guides to 
the Medical Literature: A Manual for Evidence-Based Clinical Practice. 
2nd ed. Chicago, IL: American Medical Association; 2008.
 13. Home. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. January 2016. http://
www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name/home.
 14. Grade Deﬁnitions. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. October 
2014. http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name/
grade-deﬁnitions.
 15. Guyatt GH, Sackett DL, Sinclair JC, et al. Users’ Guides to the 
Medical Literature. IX. A method for grading health care recom-
mendations. Evidence-Based Medicine Working Group. JAMA. 
1995;274(22):1800.
 16. Guyatt G, Rennie D, Meade M, et al. Users’ Guides to the Medical 
Literature. 2nd ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Company; 2008.
17. Jüni P, Altman DG, Egger M. Systematic reviews in health care: 
Assessing the quality of controlled clinical trials.  BMJ 2001;323:42.
 18. Jaeschke R, Guyatt G, Barratt A, et al. Therapy and Understanding 
the Results. Users’ Guides to the Medical Literature. 2nd ed. Chicago, 
IL: American Medical Association; 2008.
 19. Guyatt G, Oxman AD, Akl EA, et al. GRADE guidelines: 1. Intro-
duction-GRADE evidence proﬁles and summary of ﬁndings tables. 
J Clin Epidemiol. 2011;64(4):383.
 20. Guyatt G, Gutterman D, Baumann MH, et al. Grading strength of 
recommendations and quality of evidence in clinical guidelines: 
report from an American college of chest physicians task force. 
Chest. 2006;129(1):174.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  3 |
 
Interviewing and the Health History  
65
The health history interview is a conversation with a purpose. As you learn to 
elicit the patient’s story, you will draw on many of the interpersonal skills that you 
use every day, but with unique and important differences. In social conversation, 
you freely express your own views and are responsible only for yourself. In con-
trast, the primary goals of the patient interview are to listen and to improve the 
well-being of the patient through a trusting and supportive relationship (Fig. 3-1).
Relating effectively with patients is among the most valued skills of clinical care. 
For the patient, “a feeling of connectedness . . . of being deeply heard and under-
stood . . . is the very heart of healing.”1 For the clinician, this deeper relationship 
enriches the rewards of patient care.2–4 High-quality patient–clinician commu-
nication has also been shown to improve patient outcomes, decrease symptoms, 
improve functional status, reduce litigation, and decrease errors.5–7 The inter-
view is also the most commonly performed clinical intervention, occurring thou-
sands of times in a clinician’s career. These are all salient and compelling reasons 
to develop expertise in this skill (Fig. 3-2).
This chapter introduces you to the essentials of interviewing and establishing 
trust, the foundations of your therapeutic alliance with patients. At ﬁrst, you will 
focus on gathering information, but with experience and empathic listening, you 
will allow the patient’s story to unfold in its most authentic and detailed form.
Interviewing is both a skill and an art. Skilled interviewing is both patient-centered 
and clinician-centered. The clinician must focus on the patient to elicit the full story 
of the patient’s symptoms, but the clinician must also interpret key information 
to reach an assessment and plan. Patient-centered interviews “recognize the 
importance of patients’ expressions of personal concerns, feelings, and emotions” 
and evoke “the personal context of the patient’s symptoms and disease.”8 Experts 
have deﬁned patient-centered interviewing as “following the patient’s lead to 
understand their thoughts, ideas, concerns and requests, without adding 
C H A P T E R3
Interviewing and the  
Health History
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate 
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (All Volumes)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com
F I G U R E  3 - 1 .  History-taking 
involves empathic listening.
F I G U R E  3 - 2 .
Establish connections 
with patients.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
66 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
INTERVIEWING AND THE HEALTH HISTORY
additional information from the clinician’s perspective.” In contrast, in the more 
symptom-focused, clinician-centered approach, the clinician “takes charge of the 
interaction to meet her or his own need to acquire the symptoms, their details, 
and other data that will help her or him identify a disease,” which can bypass the 
personal dimensions of the illness.8,9 Evidence suggests that the patient is best 
served by integrating these interviewing styles, leading to a more complete picture 
of the patient’s illness and allowing clinicians to more fully convey the caring 
attributes of “respect, empathy, humility and sensitivity.”8,10 Current evidence 
shows that this approach is not only more satisfying for the patient and the clini-
cian, but also more effective in achieving desired health outcomes (Fig. 3-3).11,12
The interviewing process is quite different from the format of the health history, 
presented in Chapter 1. The interview is more than just a series of questions; it 
requires a highly reﬁned sensitivity to the patient’s feelings and behavioral cues. 
The health history format provides an important framework for organizing the 
patient’s story into various categories pertinent to the patient’s present, past, and 
family health. The interview and the health history format have distinct but 
complementary purposes. Keep these differences in mind as you learn the 
techniques of skilled interviewing.
The interviewing process that generates the patient’s story is ﬂuid and draws on 
numerous relational skills to respond effectively to patient cues, feelings, and 
concerns. The adaptability of the interviewer has been compared to the impro-
visation of jazz musicians who listen attentively to notes and themes and play to 
each other’s cues. This “in-the-moment” ﬂexibility lets the interviewer adapt to 
the patient’s leads as the story unfolds.13 The interview should be “open-ended,” 
drawing on a range of techniques to cue patients to tell their stories—active 
listening, guided questioning, nonverbal afﬁrmation, empathic responses, vali-
dation, reassurance, and partnering. These techniques are especially valuable 
when eliciting the patient’s chief concerns and the History of the Present Illness.
The health history format is a structured framework for organizing patient informa-
tion in written or verbal form. This format focuses your attention on the speciﬁc 
kinds of information you need to obtain, facilitates clinical reasoning, and standard-
izes communication to other health care providers involved in the patient’s care. The 
Past Medical History, the Family History, Personal and Social History, and Review of 
Systems give shape and depth to the patient’s story. The Personal and Social History 
is an opportunity for the clinician to see the patient as a person and gain deeper 
understanding of the patient’s outlook and background. Learning about the patient’s 
life circumstances, emotional health, perception of health care, health behaviors, 
and access to and utilization of health care strengthens your therapeutic alliance and 
improves health outcomes.14 Make every effort to limit the “clinician-centered,” 
closed-ended “yes-no” questions to the Review of Systems.
Above all, skilled interviewing requires your lifelong commitment to masterful 
listening, easily sacriﬁced to the time pressures of daily health care. In the words of 
Sir William Osler, one of our greatest clinicians and co-founder of Johns Hopkins 
School of Medicine in 1893: “Listen to your patient. He is telling you the diag-
nosis” and “The good physician treats the disease; the great physician treats the 
patient who has the disease.”
F I G U R E  3 - 3 .  Interviewing is 
symptom- and patient-focused.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  3 |
 
Interviewing and the Health History  
67
DIFFERENT KINDS OF HEALTH HISTORIES
Different Kinds of Health 
Histories
As you learned in Chapter 1, the scope and detail of the history depends on the 
patient’s needs and concerns, your goals for the encounter, and the clinical setting 
(inpatient or outpatient, the amount of time available, primary care or subspecialty).
■ For new patients, in most settings, you will do a comprehensive health history.
■ For patients seeking care for speciﬁc concerns, for example, cough or painful 
urination, a more limited interview tailored to that speciﬁc problem may be 
indicated; this is sometimes known as a focused or problem-oriented history.
■ For patients seeking care for ongoing or chronic problems, focusing on the 
patient’s self-management, response to treatment, functional capacity, and 
quality of life is most appropriate.15
■ Patients frequently schedule health maintenance visits with the more fo-
cused goals of keeping up screening examinations or discussing concerns 
about smoking, weight loss, or sexual behavior.
■ A specialist may need a more comprehensive history to evaluate a problem 
with numerous possible causes.
By knowing the content and relevance of the different components of the com-
prehensive health history, you are able to select the elements most pertinent to 
the visit and shared goals for the patient’s health. This chapter sets guideposts 
for interviewing and the health history, outlined below.
See Chapter 1, Overview: Physical 
Examination and History Taking,  
pp. 3–43.
Chapter Overview
The Fundamentals of Skilled Interviewing
● The Techniques of Skilled Interviewing: Active listening. Empathic responses. 
Guided questioning. Nonverbal communication. Validation. Reassurance. 
Partnering. Summarization. Transitions. Empowering the patient.
The Sequence and Context of the Interview
● Preparation: Reviewing the clinical record. Setting goals for the interview. 
Reviewing your clinical behavior and appearance. Adjusting the environment.
● The Sequence of the Interview: Greeting the patient and establishing rapport. 
Taking notes. Establishing the agenda for the interview. Inviting the patient’s 
story. Identifying and responding to emotional cues. Expanding and clarifying the 
patient’s story. Generating and testing diagnostic hypotheses. Sharing the treat-
ment plan. Closing the interview and the visit. Taking time for self-reﬂection.
● The Cultural Context of the Interview: Demonstrating cultural humility—a 
changing paradigm.
(continued)
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
68 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE FUNDAMENTALS OF SKILLED INTERVIEWING 
You may have many reasons for choosing to enter the health care professions, 
but building effective and healing relationships is undoubtedly paramount. 
“Those who suffer empower healers to witness, explain, and relieve their suffer-
ing.”2 This section describes the fundamental techniques of therapeutic inter-
viewing, the timeless skills you will continually polish as you care for patients. 
These skills require practice and feedback from your teachers so that you can 
monitor your progress. Over time, you will learn to select the techniques best 
suited to the ever-changing dynamics of human behavior in your patient rela-
tionships. Key among these techniques are active listening and empathy, the 
golden links to a therapeutic alliance.
Chapter Overview (continued )
Advanced Interviewing
● Challenging Patients: The silent patient. The confusing patient. The patient 
with impaired capacity. The talkative patient. The angry or disruptive patient. 
The patient with a language barrier. The patient with low literacy or low health 
literacy. The hearing impaired patient. The blind patient. The patient with lim-
ited intelligence. The patient seeking personal advice. The seductive patient.
● Sensitive Topics: The sexual history. The mental health history. Alcohol and 
prescribed and illicit drug use. Intimate partner and family violence. Death 
and dying.
Ethics and Professionalism
The Fundamentals of  
Skilled Interviewing
Skilled Interviewing Techniques
● Active listening
● Empathic responses
● Guided questioning
● Nonverbal communication
● Validation
● Reassurance
● Partnering
● Summarization
● Transitions
● Empowering the patient
Active Listening.
Active listening lies at the heart of the patient interview. 
Active listening means closely attending to what the patient is communicating, 
connecting to the patient’s emotional state, and using verbal and nonverbal skills 
to encourage the patient to expand on his or her feelings and concerns. Active 
listening allows you to relate to those concerns at multiple levels of the patient’s 
experience.16 This takes practice. It is easy to drift into thinking about your next 
question or possible diagnoses and lose your concentration on the patient’s story. 
Focus on what the patient is telling you, both verbally and nonverbally. Sometimes 
your body language tells a different story from your words.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  3 |
 
Interviewing and the Health History  
69
THE FUNDAMENTALS OF SKILLED INTERVIEWING 
Empathic Responses. Empathic responses are vital to patient rapport and 
healing.17,18 Empathy has been described as the capacity to identify with the patient 
and feel the patient’s pain as your own, then respond in a supportive manner.19 
Empathy “requires a willingness to suffer some of the patient’s pain in the sharing 
of suffering that is vital to healing.”20 As patients talk with you, they may convey, in 
their words or facial expressions, feelings they have not consciously acknowledged. 
These feelings are crucial to understanding their illnesses. To express empathy, you 
must ﬁrst recognize the patient’s feelings, then actively move toward and elicit 
emotional content.21,22 At ﬁrst, exploring these feelings may make you feel 
uncomfortable, but your empathic responses will deepen mutual trust.
When you sense unexpressed feelings from the patient’s face, voice, behavior or 
words, gently ask: “How do you feel about that?” or “That seems to trouble you, 
can you say more?” Sometimes a patient’s response may not correspond to your 
initial assumptions. Responding to a patient that the death of a parent must be 
upsetting, when in fact the death relieved the patient of a heavy emotional bur-
den, reﬂects your interpretation, not what the patient feels. Instead, you can ask: 
“You have lost your father. What has that been like for you?” It is better to ask 
the patient to expand or clarify a point than assume you understand. Empathy 
may also be nonverbal—placing your hand on the patient’s arm or offering tis-
sues when the patient is crying. Unless you afﬁrm your concern, important 
dimensions of the patient’s experience may go untapped.
Once the patient has shared these feelings, reply with understanding and accep-
tance. Your responses may be as simple as: “I cannot imagine how hard this must 
be for you” or “That sounds upsetting” or “You must be feeling sad.” For a 
response to be empathic, it must convey that you feel what the patient is feeling.
Guided Questioning: Options for Expanding and Clarifying the 
Patient’s Story. There are several ways to elicit more information without 
changing the ﬂow of the patient’s story. Your goal is to facilitate full communication, 
in the patient’s own words, without interruption. Guided questions show your 
sustained interest in the patient’s feelings and deepest disclosures (Fig. 3-4). 
They help you avoid questions that prestructure or even shut down the patient’s 
responses. A series of “yes-no” questions makes the patient feel more restricted 
and passive, leading to signiﬁcant loss of detail. Instead, use guided questioning 
to absorb the patient’s full story.
F I G U R E  3 - 4 .  Employ guided 
questioning.
For further practice see Smith, 
Patient-Centered Interviewing.8
Techniques of Guided Questioning
● Moving from open-ended to focused questions
● Using questioning that elicits a graded response
● Asking a series of questions, one at a time
● Oﬀering multiple choices for answers
● Clarifying what the patient means
● Encouraging with continuers
● Using echoing
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
70 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE FUNDAMENTALS OF SKILLED INTERVIEWING 
Moving from Open-Ended to Focused Questions. Your questions 
should ﬂow from general to speciﬁc. Think about a cone, open at the top, then 
tapering to a focal point. Start with the most general questions like, “How can I 
help?” or “What brings you in today?” Then move to still open, but more focused, 
questions like, “Can you tell me more about what happened when you took the 
medicine?” Then pose closed questions like, “Did the new medicine cause any 
problems?”
Begin with a truly open-ended question that does not preﬁgure an answer. A 
possible sequence might be:
“Tell me about your chest discomfort.” (Pause)
“What else?” (Pause)
“Where did you feel it?” (Pause) “Show me.”
“Anywhere else?” (Pause) “Did it travel anywhere?” (Pause) “To which 
arm?”
Avoid leading questions that already contain an answer or suggested response like: 
“Has your pain been improving?” or “You don’t have any blood in your stools, do 
you?” If you ask “Is your pain like a pressure?” and the patient answers yes, 
the patient’s response is truncated instead of what he or she experienced. Adopt 
the more neutral “Please describe your pain.”
Questioning That Elicits a Graded Response. Ask questions that 
require a graded response rather than a yes-no answer. “How many steps can you 
climb before you get short of breath?” is better than “Do you get short of breath 
climbing stairs?”
Asking a Series of Questions, One at a Time. Be sure to ask one question 
at a time. “Any tuberculosis, pleurisy, asthma, bronchitis, pneumonia?” may prompt 
“No” out of sheer confusion. Try “Do you have any of the following problems?” Be 
sure to pause and establish eye contact as you list each problem.
Offering Multiple Choices for Answers. Sometimes, patients need 
help describing their symptoms. To minimize bias, offer multiple-choice answers: 
“Which of the following words best describes your pain: aching, sharp, press-
ing, burning, shooting, or something else?” Almost any speciﬁc question can 
contrast two possible answers. “Do you bring up any phlegm with your cough, 
or is it dry?”
Clarifying What the Patient Means. Sometimes the patient’s history is 
difﬁcult to understand. It is better to acknowledge confusion than to act like the 
story makes sense. To understand what the patient means, you need to request 
clariﬁcation, as in “Tell me exactly what you mean by ‘the ﬂu’” or “You said you 
were behaving just like your mother. What did you mean?” Taking time for 
clariﬁcation reassures the patient that you want to understand his or her story 
and builds your therapeutic relationship.
Encouraging with Continuers. Without even speaking, you can use 
posture, gestures, or words to encourage the patient to say more. Pausing and 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  3 |
 
Interviewing and the Health History  
71
THE FUNDAMENTALS OF SKILLED INTERVIEWING 
nodding your head, or remaining silent, yet attentive and relaxed, is a cue for 
the patient to continue. Leaning forward, making eye contact, and using phrases 
like “Mm-hmm,” or “Go on,” or “I’m listening” all enhance the ﬂow of the 
patient’s story.
Echoing. Simply repeating the patient’s last words, or echoing, encourages 
the patient to elaborate on details and feelings. Echoing also demonstrates care-
ful listening and a subtle connection with the patient by using the same words. 
For example:
Patient: “The pain got worse and began to spread.” (Pause)
Response: “Spread?” (Pause)
Patient: “Yes, it went to my shoulder and down my left arm to the ﬁngers. It 
was so bad that I thought I was going to die.” (Pause)
Response: “Going to die?”
Patient: “Yes, it was just like the pain my father had when he had his heart 
attack, and I was afraid the same thing was happening to me.”
This reﬂective technique helped to reveal not only the location and severity 
of the pain but also its meaning to the patient. It did not bias the story or inter-
rupt the patient’s train of thought.
Nonverbal Communication. Both clinicians and patients continuously 
display nonverbal communication that provides important clues to our 
underlying feelings. Being sensitive to nonverbal cues allows you to “read the 
patient” more effectively and send messages of your own. Pay close attention 
to eye contact, facial expression, posture, head position and movement such 
as shaking or nodding, interpersonal distance, and placement of the arms or 
legs—crossed, neutral, or open. Be aware that some forms of nonverbal 
communication are universal, but many are culturally bound.
Just as mirroring your posture shows the patient’s sense of connection, matching 
your position to the patient’s can transmit increased rapport. You can also mirror 
the patient’s paralanguage, or qualities of speech, such as pacing, tone, and volume. 
Moving closer or making physical contact like placing your hand on the patient’s 
shoulder conveys empathy and can help the patient gain control of upsetting 
feelings. The ﬁrst step to using this important technique is to notice nonverbal 
behaviors and bring them to conscious level.
Validation. Another way to afﬁrm the patient is to validate the legitimacy of 
his or her emotional experience. A patient caught in a car accident, even if 
uninjured, may still feel very distressed. Saying something like, “Your accident 
must have been very scary. Car accidents are always unsettling because they 
remind us how vulnerable we are. Perhaps that explains why you still feel upset,” 
validates the patient’s response as legitimate and understandable.
Reassurance. When patients are anxious or upset, it is tempting to 
provide reassurance like “Don’t worry. Everything is going to be all right.” 
Although this is common in social interactions, for clinicians, such comments 
may be premature and counterproductive. Depending on the actual situation, 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
72 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE FUNDAMENTALS OF SKILLED INTERVIEWING 
they may even be misleading and block further disclosure. The patient may 
sense that you are uncomfortable handling anxiety or fail to appreciate the 
depth of the distress.
The ﬁrst step to effective reassurance is simply identifying and acknowledging the 
patient’s feelings. For example, you might simply say, “You seem upset today.” 
This promotes a feeling of connection. Meaningful reassurance comes later, 
after you have completed the interview, the physical examination, and perhaps 
some laboratory tests. At that point, you can explain what you think is hap-
pening and deal openly with any concerns. Reassurance is more appropriate 
when the patient feels that problems have been fully understood and are being 
addressed.
Partnering. When building rapport with patients, express your commitment 
to an ongoing relationship. Make patients feel that no matter what happens, you 
will continue to provide their care. Even as a student, especially in a hospital 
setting, this support can make a big difference.
Summarization. Giving a capsule summary of the patient’s story during 
the course of the interview serves several purposes. It communicates that you 
have been listening carefully. It identiﬁes what you know and what you don’t 
know. “Now, let me make sure that I have the full story. You said you’ve had a 
cough for 3 days, that it’s especially bad at night, and that you have started to 
bring up yellow phlegm. You have not had a fever or felt short of breath, but 
you do feel congested, with difﬁculty breathing through your nose.” Following 
with an attentive pause, or asking “Anything else?” lets the patient add other 
information and corrects any misunderstandings.
You can use summarization at different points in the interview to structure the 
visit, especially at times of transition (see below). This technique also allows you 
to organize your clinical reasoning and convey your thinking to the patient, 
making the relationship more collaborative. It also helps learners when they 
draw a blank on what to ask next.
Transitions. Patients may be apprehensive during a health care visit. To 
put them more at ease, tell them when you are changing directions during the 
interview. Just like signs along the highway, “signposting” transitions help 
prepare patients for what comes next. As you move through the history and on 
to the physical examination, orient the patient with brief transitional phrases 
like “Now I’d like to ask some questions about your past health.” Make clear 
what the patient should expect or do next. “Before we move on to reviewing 
all your medications, was there anything else about past health problems?” 
“Now I would like to examine you. I will step out for a few minutes. Please 
undress and put on this gown.”
Empowering the Patient. The clinician–patient relationship is inherently 
unequal. Your feelings of inexperience as a student predictably change over time 
as you grow in clinical experience. Patients, however, have many reasons to feel 
vulnerable. They may be in pain or worried about a symptom. They may feel 
overwhelmed by even scheduling a visit, a task you might take for granted. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  3 |
 
Interviewing and the Health History  
73
THE SEQUENCE AND CONTEXT OF THE INTERVIEW 
Differences of gender, ethnicity, race, or socioeconomic status contribute to the 
power asymmetry of the relationship. Ultimately, however, patients are 
responsible for their own care.23 When you empower patients to ask questions, 
express their concerns, and probe your recommendations, they are most likely 
to adopt your advice, make lifestyle changes, or take medications as prescribed 
(Fig. 3-5).21
Listed below are techniques for sharing power with your patients. Although 
many have already been discussed, reinforcing patients’ responsibility for their 
health is fundamental and worth summarizing here.
F I G U R E  3 - 5 .  Share power with 
patients.
Empowering the Patient:  
Techniques for Sharing Power
● Evoke the patient’s perspective.
● Convey interest in the person, not just the problem.
● Follow the patient’s leads.
● Elicit and validate emotional content.
● Share information with the patient, especially at transition points during the 
visit.
● Make your clinical reasoning transparent to the patient.
● Reveal the limits of your knowledge.
The Sequence and Context  
of the Interview
Preparation, Sequence, and Cultural Context
Preparation: Reviewing the clinical record. Setting goals for the interview. 
Reviewing your clinical behavior and appearance. Adjusting the environment.
The Sequence of the Interview: Greeting the patient and establishing rapport. 
Establishing the agenda for the interview. Inviting the patient’s story. Exploring 
the patient’s perspective. Identifying and responding to emotional cues. Expand-
ing and clarifying the patient’s story. Generating and testing diagnostic hypothe-
ses. Sharing the treatment plan. Closing the interview and the visit. Taking time 
for self-reﬂection.
The Cultural Context of the Interview: Demonstrating cultural humility—a 
changing paradigm.
Now that you have learned the fundamentals of skilled interviewing, you are 
ready to start the interview. First, prepare for the interview by reviewing the 
record and setting goals for the interview ahead. Check your appearance. 
Make sure the patient is comfortable and the environment is conducive to the 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
74 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE SEQUENCE AND CONTEXT OF THE INTERVIEW 
very personal information soon to be shared. You will ﬁnd that each interview 
has its own rhythm and sequence. Master the steps described. Finally, the 
interview has important societal dimensions. Reﬂect on any biases you have 
that color your reactions to the patient and the therapeutic alliance you need 
to create.
Preparation
Interviewing patients requires planning. As you begin, consider several steps that 
are crucial to success.
Reviewing the Clinical Record. Before seeing the patient, review the 
clinical record (Fig. 3-6). This provides important background information and 
suggests areas you need to explore. Review identifying data such as age, gender, 
address, and insurance. Look at the problem list and the patient’s medications 
and allergies. Even though the clinical record usually contains past diagnoses 
and treatments, you need to make your own assessment based on what you 
learn from the visit ahead. The clinical record is compiled from many observers. 
Data may be incomplete or even disagree with what the patient tells you. 
Correcting discrepancies in the record is important for the patient’s care.
Setting Goals for the Interview. Before you talk with the patient, 
clarify your goals for the interview. As a student, your primary purpose may be 
to complete a comprehensive history required for your rotation. As a practicing 
clinician, your goals can range from assessing a new concern, to treatment 
follow-up, to completing forms. The clinician must balance these provider-centered 
goals with patient-centered goals, weighing multiple agendas arising from the needs 
of the patient, the patient’s family, and health care agencies and facilities. Taking 
a few minutes to think about your goals makes it easier to align your priorities 
with the patient’s agenda.24
Reviewing Your Clinical Behavior and Appearance. Just as you 
carefully observe the patient, the patient will be watching you. Consciously or 
not, you send messages through both your words and your behavior. Posture, 
gestures, eye contact, and tone of voice all convey the extent of your interest, 
attention, acceptance, and understanding. The skilled interviewer seems calm and 
unhurried, even when time is limited. Patients sense when you are preoccupied. It 
is important to learn to focus and give the patient your full attention. Patients are 
also sensitive to any implied disapproval, embarrassment, impatience, or boredom 
and to behaviors that condescend, stereotype, criticize, or belittle. Professionalism 
requires equanimity and “unconditional positive regard” to nurture healing 
relationships.25 Your appearance is also important. Patients ﬁnd cleanliness, 
neatness, conservative dress, and a name tag reassuring. Remember to keep the 
patient’s perspective in mind if you want to build the patient’s trust.
Adjusting the Environment. Make the interview setting as private and 
comfortable as possible. You may have to talk with the patient in surroundings 
like a two-bed room or the corridor of a busy emergency department. Making 
the environment as conﬁdential as possible improves communication. If there 
F I G U R E  3 - 6 .  Review records and 
set goals.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  3 |
 
Interviewing and the Health History  
75
THE SEQUENCE AND CONTEXT OF THE INTERVIEW 
are privacy curtains, try to pull them shut. Suggest moving to an empty room 
instead of talking in a waiting area. Adjust the room temperature for the patient’s 
comfort. As the clinician, it is part of your role to make the patient more comfortable. 
These efforts are always worth the time.
The Sequence of the Interview
In general, an interview moves through several stages. Throughout this sequence, 
as the clinician you must remain attuned to the patient’s feelings, help the patient 
express them, respond to their content, and validate their signiﬁcance. As a stu-
dent, you will concentrate primarily on eliciting the patient’s story and creating 
a shared understanding of the patient’s concerns. Later on, as a practicing clini-
cian, reaching agreement on a plan for further evaluation and treatment becomes 
more important. Whether the interview is comprehensive or focused, pay close 
attention to the patient’s feelings and affect, always working on strengthening the 
relationship as you move through the typical sequence that follows. Including 
the patient’s feelings, ideas, and expectations leads to therapeutic interventions 
best suited to the patient’s needs, coping skills, and life circumstances.
Greeting the Patient and Establishing Rapport. The initial 
moments of your encounter lay the foundation for your ongoing relationship. 
How you greet the patient and other visitors in the room, provide for the 
patient’s comfort, and arrange the physical setting all shape the patient’s ﬁrst 
impressions.
As you begin, greet the patient by name and introduce yourself, giving your own name. 
If possible, shake hands with the patient. If this is the ﬁrst contact, explain your 
role, your status as a student, and how you will be involved in the patient’s 
care. Introduce yourself during future meetings until you are sure the patient 
knows who you are: “Good morning, Mr. Peters. I am Susannah Velasquez, a third-
year clinical student. You may remember me. I was here yesterday talking with you 
about your heart problems. I am part of the clinical team taking care of you.”
In general, use a formal title to address the patient, Mr. O’Neil or Ms. Washington 
for example.25 Except with children or adolescents, avoid ﬁrst names until you 
have speciﬁc permission. Calling a patient “dear” or overly familiar names can 
depersonalize and demean. If you are unsure how to pronounce the patient’s 
name, don’t be afraid to ask. You can say, “I am afraid of mispronouncing your 
name. Could you say it for me?” Then repeat it to make sure that you heard it 
correctly.
When visitors are in the room, acknowledge and greet each one in turn, inquir-
ing about each person’s name and relationship to the patient. Whenever visitors 
are present, you are obligated to maintain the patient’s conﬁdentiality. Let the patient 
decide if visitors or family members should stay in the room, and ask for the 
patient’s permission before conducting the interview in front of them. For exam-
ple, “I am comfortable with having your sister stay for the interview, Mrs. Jones, 
but I want to make sure that this is what you want” or “Is it better if I speak to 
you alone or with your sister present?” For sensitive questions, you may need to 
arrange another time to be with the patient alone.
See Chapter 18, Assessing Children, 
Infancy Through Adolescence, for  
discussion of visitors present during 
pediatric visits, pp. 765–891.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
76 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE SEQUENCE AND CONTEXT OF THE INTERVIEW 
Always be attuned to the patient’s comfort. In the ofﬁce or clinic, help the patient ﬁnd 
a place for coats and belongings. In the hospital, after greeting the patient, ask 
how the patient is feeling and if you are coming at a convenient time. Arranging 
the bed to make the patient more comfortable or waiting a few minutes while the 
patient says goodbye to visitors or ﬁnishes in the bathroom shows that you are 
attentive to the patient’s needs. In any setting, look for signs of discomfort, such 
as shifting position or facial expressions of pain or anxiety. Attend to these signs 
ﬁrst to promote trust and provide enough comfort for the interview to proceed.
Consider the best way to arrange the room and how close you should be to the 
patient. Remember that cultural background and individual taste inﬂuence 
preferences about interpersonal space. Choose a distance that facilitates conver-
sation and allows good eye contact (Fig. 3-7). You should probably be within 
several feet, close enough to hear and be heard clearly. Pull up a chair and, if 
possible, sit at eye level with the patient. Move physical barriers like bed railings 
or bedside tables out of the way. In an outpatient setting, sitting on a rolling 
stool, for example, allows you to change distances in response to patient cues. 
Avoid arrangements that convey disrespect, like interviewing a woman already 
positioned for a pelvic examination or talking through a bathroom door. Light-
ing also makes a difference. If you sit between a patient and a bright light or 
window the patient may have to squint to see you, lending the interaction an 
air of interrogation.
As you begin the interview, give the patient your undivided attention. Spend 
enough time on small talk to put the patient at ease, and avoid looking down to 
take notes, read the chart, or scan a computer screen. Show interest in the patient 
as a unique individual. You can begin by asking, “So that I can get to know you, 
tell me about yourself.”26
Taking Notes. As a novice, you may need to write down much of what 
you learn during the interview. Experienced clinicians usually recall much of the 
interview without any notes, but few remember all the details of a comprehen-
sive history. Jot down short phrases, speciﬁc dates, or words; but do not let note 
taking or the laptop screen distract you from the patient. Maintain good eye 
contact. If the patient is talking about sensitive or disturbing material, put down 
your pen or move away from the keyboard. For patients who ﬁnd note taking 
uncomfortable, explore their concerns and explain your need to make an accu-
rate record. When using an electronic health record, face the patient directly as 
you elicit the patient’s story, maintaining good eye contact and observing non-
verbal behaviors; turn to the screen only after engaging the patient in the goals 
for the visit. Look up at the patient as often as possible, readjusting your screen 
and position if needed.27
Establishing the Agenda. Once you have established rapport, you are 
ready to pursue the patient’s reason for seeking care, traditionally called the 
chief complaint. In the ambulatory setting, where there are often three or four 
reasons for the visit, the phrase presenting problem(s) may be preferable. One 
beneﬁt to this phrase is that it does not characterize the patient as a complainer. 
Begin with open-ended questions that allow full freedom of response: “What 
are your special concerns today?”, “How can I help you?”, or “Are there speciﬁc 
F I G U R E  3 - 7 .  Choose a distance 
that facilitates conversation and eye 
contact.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  3 |
 
Interviewing and the Health History  
77
THE SEQUENCE AND CONTEXT OF THE INTERVIEW 
concerns that prompted your appointment today?” These questions encourage 
the patient to talk about any kinds of concerns, not just clinical ones. Note that 
the ﬁrst problem the patient mentions may not be the one that is most 
important.28 Often, patients give one reason for the visit to the nurse and 
another to you. For some visits, patients do not have a speciﬁc concern and 
only “want a check-up.”
Identifying all the concerns at the outset allows you and the patient to decide 
which ones are most pressing and which ones can be postponed to a later visit. 
Questions such as “Is there anything else?”, “Have we got everything?”, or “Is 
there anything we missed?” help you uncover the patient’s full agenda and “the 
real reason” for the visit. You may want to address different goals, like discussing 
an elevated blood pressure or an abnormal test result. Identifying the full agenda 
protects time for the most important issues. However, even negotiating the 
agenda at the outset does not avert “oh by the way” concerns that suddenly 
emerge at the end of the visit.
Inviting the Patient’s Story. Once you have prioritized the agenda, 
invite the patient’s story by asking about the foremost concern, “Tell me more 
about…” Encourage patients to tell their stories in their own words, using an 
open-ended approach. Avoid biasing the patient’s story—do not inject new 
information or interrupt. Instead, use active listening skills: lean forward as you 
listen; add continuers such as nodding your head and phrases like “uh huh,” “go 
on,” or “I see.” Train yourself to follow the patient’s leads. If you ask speciﬁc 
questions prematurely, you risk suppressing details in the patient’s own words. 
Studies show that clinicians wait only 18 seconds before they interrupt.28 Once 
interrupted, patients usually do not resume their stories. After the patient’s 
initial description, explore the patient’s story in more depth. Ask, “How would you 
describe the pain?”, “What happened next?”, or “What else did you notice?” so that the 
patient enriches important details.
Exploring the Patient’s Perspective. The disease/illness distinction 
model helps elucidate the different yet complementary perspectives of the clinician 
and the patient.29 Disease is the explanation that the clinician uses to organize 
symptoms that leads to a clinical diagnosis. Illness is a construct that explains how 
the patient experiences the disease, including its effects on relationships, function, 
and sense of well-being. Many factors may shape this experience, including prior 
personal or family health, its impact on everyday life, the patient’s outlook, style of 
coping, and expectations about care. The clinical interview needs to incorporate both 
these views of reality. The melding of these two perspectives forms the basis for 
planning evaluation and treatment.
Even a straightforward concern like sore throat can illustrate these divergent 
views. The patient may be worried about pain and difﬁculty swallowing, missing 
time from work, or a cousin who was hospitalized with tonsillitis. The clinician 
may focus on speciﬁc points in the history that differentiate streptococcal phar-
yngitis from other etiologies, or on a questionable history of allergy to penicillin. 
To understand the patient’s perspective, the clinician needs to explore the four 
domains below. This information is crucial to patient satisfaction and patient 
compliance.8,30
See pp. 70–71 for discussions  
of continuers.
See pp. 69–71 for discussions  
of guided questioning.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
78 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE SEQUENCE AND CONTEXT OF THE INTERVIEW 
Exploring the Patient’s Perspective (F-I-F-E)
● The patient’s Feelings, including fears or concerns, about the problem
● The patient’s Ideas about the nature and the cause of the problem
● The eﬀect of the problem on the patient’s life and Function
● The patient’s Expectations of the disease, of the clinician, or of health care, 
often based on prior personal or family experiences
To explore the patient’s perspective, use different types of questions. To uncover the 
patient’s feelings, ask, “What concerns you most about the pain?” or “How 
has this been for you?” For views about the cause of the problem, ask, “Why do you 
think you have this [stomachache]?” You might ask, “What have you tried to help?” 
since these choices suggest how the patient perceives the cause. Some patients 
worry that their pain is a symptom of serious disease. Others just want relief. To 
determine how the illness affects the patient’s lifestyle, particularly if the illness is 
chronic, ask, “What did you do before that you can’t do now? How has your [back-
ache, shortness of breath, etc.] affected you? Your life at home? Your social activities? 
Your role as a parent? Your function in intimate relationships? The way you feel 
about yourself as a person?” To ﬁnd out what the patient expects from you or from 
the encounter in general, consider asking, “I am glad the pain is almost gone, how 
speciﬁcally can I help you now?” Even if the pain is gone, the patient may still need 
a work excuse to take to an employer. A mnemonic for the patient’s perspective on 
the illness is FIFE—Feelings, Ideas, effect on Function, and Expectations.
Identifying and Responding to the Patient’s Emotional Cues. 
Illness is often accompanied by emotional distress; 30% to 40% of patients have 
anxiety and depression in primary care practices.31 Visits tend to be longer when 
clinicians miss emotional clues. Patients may withhold their true concerns in up 
to 75% of acute care visits even though they give clues to these concerns that are 
direct, indirect, verbal, nonverbal, or disguised as related ideas or emotions.32 
Check on these clues and feelings by asking, “How did you feel about that?” or 
“Many people would be frustrated by something like this.” See the box below for 
a taxonomy of the clues about the patient’s perspective on illness.
Clues to the Patient’s Perspective on Illness
● Direct statement(s) by the patient of explanations, emotions, expectations, 
and eﬀects of the illness
● Expression of feelings about the illness without naming the illness
● Attempts to explain or understand symptoms
● Speech clues (e.g., repetition, prolonged reﬂective pauses)
● Sharing a personal story
● Behavioral clues indicative of unidentiﬁed concerns, dissatisfaction, or unmet 
needs such as reluctance to accept recommendations, seeking a second  
opinion, or early return appointment
Source: Lang F, Floyd MR, Beine KL. Clues to patients’ explanations and concerns about their ill-
nesses: a call for active listening. Arch Fam Med. 2000;9:222.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  3 |
 
Interviewing and the Health History  
79
THE SEQUENCE AND CONTEXT OF THE INTERVIEW 
Learn to respond attentively to emotional cues using techniques like reﬂection, 
feedback, and “continuers” that convey support. A mnemonic for responding to 
emotional cues is NURSE: Name—“That sounds like a scary experience”; Under-
stand or legitimize—“It’s understandable that you feel that way”; Respect—
“You’ve done better than most people would with this”; Support—“I will 
continue to work with you on this”; and Explore—“How else were you feeling 
about it?”33,34
Expanding and Clarifying the Patient’s Story. As you elicit the 
patient’s story, you must diligently clarify the attributes of each symptom, 
including context, associations, and chronology. For pain and many other 
symptoms, understanding these essential characteristics, summarized as the 
seven attributes of a symptom, is critical.
To pursue the seven attributes, two mnemonics may help:
■ OLD CARTS, or Onset, Location, Duration, Character, Aggravating/ 
Alleviating Factors, Radiation, and Timing, or
■ OPQRST, or Onset, Palliating/Provoking Factors, Quality, Radiation, Site, 
and Timing
The Seven Attributes of a Symptom
1. Location. Where is it? Does it radiate?
2. Quality. What is it like?
3. Quantity or severity. How bad is it? (For pain, ask for a rating on a scale of  
1 to 10.)
4. Timing. When did (does) it start? How long does it last? How often does it 
come?
5. Onset (setting in which symptom occurs). Include environmental factors, 
 personal activities, emotional reactions, or other circumstances that may 
have contributed to the illness.
6. Remitting or exacerbating factors. Is there anything that makes it better or 
worse?
7. Associated manifestations. Have you noticed anything else that  
accompanies it?
Whenever possible, repeat back the patient’s words and expressions as the history 
unfolds, to afﬁrm the patient’s experience as you clarify what he or she means. 
Although using clinical terminology is tempting, these terms can leave patients 
confused and frustrated. Be aware of how easily jargon like “take a history” 
and “work you up” can creep into your discussions. Choose plain language 
for reﬂecting back the patient’s story, for example, “You said there was ‘a heavy 
weight’ on your chest. Can you tell me more about that?” Or, to help clarify 
the meaning of a patient symptom by offering a choice of responses, ask, “You 
mentioned you were light-headed. Did you feel like fainting or that your legs 
were just weak?” It is highly important to establish the sequence and time course 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
80 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE SEQUENCE AND CONTEXT OF THE INTERVIEW 
of each of the patient’s symptoms to ensure that your assessments are based 
on a fully accurate history. To establish the correct chronological order, ask 
questions like “What then?” or “What happened next?” or “Please start at the 
beginning, or the last time you felt well, and go step by step.” To ﬁll in speciﬁc 
details, vary the types of questions and interviewing techniques that you use, 
including focused questions for information that is still missing. In general, an 
interview moves back and forth from open-ended questions to increasingly focused 
questions and then on to another open-ended question, returning the lead in the 
interview to the patient.
Generating and Testing Diagnostic Hypotheses. As you gain 
experience listening to patient concerns, you will deepen your skills of clinical 
reasoning. You will generate and test diagnostic hypotheses about which disease 
process might be present. Identifying all the features of each symptom is 
fundamental to recognizing patterns of disease and to generating the differential 
diagnosis. It is important to fully ﬂesh out the patient’s story. This avoids the 
common trap of premature closure, or shutting down the patient’s story too 
quickly, which can lead to errors in diagnosis.35
It is helpful to visualize the process of evoking a full description of each symptom 
as “the cone” (Fig. 3-8).
Each symptom has its own “cone,” which becomes a paragraph in the History of 
Present Illness in the written record.
Questions about clusters of symptoms in common clinical entities are also 
found in “The Health History” section of each of the regional physical exam-
ination chapters. The interview is your primary source of evidence for and 
against various diagnostic possibilities. The challenge is to avoid a clinician-
centered agenda, letting focused questions take over that obscure the patient’s 
perspective and limit your opportunity to create an empathic therapeutic 
connection.
Sharing the Treatment Plan. Learning about the disease and 
conceptualizing the illness allow you and the patient to create a shared picture 
See Skilled Interviewing Techniques 
and discussion of focused questions, 
pp. 68–73.
First, open-ended questions to
hear “the story of the symptom”
in the patient’s own words
Then more specific questions to
elicit “the seven features of every
symptom”
Finally, the yes-no questions or
“pertinent positives and negatives” 
from the relevant section of the
review of systems   
F I G U R E  3 - 8 .  Gather a full description of each symptom.
For example, in a patient with a 
cough, the yes-no questions would 
come from the Respiratory section of 
the Review of Systems, on p. 12.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  3 |
 
Interviewing and the Health History  
81
THE SEQUENCE AND CONTEXT OF THE INTERVIEW 
See Table 3-1, Motivational Interview-
ing: A Clinical Example, p. 104.
of the patient’s problems. This multifaceted picture then forms the basis for 
planning further evaluation (e.g., physical examination, laboratory tests, 
consultations) and negotiating a treatment plan. Shared decision-making has 
been called the pinnacle of patient-centered care.36 Experts recommend a 
three-step process: introducing choices and describing options using patient 
decision support tools when available; exploring patient preferences; and 
moving to a decision, checking that the patient is ready to make a decision and 
offering more time, if needed.37
Behavior Change and Motivational Interviewing. Many of your 
patient visits will close with a discussion of behavior changes needed to opti-
mize health or treat illness. These could include a change in diet, exercise 
habits, cessation of smoking or drinking, adherence to medication regimens, 
or self-management strategies, among others.38 Advanced techniques such as 
motivational interviewing and the therapeutic use of the clinician–patient 
relationship are beyond the scope of this book. Nonetheless, it is worthwhile 
to introduce the principles of motivational interviewing, a set of well-docu-
mented techniques that improve health outcomes, especially for patients with 
substance abuse.39 Motivational interviewing helps patients “to say why and 
how they might change, and is based on the use of a guiding style” of inter-
viewing, rather than direct advice. It engages patients to express the pros and 
cons of a given behavior.40 Motivational interviewing makes the assumption 
that many patients already know what is best for them and helps them con-
front their ambivalence to change.41 Using three core skills empowers the 
patient to provide ideas, solutions, and a timetable for change, as shown in the 
following table.
The Guiding Style of Motivational Interviewing
1. “Ask” open-ended questions—invite the patient to consider how and why 
they might change.
2. “Listen” to understand your patient’s experience—“capture” their account 
with brief summaries or reﬂective listening statements such as “quitting 
smoking feels beyond you at the moment”; these express empathy, encourage 
the patient to elaborate, and are often the best way to respond to resistance.
3. “Inform”—by asking permission to provide information, and then asking what 
the implications might be for the patient.
Source: Quoted directly from Rollnick S, Butler CC, Kinnersly P, et al. Motivational Interviewing. 
BMJ. 2010;340:1242.
See Table 3-2, Brief Action Planning 
(BAP)—A Self-Management Support 
Tool, p. 105.
Closing the Interview and the Visit. You may ﬁnd that ending the 
health history interview, and later concluding the visit, are difﬁcult. Patients often 
have many questions, and if you have done your job well, they feel engaged and 
afﬁrmed as they talk with you. Let the patient know that the end of the interview 
or the visit is approaching to allow time for any ﬁnal questions. Make sure the 
patient understands the mutual plans you have developed. For example, before 
gathering your papers or standing to leave the room, you can say, “We need to 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
82 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE SEQUENCE AND CONTEXT OF THE INTERVIEW 
stop now. Do you have any questions about what we’ve covered?” As you close, 
summarizing plans for future evaluation, treatments, and follow-up is helpful. A 
useful technique to assess the patient’s understanding is to “teach back,” 
whereby you invite the patient to tell you, in his or her own words, the plan of 
care. An example would be: “Could you please tell me what you understand is 
our plan of care?”42,43
The patient should have a chance to ask any ﬁnal questions, but the last few 
minutes are not a good time to bring up new topics. If this happens and the 
concern is not life threatening, simply assure the patient of your interest and 
make plans to address the problem at a future time. “That knee pain sounds 
concerning. Why don’t you make an appointment for next week so we can dis-
cuss it?” Reafﬁrming your ongoing commitment to the patient’s health shows 
your involvement and esteem.
Taking Time for Self-Reﬂection. The role of self-reﬂection, or 
mindfulness, in developing clinical empathy cannot be overemphasized. 
Mindfulness refers to the state of being “purposefully and nonjudgmentally 
attentive to [one’s] own experience, thoughts, and feelings.”44 As you encounter 
people of diverse ages, gender identities, social class, race, and ethnicity, being 
consistently respectful and open to individual differences is an ongoing challenge 
of clinical care. Because we bring our own values, assumptions, and biases to 
every encounter, we must look inward to see how our own expectations and 
reactions affect what we hear and how we behave. Self-reﬂection is a continual part 
of professional development in clinical work. It brings a deepening personal awareness 
to our work with patients. This personal awareness is one of the most rewarding aspects 
of patient care.45
The Cultural Context of the Interview
Demonstrating Cultural Humility—A Changing Paradigm. 
Communicating effectively with patients from every background has always 
been an important professional skill. Nonetheless, the disparities in risks of 
disease, morbidity, and mortality are marked and broadly documented across 
different population groups, reﬂecting inequities in health care access, income 
level, type of insurance, educational level, language proﬁciency, and provider 
decision making.46,47 To moderate these disparities, clinicians are increasingly 
urged to engage in self-reﬂection, critical thinking, and cultural humility as they 
experience diversity in their clinical practices.48–50
Cultural competence is commonly viewed as “a set of attitudes, skills, behav-
iors, and policies that enable organizations and staff to work effectively in 
cross-cultural situations. It reflects the ability to acquire and use knowledge 
of the health-related beliefs, attitudes, practices, and communication pat-
terns of clients and their families to improve services, strengthen programs, 
increase community participation, and close the gaps in health status among 
diverse population groups.”51 Culturally competent care requires “under-
standing of and respect for the cultures, traditions, and practices of a com-
munity.”52 For example, Asians and Pacific Islanders for Reproductive 
Health have cited environmental toxins as threats to food safety, and the 
See Chapters 4 to 20, sections on 
Health Promotion and Counseling: 
Evidence and Recommendations and 
selected notations in the Examples of 
Abnormalities columns.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  3 |
 
Interviewing and the Health History  
83
THE SEQUENCE AND CONTEXT OF THE INTERVIEW 
Native American Women’s Health Education Resource Center has included 
sovereignty and the right to parent as Native Americans in their agendas for 
health.
Experts caution that too often, cultural competence is reduced to a static decon-
textualized set of traits and beliefs for particular ethnic groups that objectiﬁes 
patients as “other,” implicitly reinforcing the perspectives of the dominant, often 
Western, culture.53 Instead, “culture is ever-changing and always being revised 
within the dynamic context of its enactment.” However, “this dynamic is often 
compromised by various sociocultural mismatches between patients and provid-
ers.”54 Such mismatches arise from clinicians’ lack of knowledge about patient 
beliefs and lived experiences as well as unintentional or intentional enactment of 
stereotypes and bias during patient encounters.
Instead, move toward the precepts of cultural humility. Cultural humility is 
deﬁned as a “process that requires humility as individuals continually engage in 
self-reﬂection and self-critique as lifelong learners and reﬂective practitio-
ners.”54 It is a process that includes “the difﬁcult work of examining cultural 
beliefs and cultural systems of both patients and providers to locate the points 
of cultural dissonance or synergy that contribute to patients’ health outcomes.”55 
It calls for clinicians to “bring into check the power imbalances that exist in the 
dynamics of (clinician)–patient communication” and maintain mutually 
respectful and dynamic partnerships with patients and communities. To attain 
these attributes, seek out the more effective training models that continue to 
emerge.56–60
Begin your commitment to self-reﬂective practice by studying the vignettes 
that follow. These examples illustrate how cultural differences and uncon-
scious bias can unwittingly lead to poor communication and poor patient 
outcomes.
A 28-year-old taxi driver from Ghana who had recently moved to the United 
States complained to a friend about U.S. clinical care. He had gone to the clinic 
because of fever and fatigue. He described being weighed, having his tempera-
ture taken, and having a cloth wrapped tightly, to the point of pain, around his 
arm. The clinician, a 36-year-old woman from Washington, D.C., asked the 
patient many questions, examined him, and wanted to take blood, which the 
patient had refused. The patient’s ﬁnal comment was “ . . . and she didn’t even 
give me chloroquine!”—his primary reason for seeking care. The man from 
Ghana was expecting few questions, no examination, and treatment for malaria, 
which is what fever usually means in Ghana.
Cultural Humility: Scenario 1
In this example, cross-cultural miscommunication is understandable and thus 
less threatening to explore. Unconscious bias leading to miscommunication, 
however, occurs in many clinical interactions. Consider the scenario below that 
is closer to daily practice.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
84 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE SEQUENCE AND CONTEXT OF THE INTERVIEW 
Cultural Humility: Scenario 2
A 16-year-old high school student came to the local teen health center because 
of painful menstrual cramps that interfered with her concentration at school. 
She was dressed in a tight top and short skirt and had multiple piercings. The 
30-year-old male clinician asked the following questions: “Are you passing all of 
your classes? What kind of job do you want after high school? What kind of birth 
control do you want?” The teen felt pressured into accepting birth control pills, 
even though she had clearly stated that she had never had intercourse and 
planned to postpone it until she got married. She was an honor student plan-
ning to go to college, but the clinician did not elicit these goals. The clinician 
glossed over her cramps by saying, “Oh, you can just take some ibuprofen. 
Cramps usually get better as you get older.” The patient will not take the birth 
control pills that were prescribed, nor will she seek health care soon again. She 
experienced the encounter as an interrogation, so failed to gain trust in her cli-
nician. In addition, the clinician’s questions made assumptions about her life and 
did not show respect for her health concerns. Even though the provider pursued 
important psychosocial domains, she received ineﬀective health care because of 
conﬂicting cultural values and clinician bias.
In both of these cases, the failure stems from mistaken assumptions or biases. 
In the ﬁrst case, the clinician did not consider the many variables affecting 
patient beliefs about health and expectations for care. In the second case, the 
clinician allowed stereotypes to dictate the agenda instead of listening to the 
patient and respecting her as an individual. Each of us has our own cultural 
background and our own biases. These do not simply fade away as we become 
clinicians.
As you provide care for an ever-expanding and diverse group of patients, you 
must recognize how culture shapes not only the patient’s beliefs, but also 
your own. Culture is the system of shared ideas, rules, and meanings that 
inﬂuences how we view the world, experience it emotionally, and behave in 
relation to other people. It can be understood as the “lens” through which we 
perceive and make sense out of the world we inhabit. The meaning of culture 
is much broader than the term “ethnicity.” Cultural systems are not limited 
to minority groups; they emerge in many social groupings, including clinical 
professionals.
Avoid letting personal impressions about cultural groups turn into professional 
stereotyping. For example, you may have heard that Hispanic patients are more 
dramatic when they express pain. Recognize that this is a stereotype. Evaluate 
each patient as an individual, not decreasing the dose of analgesics, but staying 
attuned to your reactions to the patient’s style. Work on an informed clinical 
approach to each patient by consciously acknowledging your own values and 
biases, developing communication skills that transcend cultural differences, and 
building therapeutic partnerships based on respect for each patient’s life experi-
ence. This type of framework, described in the next section, will allow you to 
approach each patient as a unique individual.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  3 |
 
Interviewing and the Health History  
85
THE SEQUENCE AND CONTEXT OF THE INTERVIEW 
The Three Dimensions of Cultural Humility
1. Self-awareness. Learn about your own biases; we all have them.
2. Respectful communication. Work to eliminate assumptions about what is “nor-
mal.” Learn directly from your patients; they are the experts on their culture 
and illness.
3. Collaborative partnerships. Build your patient relationships on respect and 
mutually acceptable plans.
Self-Awareness. Start by exploring your own cultural identity. How do you 
describe yourself in terms of ethnicity, class, region or country of origin, religion, 
and political afﬁliation? Don’t forget the characteristics we often take for granted—
gender, life roles, sexual orientation, physical ability, and race—especially if we 
belong to majority groups. What aspects of your family of origin do you identify 
with, and how are you different from your family of origin? How do these iden-
tities inﬂuence your beliefs and behaviors?
A more challenging task is to bring our own values and biases to a conscious 
level. Values are the standards we use to measure our own and others’ beliefs and 
behaviors. Biases are the attitudes or feelings that we attach to perceived differ-
ences. Being attuned to difference is normal; in fact, in the distant past, reacting 
to differences may have ensured survival. Instinctively knowing members of 
one’s own group is a survival skill that we may have outgrown as a society, but 
that is still actively at work.
Feeling guilty about our biases makes them hard to recognize and acknowledge. 
Start with less threatening constructs, like the way an individual relates to time, 
a culturally determined phenomenon. Are you always on time—a positive value 
in the dominant Western culture? Or do you tend to run a little late? How do you 
feel about people whose habits are opposite to yours? Next time you attend a 
meeting or class, notice who is early, on time, or late. Is it predictable? Think 
about the role of physical appearance. Do you consider yourself thin, mid-size, 
or heavy? How do you feel about your weight? What does prevailing U.S. culture 
teach us to value in physique? How do you feel about people who have different 
weights?
Respectful Communication. Given the complexities of global society, 
no one can possibly know the health beliefs and practices of every culture and 
subculture. Let your patients be the experts on their own unique cultural per-
spectives. Even if patients have trouble describing their values or beliefs, they 
can often respond to speciﬁc questions. Find out about the patient’s cultural 
background. Maintain an open, respectful, and inquiring attitude. “What did 
you hope to get from this visit?” If you have established rapport and trust, 
patients will be willing to teach you. Be aware of questions that contain 
assumptions. And always be ready to acknowledge your areas of ignorance or 
bias. “I know very little about Ghana. What would have happened at a clinic 
there if you had these concerns?” Or, with the second patient and with much 
more difﬁculty, “I mistakenly made assumptions about you that are not right. 
Use some of the same questions  
discussed earlier in Sharing the  
Treatment Plan, pp. 80–81.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
86 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ADVANCED INTERVIEWING
I apologize. Would you be willing to tell me more about yourself and your 
future goals?”
Learning about the patient’s speciﬁc culture broadens the areas you, as a clini-
cian, need to explore. Do some reading about the life experiences of individuals 
in ethnic or racial groups who live in your area. There may be historic reasons 
for loss of trust in clinicians or health care.60 Go to movies ﬁlmed in foreign 
countries, which can help you better understand different cultures. Learn about 
the explicit health agendas of different consumer groups. Talk with different 
kinds of healers and learn about their practices. Most importantly, be open to 
learning from each patient. Do not assume that your impressions about a given 
cultural group apply to the individual before you.
Collaborative Partnerships. Through continual work on self-awareness 
and seeing through the “lens” of others, the clinician lays the foundation for the 
collaborative relationship that best supports the patient’s health. Communication 
based on trust, respect, and your own willingness to re-examine assumptions 
allows patients to be more open to expressing views that diverge from the dom-
inant culture. They may have strong feelings such as anger or shame. You, the 
clinician, must be willing to listen to and validate these emotions, and not let 
your own feelings of discomfort or time pressure prevent you from exploring 
painful areas. Be willing to re-examine your beliefs about the “right approach” to 
clinical care in a given situation. Make every effort to be ﬂexible as you develop 
shared plans that reﬂect patients’ knowledge about their best interests that are 
congruent with both their beliefs and effective clinical care. Remember that if 
the patient stops listening, fails to follow your advice, or does not return, your 
care has not been successful.
Advanced Interviewing
Interviewing the Challenging Patient
As you spend time inviting patient stories, you will ﬁnd that some patients are more 
difﬁcult to interview than others. For some clinicians, a quiet patient might seem 
difﬁcult, for others, a patient who is more assertive. Being aware of your reactions 
helps develop your clinical skills. Your success in eliciting the history from different 
types of patients grows with experience, but take into account your own stressors, 
such as fatigue, mood, and overwork. Self-care is also important in caring for others. 
Even if a patient is challenging, always remember the importance of listening to the 
patient and clarifying his or her concerns.
The Silent Patient.
Novice interviewers often feel uncomfortable with 
periods of silence and try to keep the conversation going. Silence has many 
meanings. Patients fall silent to collect their thoughts, remember details, or 
decide if they can trust you with certain information. Periods of silence usually 
seem longer to the clinician than the patient. Be attentive and respectful, and 
encourage the patient to continue when ready. Watch the patient closely for 
nonverbal cues, such as difﬁculty controlling emotions. Being comfortable 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  3 |
 
Interviewing and the Health History  
87
ADVANCED INTERVIEWING
See Chapter 5, Behavior and Mental 
Status, pp. 147–171.
See Chapter 5, Behavior and Mental 
Status, Medically Unexplained Symp-
toms, pp. 149–150, and Table 5-1, 
Somatic Symptom and Related 
 Disorders, p. 169.
with periods of silence may be therapeutic, prompting the patient to reveal 
deeper feelings.
Patients with depression or dementia may seem subdued and lose their usual 
affect, giving only short answers to questions, then falling silent. If you have 
already tried guided questioning, try shifting to more direct inquiry about symp-
toms of depression, or begin an exploratory mental status examination.
At times, silence may be the patient’s response to how you are asking questions. 
Are you asking too many short-answer questions in rapid succession? Have you 
offended the patient by showing disapproval or criticism? Have you failed to 
recognize an overwhelming symptom such as pain, nausea, or shortness of 
breath? If so, you may need to ask the patient directly, “You seem very quiet. 
Have I done something to upset you?”
The Confusing Patient. Some patient stories are confusing and do not 
seem to make sense. Just as you develop a differential diagnosis from the symp-
toms of the Present Illness, keep several possibilities in mind as you assess why 
the story is confusing. It may be the patient’s style, and by using your skills of 
guiding questions, clariﬁcation, and summarizing, you can put together a 
coherent story. Watch for an underlying issue, however, that is interfering with 
communication.
Some patients present a confusing array of multiple symptoms. They seem to 
have every symptom that you ask about, or “a positive review of systems.” 
With these patients, focus on the context of the symptom, emphasizing the 
patient’s perspective (see pp. 77–78), and guide the interview into a psycho-
social assessment.
At other times, you may feel bafﬂed and frustrated because the history is vague, 
and ideas are poorly connected and hard to follow. Even with careful wording, 
you cannot prompt clear answers to your questions. The patient may seem pecu-
liar, distant, aloof, or inappropriate. Symptoms may seem bizarre: “My ﬁngernails 
feel too heavy” or “My stomach knots up like a snake.” Perhaps there is a mental 
status change like psychosis or delirium, a mental illness such as schizophrenia, 
or a neurologic disorder. Consider delirium in acutely ill or intoxicated patients 
and dementia in the elderly. Their histories are inconsistent and dates are hard to 
follow. Some may even confabulate to ﬁll in the gaps in their memories.
If you suspect a psychiatric or neurologic disorder, gathering a detailed history 
can tire and frustrate both you and the patient. Shift to the mental status exami-
nation, focusing on level of consciousness, orientation, memory, and capacity to 
understand. You can ease this transition by asking questions like “When was 
your last appointment at the clinic? Let’s see . . . that was about how long ago?” 
“Your address now is . . . ? . . . and your phone number?” You can conﬁrm these 
responses in the chart or ask permission to speak with family members or friends 
to obtain their perspectives.
The Patient with Altered Cognition. Some patients cannot provide 
their own histories because of delirium, dementia, or mental health conditions. 
See Table 20-2, Delirium and  
Dementia, p. 1001.
See Chapter 5, Behavior and Mental 
Status, The Mental Status Examina-
tion, pp. 147–171. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
88 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ADVANCED INTERVIEWING
Others are unable to remember certain parts of the history, such as events 
related to a febrile illness or a seizure. Under these circumstances, you will need 
to obtain historical information from other sources such as family members or 
caregivers. Always seek the best-informed source. Apply the basic principles of 
interviewing to your conversations with relatives or friends. Find a private place 
to talk. Introduce yourself, state your purpose, inquire how they are feeling 
under the circumstances, and recognize and acknowledge their concerns. As 
you listen to their accounts, assess their credibility in light of the quality of their 
relationship with the patient. Establish how they know the patient. For example, 
when a child is brought in for health care, the accompanying adult may not 
be the parent or caregiver, but just the most available driver. Remember that 
while you are gathering information about the history, you should not disclose 
information about the patient unless the informant is the health care proxy or 
has a durable power of attorney for health care, or you have permission from 
the patient. Learn the tenets of the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA) passed by Congress in 1996, which sets strict 
standards for disclosure for both institutions and providers when sharing 
patient information.61
Some patients can provide a history, but lack the ability to make informed health 
care decisions. You then need to determine whether a patient has “decision- 
making capacity,” which is the ability to understand information related to health, 
weigh choices and their consequences, reason through the options, and commu-
nicate a choice. Capacity is a clinical designation and can be assessed by clinicians, 
whereas competence is a legal designation and can only be decided by a court. If a 
patient lacks capacity to make a health care decision, then identify the health care 
proxy or the agent with power of attorney for health care. If the patient had not 
identiﬁed a surrogate decision-maker, then that role may shift to a spouse or 
family member. It is critical to remember that decision-making capacity is both 
“temporal and situational”:62 It can ﬂuctuate depending on the condition of the 
patient and the complexity of the decision involved. A patient who is quite ill 
may be unable to make decisions about care, but can regain capacity with clini-
cal improvement. A patient may be unable to make a complex decision, but still 
able to make simple decisions. Even if patients lack capacity for certain deci-
sions, it is still important to seek their input, as they may have deﬁnite opinions 
about their care.
Elements of Decision-Making Capacity
Patients must have the ability to:
● Understand the relevant information about proposed diagnostic tests or 
treatment,
● Appreciate their situation (including their underlying values and current  
clinical situation),
● Use reason to make a decision, and
● Communicate their choice.
Source: Sessums LL, Zembrzuska H, Jackson JL. Does This Patient Have Medical Decision-Making 
Capacity? JAMA. 2011;306:420.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  3 |
 
Interviewing and the Health History  
89
ADVANCED INTERVIEWING
The Aid to Capacity Evaluation (ACE)63 is an instrument that has been validated 
against a gold standard, is free and available online, can be performed in less than 
30 minutes, and uses the patient’s actual clinical scenario in the evaluation.
The Talkative Patient. The garrulous rambling patient is also challenging. 
Faced with limited time to “get the whole story,” you may grow impatient, even 
exasperated. Although this problem has no perfect solution, several techniques 
are helpful. Give the patient free rein for the ﬁrst 5 or 10 minutes, while listening 
closely. Perhaps the patient simply needs a good listener and is expressing 
pent-up concerns, or just enjoys telling stories. Does the patient seem obsessively 
detailed? Is the patient unduly anxious or apprehensive? Is there ﬂight of ideas 
or a disorganized thought process that suggests a thought disorder?
Focus on what seems most important to the patient. Show your interest by ask-
ing questions in those areas. Interrupt only if necessary, but be courteous. Learn 
to set limits when needed, since part of your task is structuring the interview to 
gain important information about the patient’s health. A brief summary may help 
you change the subject, yet validate any concerns. “Let me make sure that I 
understand. You have described many concerns. In particular, I heard about two 
different kinds of pain, one on your left side that goes into your groin and is fairly 
new, and one in your upper abdomen after you eat that you have had for months. 
Let’s focus just on the side pain ﬁrst. Can you tell me what it feels like?” Or you 
can ask the patient, “What is your #1 concern today?”
Finally, avoid showing impatience. If time runs out, explain the need for a sec-
ond visit and prepare the patient by setting a time limit. “I know we have much 
more to talk about. Can you come again next week? We will have a 30-minute 
visit then.”
The Crying Patient. Crying signals strong emotions, ranging from sadness 
to anger or frustration. Pausing, gentle probing, or responding with empathy 
gives the patient permission to cry. Usually crying is therapeutic, as is your quiet 
acceptance of the patient’s distress. Offer a tissue and wait for the patient to 
recover. Make a supportive remark like “I am glad you were able to express your 
feelings.” Most patients will soon compose themselves and resume their story. 
Crying makes many clinicians uncomfortable. If this is true for you, learn how 
to accept displays of emotion so you can support patients at these moving and 
signiﬁcant times.
The Angry or Disruptive Patient. Many patients have reasons to be 
angry: They are ill, they have suffered a loss, they have lost control of their health, 
or they feel overwhelmed by the health care system.26 They may direct this anger 
toward you. It is possible that their anger at you is justiﬁed . . . were you late 
for your appointment, inconsiderate, insensitive, or angry yourself? If so, 
acknowledge the situation and try to make amends. More often, however, 
patients displace their anger onto the clinician as a reﬂection of their frustration 
or pain.
Learn to accept angry feelings from patients without getting angry in return or 
retreating from the patient’s affect.64 Avoid reinforcing criticism of other clinicians, 
See Summarization, p. 72.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
90 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ADVANCED INTERVIEWING
the clinical setting, or the hospital, even if you feel sympathetic. You can validate 
patients’ feelings without agreeing with their reasons. “I understand that you felt 
frustrated by answering the same questions over and over. Repeating the same 
information to everyone on the team can seem unnecessary when you are sick.” 
After the patient has calmed down, help the patient to work through his or her 
angry feelings and move on to other concerns.
Some angry patients become overtly disruptive, belligerent, or out of control. 
Before approaching such patients, alert the security staff; ensuring a safe environ-
ment is one of your responsibilities. Stay calm and avoid being confrontational. 
Keep your posture relaxed and nonthreatening. At ﬁrst, do not try to make dis-
ruptive patients lower their voices or stop threatening you or the staff. Listen 
carefully. Try to understand what they are saying. Once you have established 
rapport, gently suggest moving to a more private location.
The Patient with a Language Barrier. Nothing makes the importance of 
the history more evident than being unable to communicate with the patient, an 
increasingly common experience. In 2011, the Census Bureau reported that more 
than 60 million Americans speak a language other than English at home. Of these, 
more than 20% have limited English proﬁciency. Spanish is the primary non-English 
language, spoken by 37 million Americans.65 These individuals are less likely to have 
regular primary or preventive care and more likely to experience dissatisfaction and 
adverse outcomes from clinical errors. Learning to work with qualiﬁed interpreters is 
essential for optimal outcomes and cost-effective care.66–70 Experts take this one step 
further, “If it isn’t culturally and linguistically appropriate, it isn’t health care.”71
If your patient speaks a different language, make every effort to ﬁnd a trained 
interpreter. A few words of clinical Spanish may enhance rapport, but they are 
no substitute for the full story. Even if you are ﬂuent, you may miss important 
nuances in the meanings of certain words.72 Recruiting family members as 
translators is equally hazardous—it may violate conﬁdentiality, and information 
may be incomplete, misleading, or harmful. Lengthy patient explanations may 
be telescoped into a few words, omitting signiﬁcant details. The ideal inter-
preter is a “cultural navigator” who is neutral and trained in both languages and 
cultures.73,74 However, even trained interpreters may be unfamiliar with the 
multiple subcultures in many societies.
When you work with an interpreter, begin by establishing rapport and reviewing 
the information that will be most useful. Ask the interpreter to translate everything, 
not to condense or summarize. Make your questions clear, short, and simple. Help 
the interpreter by outlining your goals for each segment of the history. After going 
over your plans, arrange the seating so that you have easy eye contact with the 
patient. Then speak directly to the patient… “How long have you been sick?” rather 
than “How long has the patient been sick?” Having the interpreter sit close to the 
patient, or even behind you, keeps you from turning your head back and forth.
When available, bilingual written questionnaires are invaluable, especially for 
the review of systems. First, however, be sure that patients can read in their lan-
guage; otherwise, ask the interpreter for help. In some clinical settings, use 
speakerphone translators, if available.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  3 |
 
Interviewing and the Health History  
91
ADVANCED INTERVIEWING
Guidelines for Working with an  
Interpreter: “INTERPRET”
I
Introductions: Make sure to introduce all the individuals in the room. Dur-
ing the introduction, include information as to the roles individuals will play.
N
Note Goals: Note the goals of the interview. What is the diagnosis? What 
will the treatment entail? Will there be any follow-up?
T
Transparency: Let the patient know that everything said will be inter-
preted throughout the session.
E
Ethics: Use qualiﬁed interpreters (not family members or children) when 
conducting an interview. Qualiﬁed interpreters allow the patient to 
maintain autonomy and make informed decisions about his or her care.
R
Respect Beliefs: Limited English Proﬁcient (LEP) patients may have cultural 
beliefs that need to be taken into account as well. The interpreter may be able 
to serve as a cultural broker and help explain any cultural beliefs that may exist.
P
Patient Focus: The patient should remain the focus of the encounter. 
Providers should interact with the patient and not the interpreter. Make 
sure to ask and address any questions the patient may have before end-
ing the encounter. If you don’t have trained interpreters on staﬀ, the 
patient may not be able to call in with questions.
R
Retain Control: It is important as the provider that you remain in control 
of the interaction and not let the patient or the interpreter take over the 
conversation.
E
Explain: Use simple language and short sentences when working with an 
interpreter. This will ensure that comparable words can be found in the 
second language and that all the information can be conveyed clearly.
T
Thanks: Thank the interpreter and the patient for their time. On the 
chart, note that the patient needs an interpreter and who served as an 
interpreter this time.
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. INTERPRET tool: working with interpret-
ers in cultural settings. Available at https: www.google.com/#q = USDHHS+Interpret+Tool. 
Accessed January 11, 2015.
The Patient with Low Literacy or Low Health Literacy. Before 
giving written instructions, assess the patient’s ability to read. More than 14% of 
Americans, or 30 million people, are unable to read basic documents.75 Low 
literacy may explain why the patient has not taken medications or followed your 
recommendations.
To detect low literacy, you can ask about years completed in school, or “How is 
your reading?” You can ask “How comfortable are you with ﬁlling out health 
forms?” or check how well the patient reads written instructions. One rapid 
screen is to hand the patient a written text upside down—most patients will turn 
the page around immediately. Many patients are embarrassed about reading 
poorly. Be sensitive to their quandary, and do not confuse their degree of literacy 
with level of intelligence. Explore the reasons for impaired literacy—language 
barriers, learning disorders, poor vision, or level of education.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
92 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ADVANCED INTERVIEWING
Research shows that low health literacy, affecting 80 million Americans, leads to 
poor health outcomes and impaired use of health services.76 Health literacy goes 
beyond just reading. It includes the practical skills the patient needs to navigate 
the health care environment: print literacy, or the ability to interpret information 
in documents; numeracy, or the ability to use quantitative information for tasks 
like interpreting food labels or adhering to medication regimens; and oral  literacy, 
or the ability to speak and listen effectively.
The Patient with Hearing Loss. Approximately 9% of the U.S. population 
is deaf or hard of hearing. This population “is a heterogeneous group that includes 
persons who have varying degrees of hearing loss, use multiple languages, and 
belong to different cultures. Solutions to providing health care to one group from 
(this) population do not necessarily apply to the other groups. Factors that must 
be considered with this population include degree of hearing loss, age of onset of 
loss, preferred language, and psychological issues.”77 Communication and trust 
are special challenges, and the risk of mis communication is high.78 Even hearing-
impaired patients who use English may not follow standard English usage.
Find out the patient’s preferred method of communication. Learn whether the 
patient belongs to the deaf culture or the hearing culture, when the hearing 
loss occurred relative to the development of speech and language, and the 
kinds of schools the patient attended. Review responses to written question-
naires. Patients may use American Sign Language (ASL), a unique language with 
its own syntax. These patients typically have a low English reading level and 
prefer having certiﬁed ASL interpreters present during their visits.77 Other 
patients may use varying combinations of signs and speech. If working with an 
interpreter, adopt the principles identiﬁed earlier. Alternatively, time-consuming 
handwritten questions and answers may be the only solution.
Partial hearing deﬁcits vary. If the patient has a hearing aid, ﬁnd out if the 
patient is using it. Make sure it is working. For patients with unilateral hearing 
loss, sit on the hearing side. A person who is hard of hearing may not be aware 
of the problem, a situation you will have to address tactfully. Eliminate back-
ground noise from the television or hallway. Face patients who can read lips 
directly, in good light. Patients should put on their glasses to see cues that help 
them understand you. Speak at a normal volume and rate. Avoid letting your 
voice trail off at the ends of sentences, covering your mouth, or looking down 
at papers while speaking. Emphasize key points ﬁrst. Even the best lip readers 
comprehend only a part of what you say, so asking them to “teach back” is 
important. When closing, write out your instructions for them to take home.
The Patient with Impaired Vision. With blind patients, shake hands 
to establish contact and explain who you are and why you are there. If the room 
is unfamiliar, orient the patient to the surroundings and report if anyone else is 
present. If helpful, adjust the light. Encourage visually impaired patients to wear 
glasses whenever possible. Spend more time on verbal explanations because 
postures and gestures are unseen.
The Patient with Limited Intelligence. Patients of moderately limited 
intelligence can usually give adequate histories. If you suspect a disability, pay 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  3 |
 
Interviewing and the Health History  
93
ADVANCED INTERVIEWING
special attention to the patient’s school record and ability to function 
independently. How far have such patients gone in school? If they didn’t ﬁnish, 
why not? What kinds of courses have they taken? How did they do? Has any 
testing been done? Are they living alone? Do they need assistance with activities 
like transportation or shopping? The sexual history is equally important and 
often overlooked. Find out if the patient is sexually active and provide information 
about pregnancy or sexually transmitted infections (STIs), if needed.
If you are unsure about the patient’s level of intelligence, transition to the mental 
status examination and assess simple calculations, vocabulary, memory, and 
abstract thinking.
For patients with severe mental retardation, turn to family or caregivers for the 
history, but always show interest in the patient ﬁrst. Establish rapport, make eye 
contact, and engage in simple conversation. As with children, avoid “talking 
down” or condescending behavior. The patient, family members, caregivers, or 
friends will appreciate your respect.
The Patient with Personal Problems. Patients may ask you for advice 
about personal problems that fall outside the range of your clinical expertise. 
Should the patient quit a stressful job, for example, or move out of state? Instead 
of responding, ask about what alternatives that the patient has considered, related 
pros and cons, and others who have provided advice. Letting the patient talk 
through the problem with you is more therapeutic than giving your own opinions.
The Seductive Patient. Clinicians occasionally ﬁnd themselves physically 
attracted to their patients. Similarly, patients may make sexual overtures or 
exhibit ﬂirtatious behavior. The emotional and physical intimacy of the clinician–
patient relationship can lend itself to these sexual feelings.
If you become aware of such feelings, bring them to conscious level to keep them 
from affecting your professional behavior. Denial can heighten the risk of 
responding inappropriately. Any sexual contact or romantic relationship with 
patients is unethical; keep your relationship with the patient within professional 
bounds, and seek help if you need it.79–82
When patients are seductive, you may be tempted to ignore their behavior because 
you are not sure it really happened, or you are just hoping it will go away. Calmly 
but ﬁrmly set clear limits that your relationship is professional, not personal. If 
necessary, leave the room and ﬁnd a chaperone before you continue the visit. 
Think carefully about your own behavior. Has your clothing or demeanor been 
inappropriate? Have you been overly warm with the patient? It is your responsi-
bility to evaluate and avoid sending any misleading signals to the patient.
Sensitive Topics
Clinicians talk with patients about many sensitive topics. These discussions can 
be awkward when you are inexperienced or assessing patients you do not know 
well. Even seasoned clinicians are inhibited by societal constraints when discuss-
ing certain subjects: abuse of alcohol or drugs, sexual practices, death and dying, 
See Chapter 5, Behavior and Mental 
Status, pp. 147–171.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
94 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ADVANCED INTERVIEWING
ﬁnancial concerns, racial and ethnic bias, domestic violence, psychiatric illness, 
physical deformity, bowel function, and others. Many of these topics trigger 
strong personal responses related to family, cultural, and societal values. Mental 
illness, drug use during pregnancy, and same-sex practices are examples of issues 
that may evoke biases that affect your interaction with the patient (Fig. 3-9).
Several basic principles can help guide your response to sensitive topics:
F I G U R E  3 - 9 .  Maintain a 
nonjudgmental manner.
Guidelines for Broaching Sensitive Topics
● The single most important rule is to be nonjudgmental. Your role is to learn from 
the patient and help the patient achieve better health. Acceptance is the best 
way to reach this goal.
● Explain why you need to know certain information. This makes patients less 
apprehensive. For example, say to patients, “Because sexual practices put 
people at risk for certain diseases, I ask all of my patients the following  
questions.”
● Find opening questions for sensitive topics and learn the speciﬁc kinds of 
information needed for your shared assessment and plan.
● Consciously acknowledge whatever discomfort you are feeling. Denying your 
discomfort may lead you to avoid the topic altogether.
Look into strategies that help make you more comfortable when discussing sensitive 
areas. These include reading about these topics in clinical and lay literature; talking 
with colleagues and teachers about your concerns; taking courses that help you 
explore your feelings and reactions; and ultimately, reﬂecting on your own life expe-
rience. Take advantage of all these resources. If possible, listen to experienced clini-
cians as they approach these issues with patients, then practice similar techniques 
in your own discussions. Over time, your level of comfort will grow and expand.
The Sexual History. Exploring the sexual history can be life-saving. Sexual 
behaviors determine risks for pregnancy, STIs, and human immunodeﬁciency 
virus (HIV); good interviewing helps prevent or reduce these risks.83,84 Sexual 
practices may be directly related to the patient’s symptoms and integral to both 
diagnosis and treatment. Many patients express their concerns more freely when 
you ask about sexual health. In addition, sexual dysfunction may result from 
medications or clinical issues that can be readily corrected.
You can elicit the sexual history at multiple points in the interview. If the chief 
complaint involves genitourinary symptoms, include questions about sexual 
health as part of “expanding and clarifying” the patient’s story. For women, 
you can ask these questions during the Obstetric/Gynecologic section of the 
Past Medical History. You can include the sexual history in discussions about 
Health Maintenance, or in the Personal and Social History as you explore 
lifestyle issues and important relationships. In a comprehensive history, you 
can also ask about sexual practices during the Review of Systems. Do not 
forget to cover the sexual history in older patients and patients with disability 
or chronic illness.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  3 |
 
Interviewing and the Health History  
95
ADVANCED INTERVIEWING
An orienting sentence or two is often helpful. “To assess your risk for various 
diseases, I need to ask you some questions about your sexual health and prac-
tices” or “I routinely ask all patients about their sexual function.” For more 
speciﬁc complaints you might state, “To ﬁgure out why you have this discharge and 
what we should do, I need to ask some questions about your sexual activity.” If you 
are matter-of-fact, the patient is more likely to follow your lead. Use speciﬁc language. 
Refer to genitalia with explicit words such as penis or vagina and avoid phrases like 
“private parts.” Choose words that are understandable and explain what you mean. 
“By intercourse, I mean when a man inserts his penis into a woman’s vagina.”
Also ask about satisfaction with sexual activity. Review the examples of questions 
that follow. These questions are designed to help patients reveal their concerns.
The Sexual History: Sample Questions
● “When was the last time you had intimate physical contact with someone?” 
“Did that contact include sexual intercourse?” The term “sexually active” can 
be ambiguous. Patients have been known to reply, “No, I just lie there.”
● “Do you have sex with men, women, or both?” Patients may have same-sex 
partners, yet not consider themselves gay, lesbian, or bisexual. Some gay and 
lesbian patients have had opposite-sex partners.
● “How many sexual partners have you had in the last 6 months? In the last  
5 years? In your lifetime?” These questions make it easy for the patient to 
acknowledge multiple partners. Ask, “Have you had any new partners in the 
past 6 months?” If patients question why this information is important, 
explain that new partners or multiple partners over a lifetime can raise the 
risk for STIs. Ask about routine use of condoms. “How often do you use  
condoms?” is an open-ended question that does not presume an answer.
● It is important to ask all patients, “Do you have any concerns about HIV  
infection or AIDS?” since infection can occur in the absence of risk factors.
Note that these questions make no assumptions about marital status, sexual 
preference, or attitudes about pregnancy or contraception. Listen to each of the 
patient’s responses, and invite additional history as indicated. To elicit informa-
tion about sexual behaviors, you will need to ask more speciﬁc and focused 
questions than in other parts of the interview.
The Mental Health History. Cultural constructs of mental and 
physical illness vary widely, leading to differences in social acceptance and 
attitudes. Think how easy it is for patients to talk about diabetes and taking 
insulin compared with discussing schizophrenia and using psychotropic 
medications. Ask open-ended questions initially. “Have you ever had any 
problem with emotional or mental illnesses?” Then move to more speciﬁc 
questions such as “Have you ever seen a counselor or psychotherapist?” “Have 
you ever taken medication for a mental health condition?” “Have you ever 
been hospitalized for an emotional or mental health problem?” “What about 
members of your family?”
See specific questions in Chapter 13, 
Male Genitalia and Hernias, pp. 541–
563, and Chapter 14, Female Genitalia, 
pp. 565–606.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
96 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ADVANCED INTERVIEWING
For patients with depression or thought disorders such as schizophrenia, take a 
careful history of their symptoms and course of illness. Watch for mood changes 
or symptoms such as fatigue, unusual tearfulness, appetite or weight changes, 
insomnia, and vague somatic complaints. Two validated screening questions for 
depression are: “Over the past 2 weeks, have you felt down, depressed, or hope-
less?” and “Over the past 2 weeks, have you felt little interest or pleasure in 
doing things?”85 If the patient seems depressed, always ask about suicide: “Have 
you ever thought about hurting yourself or ending your life?” As with chest pain, 
you must evaluate severity—both depression and angina are potentially lethal.
Many patients with psychotic disorders like schizophrenia are living in the 
community and can tell you about their diagnoses, symptoms, hospitalizations, 
and current medications. Investigate whether their symptoms and level of func-
tion are stable and review their support systems and plan of care.
Alcohol and Prescription and Illicit Drugs. Many clinicians hesitate 
to ask patients about excess use of alcohol and prescribed or illicit drugs. The 
prevalence of substance abuse and dependence remains high. In 2013, 21.6 
million Americans, or 8.2% of persons aged 12 years and older, were classiﬁed 
with a substance abuse or dependence disorder, including 14.7 million people 
with alcohol abuse or dependence, 2.6 million with alcohol and illicit drug 
abuse or dependence, and 4.3 million with illicit drug abuse or dependence. 
Abuse of prescribed pain medications is also increasing, now numbering 
about 1.9 million people.86 Roughly 28% of Americans aged 12 years or older 
report binge or heavy drinking, and almost 3%, or 7 million, have used 
prescription drugs for nonclinical reasons, especially pain relievers, stimulants, 
and antidepressants.39,87,88 The high prevalence of substance abuse makes it is 
essential to routinely assess current and past use of alcohol and drugs, patterns 
of use, and family history. Be familiar with current deﬁnitions of addiction, 
dependence, and tolerance.
Turn to Chapter 5, Behavior and Mental 
Status, for discussions of depression, 
suicidality, and psychotic disorders, 
pp. 147–171.
Addiction, Physical Dependence, and Tolerance
Tolerance: A state of adaptation in which exposure to a drug induces changes 
that result in a diminution of one or more of the drug’s effects over time.
Physical Dependence: A state of adaptation that is manifested by a drug class-
specific withdrawal syndrome that can be produced by abrupt cessation, 
rapid dose reduction, decreasing blood level of the drug, and/or administra-
tion of an antagonist.
Addiction: A primary, chronic, neurobiologic disease, with genetic, psychoso-
cial, and environmental factors influencing its development and manifesta-
tions. It is characterized by behaviors that include one or more of the 
following: impaired control over drug use, compulsive use, continued use 
despite harm, and craving.
Source: American Pain Society. Deﬁnitions Related to the Use of Opioids for the Treatment of 
Pain. A consensus statement from the American Academy of Pain Medicine, the American Pain 
Society, and the American Society of Addiction Medicine, 2001. Available at http://www.asam.
org/docs/public-policy-statements/1opioid-deﬁnitions-consensus-2–011.pdf?sfvrsn=0. Accessed 
January 13, 2015.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  3 |
 
Interviewing and the Health History  
97
ADVANCED INTERVIEWING
Alcohol. Questions about alcohol and other drugs follow naturally after 
questions about caffeine and cigarettes. “Tell me about your use of alcohol” is an 
opening query that avoids the easy yes-no response. Remember that some 
patients do not consider wine or beer as “alcohol.” Positive answers to two addi-
tional questions are highly suspicious for problem-drinking: “Have you ever had 
a drinking problem?” and “When was your last drink?”, especially if the night 
before.89 The most widely used screening questions are the CAGE questions 
about Cutting down, Annoyance when criticized, Guilty feelings, and Eye-
openers. The CAGE Questionnaire is readily available online.
Two or more afﬁrmative answers to the CAGE Questionnaire suggest alcohol 
misuse and have a sensitivity that ranges from 43% to 94% and speciﬁcity ranging 
from 70% to 96%.90,91 Several well-validated short screening tests, such as the 
MAST (Michigan Alcohol Screening Test) and the AUDIT (Alcohol Use Disorders 
Identiﬁcation Test), are also helpful.92 If you detect misuse, ask about blackouts 
(loss of memory about events during drinking), seizures, accidents or injuries 
while drinking, job problems, and conﬂict in personal relationships.
Illicit Drugs. The National Institute on Drug Abuse recommends ﬁrst ask-
ing a highly sensitive and speciﬁc single question: “How many times in the past 
year have you used an illegal drug or used a prescription medication for non-
clinical reasons?”93,94 If there is a positive response, ask speciﬁcally about non-
clinical use of illicit and prescription drugs: “In your lifetime have you ever used: 
marijuana; cocaine; prescription stimulants; methamphetamines; sedatives or 
sleeping pills; hallucinogens like lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), ecstasy, 
mushrooms…; street opioids like heroin or opium; prescription opioids like 
fentanyl, oxycodone, hydrocodone…; or other substances.” For those answering 
yes, a series of further questions is recommended.93
Another approach is to modify the CAGE questions by adding “or drugs” to each 
question. Once you identify substance abuse, probe further with questions like 
“Are you always able to control your use of drugs?” “Have you had any bad reac-
tions?” “What happened . . . Any drug-related accidents, injuries, or arrests? Job 
or family problems?” . . . “Have you ever tried to quit? Tell me about it.”
Intimate Partner Violence and Domestic Violence. Intimate partner 
violence is the leading cause of serious injury and the second leading cause of death 
among U.S. women of reproductive age.95 Each year, more than 12 million U.S. 
women and men experience rape, physical violence, or stalking by an intimate 
partner; these are groups that experience high rates of mental health disorders and 
substance abuse.96,97 Prevalence varies from 20% in general practice settings to over 
30% in emergency rooms and orthopedic clinics.98–100 The U.S. Preventive Services 
Task Force and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologist recommend 
routine screening of all women of childbearing age for intimate partner violence 
and providing or referring those who screen positive for intervention services.101,102 
Elders are also highly vulnerable to neglect and abuse.103–105
Sensitive interviewing is essential, since even with skilled inquiry, only 25% 
of patients disclose their abuse experience.106,107 The type of questioning is 
important. Experts recommend beginning with normalizing statements such as 
National Institute of Alcohol Abuse 
and Alcoholism Definitions of Drink-
ing at Low Risk for Developing and 
Alcohol Use Disorder
● Men: no more than 4 drinks on a 
single day or 14 drinks a week
● Women: no more than 3 drinks on a 
single day or 7 drinks a week
● Healthy adults over age 65 years 
and not taking medications: no 
more than 3 drinks on a single day 
or 7 drinks a week
● 1 drink is defined as 12 ounces of 
beer, 5 ounces of wine, or 1.5 ounces 
of spirits
Source: National Institute of Alcohol Abuse 
and Alcoholism, Drinking levels deﬁned. Avail-
able at http://www.niaaa.nih.gov/alcohol-
health/overview-alcohol-consumption/
moderate-binge-drinking. Accessed January 14, 
2015.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
98 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ADVANCED INTERVIEWING
“Because abuse is common in many women’s lives, I’ve begun to ask about it 
routinely.” Disclosure is more likely when probing questions lead and then in-
depth direct questions follow. “Are you in a relationship where you have been hit 
or threatened?” with a pause to encourage the patient to respond. If the patient 
says no, continue with “Has anyone ever treated you badly or made you do 
things you don’t want to?” or “Is there anyone you are afraid of?” or “Have you 
ever been hit, kicked, punched, or hurt by someone you know?” Following 
disclosure, empathic validating and nonjudgmental responses are critical, but 
currently occur less than half the time.
Clues to Physical and Sexual Abuse. Be alert to the unspoken clues to 
abuse, often present in the growing numbers of victims of human sex trafﬁcking 
in the United States and internationally, estimated at 50,000 women and chil-
dren annually in the United States alone.108,109
See also Chapter 18, Assessing Chil-
dren, Infancy Through Adolescence, 
Table 18-11, Physical Signs of Sexual 
Abuse, p. 921.
Clues to Physical and Sexual Abuse
● Injuries that are unexplained, seem inconsistent with the patient’s story, are 
concealed by the patient, or cause embarrassment
● Delay in getting treatment for trauma
● History of repeated injuries or “accidents”
● Presence of alcohol or drug abuse in patient or partner
● Partner tries to dominate the visit, will not leave the room, or seems unusually 
anxious or solicitous
● Pregnancy at a young age; multiple partners
● Repeated vaginal infections and STIs
● Diﬃculty walking or sitting due to genital/anal pain
● Vaginal lacerations or bruises
● Fear of the pelvic examination or physical contact
● Fear of leaving the examination room
See Chapter 18, Assessing Children: 
Infancy Through Adolescence,  
pp. 799–925.
When you suspect abuse, it is important to spend part of the visit alone with the 
patient. You can use the transition to the physical examination as a reason to ask 
others to leave the room. If the patient is also resistant, do not force the situation, 
potentially placing the victim in jeopardy. Be attuned to diagnoses that have a 
higher association with abuse, such as pregnancy and somatic symptom disorder.
To begin screening for child abuse, ask parents about their approach to discipline. 
Ask how they cope with a baby who will not stop crying or a child who misbe-
haves: “Most parents get very upset when their baby cries (or their child has been 
naughty). How do you feel when your baby cries?” “What do you do when your 
baby won’t stop crying?” “Do you have any fears that you might hurt your child?”
Death and the Dying Patient. There is a growing and important emphasis 
in health care education on improving care for dying patients and their families. 
Many studies have advanced our understanding of palliative care and set standards 
for quality care.110,111 Even as beginning students, working through your own 
feelings about death and dying and acquiring basic skills to ensure good 
For discussion of end-of-life decision-
making, grief and bereavement, and 
advance directives, turn to Chapter 20, 
The Older Adult, pp. 975–976.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  3 |
 
Interviewing and the Health History  
99
ADVANCED INTERVIEWING
communication are important, as you will come into contact with patients of all 
ages near the end of their lives. Studies show that clinicians are still not 
communicating effectively with patients and families about how to manage 
symptoms and their preferences for care. Clinician interventions that improve 
symptoms and avoid hospitalization reduce grief and bereavement, improve 
outcomes and quality of care, reduce costs, and sometimes even prolong 
survival.111–113
For those facing death and their survivors, there are overlapping and sometimes 
prolonged phases of anticipatory grief and bereavement.114 Kübler-Ross pro-
vided the classical description of the stages in our response to loss or the antic-
ipatory grief of impending death: denial and isolation, anger, bargaining, 
depression or sadness, and acceptance.115 These stages may occur sequentially 
or in any order or combination. Offer openings for patients and family members 
to talk about their feelings and ask questions. As deﬁned by the World Health 
Organization, your goal is “the prevention and relief of suffering by means of 
early identiﬁcation and impeccable assessment and treatment of pain and other 
problems, physical, psychosocial, and spiritual.”116 Ask, “I wonder if you have 
concerns about your illness? . . . your pain? . . . your preferences for treatment?” 
Provide the information requested and demonstrate your commitment to sup-
port and coordinate the patient’s care throughout the illness. Dying patients 
rarely want to talk about their illnesses at each encounter, nor do they wish to 
conﬁde in everyone they meet. If they wish to stay at a social level, respect their 
preferences. A smile, a touch, an inquiry about a family member, a comment on 
the day’s events, or even gentle humor conveys your concern and responsiveness. 
Clarifying the patient’s wishes about treatment at the end of life is an important 
responsibility. Failing to facilitate end-of-life decision-making is widely viewed as 
a ﬂaw in clinical care. The health status of the patient and the health care setting 
often determine what needs to be discussed. For patients who are acutely ill and 
in the hospital, discussions about how to respond to a cardiac or respiratory arrest 
are usually mandatory. Asking about Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) status is often difﬁ-
cult if you have not had a previous relationship with the patient or are unsure of 
the patient’s understanding of the illness. The media give many patients an unre-
alistic view of the effectiveness of resuscitation. Explore, “What experiences have 
you had with the death of a close friend or relative?” “What do you know about 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)?” Educate patients about the likely success 
of CPR, especially if they are chronically ill or advanced in age. Assure them that 
relieving pain and taking care of their spiritual and physical needs will be a priority.
In general, it is important to encourage any adult, but especially the elderly or 
chronically ill, to establish a health proxy who can act as the patient’s health deci-
sion maker. This part of the interview can be a “values history” that identiﬁes 
what is important to the patient and makes life worth living, and when living 
would no longer be worthwhile. Ask how patients spend their time every day, 
what they enjoy, and what they look forward to. Make sure to clarify the meaning 
of statements like, “You said that you don’t want to be a burden to your family. 
What exactly do you mean by that?” Explore the patient’s religious or spiritual 
beliefs so that you and the patient can make the most appropriate decisions 
about health care.
See discussion of the Patient with 
Altered Cognition, pp. 87–89.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
100 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ETHICS AND PROFESSIONALISM
Clinical ethics come into play scores of times each day in almost every patient 
interaction.117–119 The power of clinician–patient communication calls for guid-
ance beyond our innate sense of morality.120 Ethics are a set of principles crafted 
through reﬂection and discussion to deﬁne right and wrong. Clinical ethics, which 
guide our professional behavior, are neither static nor simple, but several prin-
ciples have guided clinicians throughout the ages. Although often your sense of 
right and wrong may be all that you need, even as students, you will face deci-
sions that call for the application of ethical principles.
Some of the traditional and still fundamental maxims embedded in the healing 
professions are listed below. This body of ethics has been termed “principalism.” 
As the ﬁeld of clinical ethics expands, other ethical systems come in use: utili-
tarianism, or providing the greatest good for the greatest number, building on the 
work of John Stuart Mill; feminist ethics, which invoke problems of marginaliza-
tion of social groups; casuistry, or the analysis of paradigmatic prior cases as rel-
evant; and communitarianism, which emphasizes the interests of communities 
and societies over individuals and social responsibilities bearing on the need to 
maintain the institutions of civil society.121
Building Blocks of Professional  
Ethics in Patient Care
● Nonmaleﬁcence or primum non nocere is commonly stated as, “First, do no 
harm.” In the context of the interview, giving information that is incorrect or 
not really related to the patient’s problem can do harm. Avoiding relevant 
topics or creating barriers to open communication can also do harm.
● Beneﬁcence is the dictum that the clinician acts in the best interest of the 
patient.
● Autonomy reminds us that informed patients have the right to make their 
own clinical decisions. This principle has become increasingly important over 
time and is consistent with collaborative rather than paternalistic clinician–
patient relationships.
● Conﬁdentiality can be one of the most challenging principles. As a clinician, 
you are obligated not to repeat what you learn from or know about a patient. 
This privacy is fundamental to our professional relationships with patients. 
In the ﬂurry of daily patient care, it is all too easy to let something slip. You 
must be on your guard. Note that some frameworks posit Justice as the 
fourth critical principle, namely that all patients be treated fairly with  
equitable distribution of health care resources.122
Ethics and Professionalism
As students, you are exposed to some of the ethical challenges that you will 
encounter later as practicing clinicians. However, there are dilemmas unique to 
students that you will face from the time that you begin taking care of patients. 
The following vignettes capture some common experiences. They raise a variety 
of interconnected ethical and practical issues.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  3 |
 
Interviewing and the Health History  
101
ETHICS AND PROFESSIONALISM
Here you are confronted with the tension between the need to learn by doing and 
doing no harm to patients. There is a utilitarian ethical principle that reminds us 
that if clinicians-in-training do not learn, there will be no future caregivers. Yet, 
the dictums to do no harm and prioritize what is in the patient’s best interests are 
clearly in conﬂict with that future need. This dilemma will arise often while you 
are a student.
The means to address this ethical dilemma is to obtain informed consent. Always 
make sure the patient realizes that you are in training and new at patient evalu-
ation (Fig. 3-10). It is impressive how often patients willingly let students be 
involved in their care; it is an opportunity for patients to give back to their care-
givers. Even when clinical activities appear purely for educational purposes, 
there may be a beneﬁt to the patient. Multiple caregivers provide multiple per-
spectives, and the experience of being heard and having a special advocate can 
be therapeutic.
Ethics and Professionalism: Scenario 1
You are a third-year clinical student on your ﬁrst clinical rotation in the hospital. 
It is late in the evening when you are ﬁnally assigned to the patient you are to 
“work up” and present the next day at preceptor rounds. You go to the patient’s 
room and ﬁnd the patient exhausted from the day’s events and ready to settle 
down for the night. You know that your intern and attending physician have 
already done their evaluations. Do you proceed with a history and physical that 
is likely to take 1 to 2 hours? Is this process only for your education? Do you ask 
permission before you start? What do you include?
F I G U R E  3 - 1 0 .  Obtain informed 
consent from patients when needed.
Ethics and Professionalism: Scenario 2
It is after 10 pm, and you and your resident are on the way to complete the 
required advance directives form with a frail, elderly patient who was admitted 
earlier that day with bilateral pneumonia. The form, which includes a discussion 
of DNR orders, must be completed before the team can sign out and leave for 
the day. Just then, your resident is paged to an emergency and asks you to go 
ahead and meet with the patient to complete the form; the resident will cosign 
it later. You had a lecture on advance directives and end-of-life discussions in 
your ﬁrst year of training, but have never seen a clinician discuss these issues 
with a patient. You have not yet met the patient, nor have you had a chance to 
really look at the form. What should you do? Do you inform the resident that 
you have never done this before or even seen it done? Do you inform the patient 
that this is totally new for you? Who should decide whether you are competent 
to do this independently?
In this situation, you are being asked to take responsibility for clinical care that 
exceeds your level of comfort and perhaps your competence. This can happen 
in a number of situations, such as being asked to evaluate a clinical situation 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
102 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ETHICS AND PROFESSIONALISM
without proper back-up or to draw blood or start an IV before practicing under 
supervision. You may have many of the following thoughts about this patient: 
“the patient needs to have this completed before going to sleep and so will ben-
eﬁt”; “the risk to the patient from discussing advance directives is minimal”; “you 
are pretty good with elderly patients and think that you might be able to do this”; 
“what if the patient actually arrests that night and you are responsible for what 
happens?”; and ﬁnally, “if you bother the resident now, he or she will be angry 
and that may affect your evaluation.” There is educational value in being pushed 
to the limits of your knowledge to solve problems and to gain conﬁdence in 
functioning independently. But what is the right thing to do in this situation?
The principles listed on page 100 only partially help you sort this out, because only 
part of your quandary relates to your relationship with the patient. Much of the 
tension in this scenario involves the dynamics of a health care team and your role 
as a team member. You are there to help with the work, but you are primarily there 
to learn. Current formulations of clinical ethics address those issues and others. 
One such formulation is the Tavistock Principles.123 These principles construct a 
framework for analyzing health care situations that extend beyond our direct care 
of individual patients to complicated choices about the interactions of health care 
teams and the distribution of resources for the well-being of society. A broadly 
representative group, which initially met in Tavistock Square in London in 1998, 
has continued to develop an evolving document of ethical principles for guiding 
health care behavior for both individuals and institutions across the health care 
spectrum. A current iteration of the Tavistock Principles follows.
The Tavistock Principles
Rights: People have a right to health and health care.
Balance: Care of the individual patient is central, but the health of populations is 
also our concern.
Comprehensiveness: In addition to treating illness, we have an obligation to ease 
suffering, minimize disability, prevent disease, and promote health.
Cooperation: Health care succeeds only if we cooperate with those we serve, 
each other, and those in other sectors.
Improvement: Improving health care is a serious and continuing responsibility.
Safety: Do no harm.
Openness: Being open, honest, and trustworthy is vital in health care.
In the second scenario, think about the Tavistock Principles of openness and 
cooperation, in addition to the balance between do no harm and beneﬁcence. You 
need to work with your team in a way that is honest and reliable to do the best 
for the patient (Fig. 3-11). You can also see that there are no clear or easy answers 
in such situations. What responses are available to you to address these and other 
quandaries?
You need to reﬂect on your beliefs and assess your level of comfort with a given 
situation. Sometimes there may be alternative solutions. For example, in Scenario 1, 
F I G U R E  3 - 1 1 .  Apply ethical 
principles to difﬁcult decisions.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  3 |
 
Interviewing and the Health History  
103
ETHICS AND PROFESSIONALISM
the patient may really be willing to have the history and physical examination 
at that late hour, or perhaps you can negotiate a time for the next morning. In 
Scenario 2, you might ﬁnd another person who is more qualiﬁed to complete 
the form or supervise you. Alternatively, you may choose to go ahead and 
complete the form, focusing on open communication, and alerting the patient 
to your inexperience while obtaining the patient’s consent. You will need to 
choose when situations warrant voicing your concerns, even at the risk of a 
bad evaluation.
Seek coaching on how to express your reservations in a way that ensures that 
they will be heard. As a clinical student, you will need settings for discussing 
these immediately relevant ethical dilemmas with other students and with more 
senior trainees and faculty. Small groups that are structured to address these 
kinds of issues are particularly useful in providing validation and support. Take 
advantage of such opportunities whenever possible.
Ethics and Professionalism: Scenario 3
You are the student on the clinical team that has been taking care of Ms. Robbins, 
a 64-year-old woman admitted for an evaluation of weight loss and weakness. 
During the hospitalization, she had a biopsy of a mass in her chest in addition to 
many other tests. You have gotten to know her well, spending a lot of time with 
her to answer questions, explain procedures, and learn about her and her family. 
You have discussed her fears about what “they” will ﬁnd and know that she likes 
to know everything possible about her health and clinical care. You have even 
heard her express frustration with her attending physician at not always getting 
the “straight story.” It is late Friday afternoon, but you promised Ms. Robbins 
that you would come by one more time before the weekend and let her know if 
her biopsy results were back yet. Just before you go to her room, the resident 
tells you that the pathology is back from her biopsy and shows metastatic can-
cer, but the attending physician does not want the team to say anything until he 
comes in on Monday.
What are you going to do? You feel that it is wrong to avoid the situation by 
not going to her room. You also believe that the patient’s preference and anxiety 
are best served by not waiting for 3 days. You do not want to go against the 
attending physician’s clear instructions, however, because you respect the fact 
that it is his patient.
In this situation, telling the patient about her biopsy results is dictated by several 
ethical principles: the patient’s best interests, autonomy, and your integrity. The 
other part of the ethical dilemma concerns communicating your plan to the 
attending. Sometimes, the most challenging part of such dilemmas tests your will 
to follow through with the right course of action. Although it may appear to be 
a lose–lose situation, a respectful and honest discussion with the attending, artic-
ulating what is in the patient’s best interest, will usually be heard. Enlist the sup-
port of your resident or other helpful attendings if that is possible. Learning how 
to navigate difﬁcult discussions will be a useful professional skill.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
104 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 3-1 Motivational Interviewing: A Clinical Example
The police brought a 40-year-old woman to the psychiatric 
emergency room because while intoxicated she threatened to 
kill her partner and herself. She had no history of violence or of 
legal or psychiatric problems. When she became sober the next 
day, she reported calmly that she was an alcoholic and was not 
violent and had no intention of hurting herself. She wanted to 
be discharged. The typical psychiatric approach to this problem 
would be a combination of education and confrontation; the 
psychiatrist would explain the dangers of alcoholism to the pa-
tient and encourage her to seek treatment, handing her a list of 
alcohol treatment centers.
In contrast, the actual motivational interviewing (MI) conver-
sation proceeded like this:
Patient: I am an alcoholic and don’t want to change. I am not 
dangerous; just let me go home now.
Psychiatrist: OK, that’s what we’ll do. We can’t force you to 
change. Can I just ask you a few questions and then we’ll let 
you out of here?
(MI: Respect for autonomy—the psychiatrist respects the indi-
vidual’s right to change or not make a change; collaboration—
the psychiatrist is equal to the patient in power and asks 
permission for further inquiry.)
Patient: OK.
Psychiatrist: I am interested in learning a little about your drinking. 
I understand you don’t want to change. So I am assuming that 
the alcohol is mostly a good thing in your life. I am wondering 
if there is anything not so good about the alcohol in your life?
(MI: Elicit ambivalence)
Patient: Well, they said my liver is not so good anymore. It’s 
going to fail if I don’t stop drinking.
Psychiatrist: OK, so that sounds like one part of the drinking that 
is not so good.
(MI: Explore ambivalence)
Source: Cole S, Bogenschutz M, Hungerford M. Motivational interviewing and psychiatry: use in addiction treatment, risky drinking and routine practice. Focus 
IX:42–52, 2011.
Patient: Right.
Psychiatrist: But it doesn’t sound important enough to make you 
want to change. I’m guessing that you don’t care so much 
whether your liver fails or not.
(MI: Not at all sarcastic here; really respecting her autonomy)
Patient: Well, I can’t live without a liver.
Psychiatrist: OK. Then it sounds like you don’t care much 
whether you live or die.
(MI: Again, not at all sarcastic; simply reﬂecting content and 
respecting autonomy)
Patient: No way! I love life!
Psychiatrist: Well, I’m not sure I understand then. On the one 
hand, you are very sure that you are not going to stop drink-
ing, yet you also say you love life and don’t want your liver to 
fail.
(MI: Develop discrepancy. Elicit change talk.)
Patient: Well, I know I’m going to have to cut down or stop 
sometime. This is just not the time.
Psychiatrist: OK. I hear what you are saying. You want to stop 
drinking at some point, to save your liver and save your life—
it’s just not the right time now.
(MI: Listen, understand, express empathy, and reﬂect feelings; 
respect autonomy.)
Patient: Right.
Psychiatrist: OK. Can I ask another question or two?…If you do 
think you’re going to stop at some point, I wonder what 
thoughts you’ve had about when and how you would like to 
stop drinking? Would you want or need any help if and when 
you decided to cut down or stop drinking?
(MI: Open questions for understanding; encourage change 
talk.)
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  3 |
 
Interviewing and the Health History  
105
Table 3-2  Brief Action Planning (BAP)—A Self-Management 
Support Tool
Brief Action Planning is structured around three core questions
1. ____ Elicit person’s preferences/desires for behavior change.
“Is there anything you would like to do for your health in the next week or two?”
____ What?
____ Where?
____ When?
____ How often?
____ Elicit commitment statement
“Just to make sure we understand each other, would you please tell me back what you’ve decided to do?”
2. ____ Evaluate conﬁdence
“I wonder how conﬁdent you feel about carrying out your plan. Considering a scale of 0 to 10, where ‘0’ means you are not at all conﬁdent 
and ‘10’ means you are very conﬁdent, about how conﬁdent do you feel?”
(If the conﬁdence level is less than 7, problem-solve how to overcome barriers or adjust the plan. “5 is great. A lot higher than zero. I 
wonder if there is any way we might modify the plan to get you to a level of ‘7’ or more? Maybe we could make the goal a little easier, or you 
could ask for help from a friend or family member, or even think of something else that might help you feel more conﬁdent?”
3. ____ Arrange a follow-up (or accountability).
“Sounds like a plan that’s going to work for you. When would you like to check in with me to review how you’re doing with your plan?”
Source: Steven Cole, Damara Gutnick, Connie Davis, Kathy Reims, Mary Cole BAP is a registered trademark of Steven Cole. ©2004–2012. Stevecolemd@gmail.
com. All rights reserved. BAP may be used in clinical practice, research, and education without permission. For further information, go to www.ComprehensiveMI.
com and www.centreCMI.ca. See also Gutnick D, Reims K, et al. Brief Action Planning to facilitate behavior change and support for self-management. JCOM 
2014;1:17. Available at http://www.centrecmi.ca/about-us/publications/. Accessed January 19, 2015. Originally developed circa 2004 by Steven Cole, with 
contributions by Mary Cole. Current version was developed with contributions from Damara Gutnick, Connie Davis, and Kathy Reims.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
106 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
References
 1. Suchman AL, Matthews DA. What makes the patient doctor rela-
tionship therapeutic? Exploring the connectional dimension of 
medical care. Ann Intern Med. 1988;108:125.
 2. Matthews DA, Suchman AL, Branch WT. Making “connexions”: 
enhancing the therapeutic potential of patient-clinician relation-
ships. Ann Intern Med. 1993;118:973.
 3. Larson EB, Yao X. Clinical empathy as emotional labor in the 
patient-physician relationship. JAMA. 2005;293:1100.
 
4. Krasner MS, Epstein RM, Beckman H, et al. Association of an educa-
tional program in mindful communication with burnout, empathy, 
and attitudes among primary care physicians. JAMA. 2009;302:1284.
 5. Stewart MA. Effective physician-patient communication and 
health outcomes: a review. CMAJ. 1995;152:1423.
 6. Dambha H, Grifﬁn S, Kinmonth AL. Patient-centered care in gen-
eral practice. InnovAIT, 0(0),1. doi:10.1177/1755738014544482.
 7. Reiss H, Kraft-Todd G. E.M.P.A.T.H.Y.: A tool to enhance nonver-
bal communication between clinicians and their patients. Acad 
Med. 2014;89:1108.
 8. Fortin AH VI, Dwamena FC, Frankel RM, et al. Smith’s Patient-
Centered Interviewing. An Evidence-Based Method. 3rd ed. Philadel-
phia, PA: McGraw Hill; 2012.
 9. Smith RC. An evidence-based infrastructure for patient-centered 
interviewing. In: Frankel FM, Quill TE, McDaniel SH eds. The 
Biopsychosocial Approach: Past, Present, and Future. Rochester, NY: 
University of Rochester Press; 2003:149.
 10. Haidet P, Paterniti DA. “Building” a History Rather Than “Taking” 
One: A Perspective on Information Sharing During the Medical 
Interview. Arch Intern Med. 2003;163:1134.
 11. Stewart M. Questions about patient-centered care: answers from 
quantitative research. In: Stewart M, et al. eds. Patient-centered 
Medicine: Transforming the Clinical Method. Abington, UK: Rad-
cliffe Medical Press; 2003:263.
 12. Atlas SJ, Grant RW, Ferris TG, et al. Patient-physician connected-
ness and the quality of primary care. Ann Intern Med. 2009;150:325.
 13. Haidet P. Jazz and the “Art” of Medicine: Improvisation in the 
Medical Encounter. Ann Fam Med. 2007;5:164.
 14. Behfourouz HL, Drain PK, Rhatigan JJ. Rethinking the social 
history. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:1277.
 15. Wagner EH, Austin BT, Korff MV. Organizing care for patients 
with chronic illness. Milbank Q. 1996;74:511.
 16. Coulehan JL, Block MR. The Medical Interview: Mastering Skills for 
Clinical Practice. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: F.A. Davis Company; 2006.
 17. Halpern J. What is clinical empathy? J Gen Intern Med. 2003;18:670.
 18. Halpern J. Empathy and patient-physician conﬂicts. J Gen Intern 
Med. 2007;22:696.
 19. Buckman R, Tulsky JA, Rodin G. Empathic responses in clinical 
practice: intuition or tuition? CMAJ. 2011;183:569.
 20. Egnew TR. Suffering, meaning, and healing: challenges of con-
temporary medicine. Ann Fam Med. 2009;2:170.
 21. Batt-Rawden SA, Chisholm MS, Anton B, et al. Teaching empathy 
to medical students: an updated, systematic review. Acad Med. 
2013;88:1171.
 22. Epner DE, Baile W. Difﬁcult conversations: teaching medical 
oncology trainees communication skills one hour at a time. Acad 
Med. 2014;89:578.
 23. Lipkin M Jr, Putnam SM, Lazare A, et al. eds. The Medical Interview: 
Clinical Care, Education, and Research. New York: Springer-Verlag; 1995.
 24. Tomsik PE, Witt AM, Raddock ML, et al. How well do physician 
and patient visit priorities align? J Fam Prac. 2014;63:E8.
 25. Makoul G, Zick A, Green M. An evidence-based perspective on 
greetings in medical encounters. Arch Int Med. 2007;167:1172.
 26. Platt FW, Gaspar DL, Coulehan JL, et al. “Tell me about yourself”: 
the patient-centered interview. Ann Intern Med. 2001;134:1079.
 27. Ventres W, Kooienga S, Vuvkovic N, et al. Physicians, patients and 
the electronic health record: an ethnographic analysis. Ann Fam 
Med. 2006;4:124.
 28. Beckman HB, Frankel RM. The effect of physician behavior on the 
collection of data. Ann Intern Med. 1984;101:692.
 29. Kleinman A, Eisenberg L, Good B. Culture, illness, and care: clin-
ical lessons from anthropological and cross-cultural research. Ann 
Intern Med. 1978;88:251.
 30. Mausch L, Farber S, Greer HT. Design, dissemination, and evalu-
ation of an advanced communication elective at seven U.S. medi-
cal schools. Acad Med. 2013;88:843.
 31. Jackson JL, Passamonti M, Kroenke K. Outcome and impact of 
mental disorders in primary care at 5 years. Psychosom Med. 
2007;69:270.
 32. Lang F, Floyd MR, Beine KL. Clues to patients’ explanations and 
concerns about their illnesses: a call for active listening. Arch Fam 
Med. 2000;9:222.
 33. Communication: What do patients want and need? J Oncol Pract. 
2008;4(5):249. doi:10.1200/JOP.0856501 PMCID: PMC2794010
 34. Pollak KI, Arnold RM, Jeffreys AS, et al. Oncologist communica-
tion about emotion during visits with patients with advanced 
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25(36):5748.
 35. Croskerry P. The importance of cognitive errors in diagnosis and 
strategies to minimize them. Acad Med. 2003;78:775.
 36. Barry MJ, Edgman-Levitan S. Shared decision making–pinnacle 
of patient-centered care. New Engl J Med. 2012;366:780.
 37. Elwyn G, Frosch D, Thomson R, et al. Shared decision-making: a 
model for clinical practice. J Gen Int Med. 2012;27:1361.
 38. Rollnick S, Butler CC, Kinnersly P, et al. Motivational interview-
ing. BMJ. 2010;340:c1900.
 39. Cole S, Bogenschutz M, Hungerford M. Motivational interviewing 
and psychiatry: use in addiction treatment, risky drinking and 
routine practice. Focus. 2011;IX:42.
 40. Hettema J, Steele J, Miller WR. Motivational interviewing. Ann Rev 
Clin Psychol. 2005;1:91.
 41. Lundahl B, Moleni T, Burke BL, et al. Motivational interviewing 
in medical care settings: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 
randomized controlled trial. Patient Educ Couns. 2013;93:157.
 42. Kripalani S, Jackson AT, Schnipper JL, et al. Promoting effective 
transitions of care at hospital discharge: A review of key issues for 
hospitalists. J Hosp Med. 2007;2:314.
 43. Kemp EC, Floyd MR, McCord-Duncan E, et al. Patients prefer the 
method of “Tell back-collaborative inquiry” to assess understand-
ing of medical information. J Am Board Fam Med. 2008;21:24.
 44. Epstein RM. Mindful practice. JAMA. 1999;282:833.
 45. Beach MC, Roter D, Korthuis PT, et al. A multicenter study of 
physician mindfulness and health care quality. Ann Fam Med. 
2013;11:421.
 46. Smedley BA, Stith AY, Nelson AR, eds. Committee on Understand-
ing and Eliminating Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health Care. 
Unequal Treatment: Confronting Racial and Ethnic Disparities in 
Health Care. Washington, DC: Institute of Medicine; 2003.
 47. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. 2013 National Healthcare Disparities 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  3 |
 
Interviewing and the Health History  
107
REFERENCES
Report. Available at http://www.ahrq.gov/research/ﬁndings/
nhqrdr/nhdr13/index.html. Accessed January 17, 2015.
 48. Like RC. Educating clinicians about cultural competence and dis-
parities in health and health care. J Contin Educ Health Prof. 
2011;31:196.
 49. Boutin-Foster C, Foster JC, Konopasek L. Viewpoint: physician, 
know thyself: the professional culture of medicine as a framework 
for teaching cultural competence. Acad Med. 2008;83:106.
 50. Teal CR, Street RL. Critical elements of culturally competent com-
munication in the medical encounter: a review and model. Soc Sci 
Med. 2009;68:533.
 51. Management Sciences for Health. The Providers’ Guide to Quality 
and Culture. What is cultural competence. Available at http://erc.
msh.org/mainpage.cfm?ﬁle=1.0.htm&module=provider&language 
=English. Accessed January 17, 2015.
 52. Silliman J, Fried MG, Ross L, et al. Ch. 1, Women of Color and Their 
Struggles for Reproductive Justice, in Undivided Rights–Women of 
Color Organize for Reproductive Justice. Cambridge, MA: South End 
Press; 2004:6.
 53. Kumas-Tan Z, Beagan B, Loppie C, et al. Measures of cultural com-
petence: examining hidden assumptions. Acad Med. 2007;82:548.
 54. Tervalon M, Murray-Garcia J. Cultural humility versus cultural com-
petence: a critical distinction in deﬁning physician training outcomes 
in multicultural education. J Health Care Poor Underserved. 1998;9:117.
 55. Tervalon M. Components of culture in health for medical stu-
dents’ education. Acad Med. 2003;78:570.
 56. Smith WR, Betancourt JR, Wynia MK, et al. Recommendations for 
teaching about racial and ethnic disparities in health and health 
care. Ann Intern Med. 2007;147:654.
 57. Center for Cultural Competence. Georgetown University Center for 
Child and Human Development. Available at http://nccc.georgetown.
edu/index.html. See also Self Assessments at http://nccc.georgetown.
edu/resources/assessments.html, Accessed January 18, 2015.
 58. Juarez JA, Marvel K, Brezinski KL, et al. Bridging the gap: a cur-
riculum to teach residents cultural humility. Fam Med. 2006;38:97.
 59. National Consortium for Multicultural Education for Health Pro-
fessionals. Available at http://culturalmeded.stanford.edu./ 
Accessed January 18, 2015.
 60. Jacobs EA, Rolle I, Ferrans CE, et al. Understanding African 
Americans’ views of the trustworthiness of physicians. J Gen Intern 
Med. 2006;21:642.
 61. Ofﬁce for Civil Rights–Health Insurance Portability and Account-
ability Act of 1996 (HIPAA), U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services. Available at http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/
index.html. Accessed January 18, 2015.
 62. Sessums LL, Zembrzuska H, Jackson JL. Does this patient have 
medical decision-making capacity? JAMA. 2011;306:420.
 63. Joint Centre for Bioethics, University of Toronto. The Aid to 
Capacity Evaluation (ACE). At http://www.jcb.utoronto.ca/tools/
ace_download.shtml. Accessed January 15, 2015.
 64. Markowitz JC, Milrod BL. The importance of responding to nega-
tive affect in psychotherapies. Am J Psychiatry. 2011;168:124.
 65. Ryan C. American Community Survey Reports, United States 
Census Bureau. Language use in the United States, 2011. Issued 
August 2013. Available at www.census.gov/prod/2013oubs/acc-
22.pdg. Accessed January 18, 2015.
 66. Karliner LS, Jacobs EA, Chen AH, et al. Do professional interpret-
ers improve clinical care for patients with limited English proﬁ-
ciency? A systematic review of the literature. Health Serv Res. 
2007;42:727.
 67. Thompson DA, Hernandez RG, Cowden JD, et al. Caring for 
patients with limited English proﬁciency: are residents prepared 
to use medical interpreters? Acad Med. 2013;88:1485.
 68. Schyve PM. Language differences as a barrier to quantity and 
safety in health care: the Joint Commission perspective. J Gen Int 
Med. 2007;22(Suppl 2):360.
 69. Jacobs EA, Sadowski LS, Rathous PJ. The impact of enhanced 
interpreter service intervention on hospital costs and patient sat-
isfaction. J Gen Intern Med. 2007;22 (Suppl 2):306.
 70. Hardt E, Jacobs EA, Chen A. Insights into the problems that lan-
guage barriers may pose for the medical interview. J Gen Intern 
Med. 2006;21:1357.
 71. Ofﬁce of Minority Health, Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices. Think Cultural Health. CLAS Standards; Communication 
Tools. Available at https://www.thinkculturalhealth.hhs.gov/ 
content/clas.asp. Accessed January 18, 2015.
 72. Brady AK. Medical Spanish. Ann Intern Med. 2010;152:127.
 73. Gregg J, Saha S. Communicative competence: a framework for 
understanding language barriers in health care. J Gen Int Med. 
2007;22(Suppl 2):368.
 74. Saha S, Fernandez A. Language barriers in health care. J Gen Int 
Med. 2007;22(Suppl 2):281.
 75. National Center for Education Statistics. National Assessment of 
Health Literacy, 2003 Survey. Available at http://nces.ed.gov/naal/
kf_demographics.asp. Accessed January 19, 2015.
 76. Berkman ND, Sheridan SL, Donahue KE, et al. Low health literacy 
and health outcomes: an updated systematic review. Ann Intern 
Med. 2011;155:97.
 77. Meador HE, Zazove P. Health care interactions with deaf culture. 
J Am Board Fam Pract. 2005;18:218.
 78. Barnett S, Klein JD, Pollard RQ Jr, et al. Community participatory 
research with deaf sign language users to identify health inequi-
ties. Am J Public Health. 2011;101:2235.
 79. Committee on Ethics, American College of Obstetricians and 
Gynecologists. ACOG Committee Opinion No. 373: Sexual mis-
conduct. Obstet Gynecol. 2007;110(2 Pt 1):441.
 80. Nadelson C, Notman MT. Boundaries in the doctor-patient rela-
tionship. Theor Med Bioeth. 2002;23:191.
 81. Gabbard GO, Nadelson C. Professional boundaries in the physi-
cian-patient relationship. JAMA. 1995;273(18):1445.
 82. Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs. American Medical Association: 
sexual misconduct in the practice of medicine. JAMA. 1991;266:2741.
 83. Coverdale JH, Franz CP, Balon R, et al. Teaching sexual history-
taking: a systematic review of educational programs. Acad Med. 
2011;86:1590.
 84. Shindel AW, Ando KA, Nelson CJ, et al. Medical student sexuality: 
How sexual experience and sexuality training impact U.S. and 
Canadian medical students’ comfort in dealing with patients’ 
sexuality in clinical practice. Acad Med. 2010;85:1321.
 85. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for depression: rec-
ommendations and rationale. 2002 (update pending). Available at 
http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Document/
RecommendationStatementFinal/depression-in-adults-screening. 
Accessed January 19, 2015.
 86. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 
Department of Health and Human Services. Results from the 
2013 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Summary of 
National Findings. Available at http://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/
default/files/NSDUHresultsPDFWHTML2013/Web/
NSDUHresults2013.pdf. Accessed January 15, 2015.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
108 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
 87. Medline Plus, National Institutes of Health. Prescription drug 
abuse: a fast-growing problem. Available at http://www.nlm.nih.
gov/medlineplus/magazine/issues/fall11/articles/fall11pg21.html. 
Accessed January 19, 2015.
 88. American Pain Society. Deﬁnitions Related to the Use of Opioids for 
the Treatment of Pain. A consensus statement from the American 
Academy of Pain Medicine, the American Pain Society, and the 
American Society of Addiction Medicine, 2001. Available at http://
www.asam.org/docs/publicy-policy-statements/1opioid-defini-
tions-consensus-2–011.pdf?sfvrsn = 0. Accessed January 15, 2015.
 89. Cyr MG, Wartman SA. The effectiveness of routine screening 
questions in the detection of alcoholism. JAMA. 1988;259:51.
 90. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening and behavioral coun-
seling interventions in primary care to reduce alcohol misuse: recom-
mendation statement. May 2013. Available at http://www.
uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Document/Recommenda-
tionStatementFinal/alcohol-misuse-screening-and-behavioral-coun-
seling-interventions-in-primary-care. Accessed January 19, 2015.
 91. Ewing JA. Detecting alcoholism: the CAGE questionnaire. JAMA. 
1984;252:1905.
 92. Friedman PD. Clinical practice. Alcohol use in adults. New Engl J 
Med. 2013;368:325.
 93. National Institute on Drug Abuse. Screening for drug use in gen-
eral medical settings. Updated March 2102. Available at http://
www.drugabuse.gov/publications/resource-guide-screening-
drug-use-in-general-medical-settings/nida-quick-screen. 
Accessed January 19, 2015.
 94. Smith PC, Schmidt SM, Allensworth-Davies D, et al. A single-
question screening test for drug use in primary care. Arch Intern 
Med. 2010;170:1155.
 95. Hewitt LN, Bhavsar P, Phelan HA. The secrets women keep: inti-
mate partner violence screening in the female trauma patient. 
J Trauma. 2011;70:320.
 96. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Understanding inti-
mate partner violence. Fact sheet 2014. Available at http://www.
cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pub/ipv_factsheet.html. Accessed 
January 19, 2015.
 97. Ahmad F, Hogg-Johnson S, Stewart DR, at al. Computer-assisted 
screening for intimate partner violence and control: a randomized 
trial. Ann Intern Med. 2009;151:93.
 98. Rees S, Silove D, Chey T, et al. Lifetime prevalence of gender-
based violence in women and the relationship with mental disor-
ders and psychosocial function. JAMA. 2011;306:513.
 99. Daugherty JD, Houry DE. Intimate partner violence screening in 
the emergency department. J Postgrad Med. 2008;54(4):301.
 100. Praise Investigators, Sprague S, Bhandari M, et al. Prevalence of 
abuse and intimate partner violence surgical evaluation (PRAISE) 
in orthopaedic fracture clinics: a multinational prevalence study. 
Lancet. 2013;382:866.
 101. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Intimate partner violence 
and abuse of elderly and vulnerable adults: screening. January 
2013. Available at http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/
Page/Document/RecommendationStatementFinal/intimate- 
partner-violence-and-abuse-of-elderly-and-vulnerable-adults-
screening. Accessed January 19, 2015.
 102. Moracco KE, Cole TB. Preventing intimate partner violence. 
Screening is not enough. JAMA. 2009;302:568.
 103. Acierno R, Hernandez MA, Amstadter AB, et al. Prevalence and 
correlates of emotional, physical, sexual, and ﬁnancial abuse and 
potential neglect in the United States: the National Elder Mistreat-
ment Study. Am J Public Health. 2010;100(2):292.
 104. Samaras N, Chevalley T, Samaras D, et al. Older patients in the 
emergency department: a review. Ann Emerg Med. 2010;56:261.
 105. Mosqueda L, Dong X. Elder abuse and self-neglect: “I don’t care 
anything about going to the doctor, to be honest…”. JAMA. 
2011;306:532.
 106. Alpert EJ. Addressing domestic violence: the (long) road ahead. 
Ann Intern Med. 2007;147:666.
 107. World Health Organization. Responding to intimate partner vio-
lence and sexual violence against women. WHO clinical and 
policy guidelines, 2013. Available at http://www.who.int/repro-
ductivehealth/publications/violence/9789241548595/en/. 
Accessed January 19, 2015.
 108. Hossain M, Zimmerman C, Abas M, et al. The relationship of 
trauma to mental disorders among trafﬁcked and sexually 
exploited girls and women. Am J Public Health. 2010;100:2442.
 109. Logan TK, Walker R, Hunt G. Understanding human trafﬁcking 
in the United States. Trauma Violence Abuse. 2009;10:3.
 110. National Consensus Project for Quality Palliative Care. Clinical 
practice guidelines for quality palliative care. 3rd ed. 2013. Avail-
able at http://www.nationalconsensusproject.org/guidelines_
download2.aspx. Accessed January 14, 2015.
 111. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Improving health 
care and palliative care for advanced and serious illness. Closing 
the quality gap. October 2012. Available at http://www.ahrq.gov/
research/findings/evidence-based-reports/gappallcaretp.html. 
Accessed January 14, 2015.
 112. Bakitas M, Lyons KD, Hegel MT, et al. Effects of a palliative care 
intervention on clinical outcomes in patients with advanced can-
cer: the Project ENABLE II randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 
2009;302:741.
 113. Casarett D, Pickard A, Bailey FA, et al. Do palliative consultations 
improve patient outcomes? J Am Geriatr Soc. 2008;56:593.
 114. Maciejewski PK, Zhang B, Block SD, et al. An empirical examina-
tion of the stage theory of grief. JAMA. 2007;297:16.
 115. Kübler-Ross E. On Death and Dying. New York: Macmillan; 1997.
 116. World Health Organization. WHO Deﬁnition of Palliative Care. 
Available at http://www.who.int/cancer/palliative/deﬁnition/en/. 
Accessed January 14, 2015.
 117. Manthous CA. Introducing the primer of medical ethics. Chest. 
2006;130:1640.
 118. Carrese JA, Sugarman J. The inescapable relevance of bioethics for 
the practicing clinician. Chest. 2006;1230:1864.
 119. Swetz KM, Crowley ME, Hook C, et al. Report of 255 clinical eth-
ics consultations and review of the literature. Mayo Clin Proc. 
2007;82:686.
 120. ABIM Foundation, American Board of Internal Medicine, ACP-
ASIM Foundation, American College of Physicians-American 
Society of Internal Medicine, European Federation of Internal 
Medicine. Medical professionalism in the new millennium: a phy-
sician charter. Ann Intern Med. 2002;136:243.
 121. Giordano J. The Ethics Of Interventional Pain Management: Basic 
Concepts And Theories: Problems And Practice. Lubbock, TX: Pre-
sentation, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center; 2008.
 122. President’s Commission for the Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine 
and Biomedical and Behavioral Research. Making health care deci-
sions: The legal and ethical implications of informed consent in the 
patient-practitioner relationship. Washington, DC: United States 
Government Printing Ofﬁce; 1982.
 123. Berwick D, Davidoff F, Hiatt H, et al. Reﬁning and implementing 
the Tavistock principles for everybody in health care. BMJ. 
2001;323(7313):616.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
UNIT
Regional 
Examinations
2
C h a p t e r  4
Beginning the Physical  
Examination: General Survey,  
Vital Signs, and Pain 111
C h a p t e r  5
Behavior and Mental Status 147
C h a p t e r  6
The Skin, Hair, and Nails 173
C h a p t e r  7
The Head and Neck 215
C h a p t e r  8
The Thorax and Lungs 303
C h a p t e r  9
The Cardiovascular System 343
C h a p t e r  1 0
The Breasts and Axillae 419
C h a p t e r  1 1
The Abdomen 449
C h a p t e r  1 2
The Peripheral Vascular System 509
C h a p t e r  1 3
Male Genitalia and Hernias 541
C h a p t e r  1 4
Female Genitalia 565
C h a p t e r  1 5
The Anus, Rectum, and Prostate 607
C h a p t e r  1 6
The Musculoskeletal System 625
C h a p t e r  1 7
The Nervous System 711
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  4 |
 
Beginning the Physical Examination: General Survey, Vital Signs, and Pain 
111
Now that you have elicited the patient’s concerns and formed a trusting relation-
ship, you are ready to begin the physical examination. At ﬁrst you may feel 
unsure of your skills, but through study and repetition, the physical examination 
will soon ﬂow more smoothly, and you will shift your attention from technique 
and how to handle instruments to what you hear, see, and feel (Fig. 4-1). Touch-
ing the patient’s body will seem more natural, and you will learn to minimize any 
discomfort to the patient (Fig. 4-2). As you gain proﬁciency, what once took 
between 1 and 2 hours will take considerably less time.
This chapter introduces the sections of the regional examination chapters you 
will ﬁnd throughout the book: The Health History of Common and Concerning 
Symptoms (in this chapter, these are common constitutional symptoms); Health 
Promotion and Counseling, which focuses in this chapter on lifestyle components 
such as weight, nutrition, and exercise; then, Techniques of Examination, which 
include the initial elements of the physical examination, the General Survey, Vital 
Signs, and assessment of pain; followed by Tables and the References. The regional 
examination chapters, Chapters 6 through 20, begin with an additional section, 
Anatomy and Physiology.
C H A P T E R 4
Beginning the Physical 
Examination: General 
Survey, Vital Signs, and Pain
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate 
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 5: General Survey and Vital Signs)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com
F I G U R E  4 - 1 .  The physical 
examination ﬂows more efﬁciently 
with practice.
F I G U R E  4 - 2 .  The clinician’s touch 
can reassure as well as assess.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
112 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Common or Concerning Symptoms
● Fatigue and weakness
● Fever, chills, night sweats
● Weight change
● Pain
Fatigue and Weakness. Fatigue is a nonspeciﬁc symptom with many 
causes. It refers to a sense of weariness or loss of energy that patients describe in 
various ways. “I don’t feel like getting up in the morning” . . . “I don’t have any 
energy” . . . “I can hardly get through the day” . . . “By the time I get to work, I feel 
as if I’ve done a day’s work.” Because fatigue is a normal response to hard work, 
sustained stress, or grief, elicit the life circumstances in which it occurs. Fatigue 
unrelated to such situations requires further investigation.
Use open-ended questions to encourage the patient to fully describe what he or 
she is experiencing. Important clues about etiology often emerge from a good 
psychosocial history, exploration of sleep patterns, and a thorough review of 
systems.
Weakness is different from fatigue. It denotes a demonstrable loss of muscle 
power and will be discussed later with other neurologic symptoms (see 
p. 723).
Fever, Chills, and Night Sweats. Fever refers to an abnormal 
elevation in body temperature (see p. 133 for deﬁnitions of normal). Ask 
about fever if the patient has an acute or chronic illness. Find out if the patient 
has measured his or her temperature. Has the patient felt feverish or unusually 
hot, noted excessive sweating, or felt chilly and cold? Try to distinguish 
between feeling cold, and a shaking chill with shivering throughout the body 
and chattering of teeth.
Feeling cold, goosebumps, and shivering accompany a rising temperature, 
whereas feeling hot and sweating accompanies a falling temperature. Normally, 
the body temperature rises during the day and falls during the night. When fever 
exaggerates this swing, night sweats occur. Malaise, headache, and pain in the 
muscles and joints often accompany fever.
Fever has many causes. Focus on the timing of the illness and its associated 
symptoms. Become familiar with patterns of infectious diseases that may 
affect your patient. Inquire about travel, contact with sick people, or other 
unusual exposures. Even medications may cause fever. By contrast, recent 
ingestion of aspirin, acetaminophen, corticosteroids, and nonsteroidal anti-
inﬂammatory drugs may mask fever and affect the temperature recorded at 
the ofﬁce visit.
Fatigue is a common symptom of 
depression and anxiety, but also con-
sider infections (such as hepatitis, 
infectious mononucleosis, and tuber-
culosis); endocrine disorders (hypothy-
roidism, adrenal insufficiency, 
diabetes mellitus); heart failure; 
chronic disease of the lungs, kidneys, 
or liver; electrolyte imbalance; moder-
ate to severe anemia; malignancies; 
nutritional deficits; and medications.
Weakness, especially if localized in a 
neuroanatomical pattern, suggests 
possible neuropathy or myopathy.
Recurrent shaking chills suggest more 
extreme swings in temperature and 
systemic bacteremia.
Feeling hot and sweating also accom-
pany menopause. Night sweats occur 
in tuberculosis and malignancy.
In immunocompromised patients 
with sepsis, fever may be absent,  
low-grade, or drop below normal 
(hypothermia).
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
The Health History
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  4 |
 
Beginning the Physical Examination: General Survey, Vital Signs, and Pain 
113
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Weight Change. Weight change results from changes in body tissues or 
body ﬂuid. Good opening questions include “How often do you check your 
weight?” “How is it compared to a year ago?” If there are changes, ask, “Why do 
you think it has changed?” “What would you like to weigh?” If weight gain or 
loss appears to be a problem, ask about the amount of change, its timing, the 
setting in which it occurred, and any associated symptoms.
Weight gain occurs when caloric intake exceeds caloric expenditure over time, 
and typically results in increased body fat. Weight gain can also reﬂect abnormal 
accumulation of body ﬂuids, particularly when the gain is very rapid.
Patients with a body mass index (BMI) of ≥25 to 29 are deﬁned as overweight; 
those with a BMI ≥30 are considered obese. For these patients, plan a thorough 
assessment to avert the many associated risks of morbidity and mortality. Clarify 
the timing and evolution of the weight gain. Was the patient overweight as a 
child? Are the parents overweight? Ask about weight at life milestones like birth, 
kindergarten, high school or college graduation, military discharge, pregnancy, 
menopause, and retirement. Has a recent disability or surgery affected weight? 
What about depression or anxiety? Is there a change in sleep pattern or daytime 
drowsiness suspicious for sleep apnea?1 Establish the level of physical activity 
and results of prior attempts at weight loss. Assess eating patterns and dietary 
preferences.
Review the patient’s medications.
Explore any clinically signiﬁcant weight loss, deﬁned as loss of 5% or more of 
usual body weight over a 6-month period. Mechanisms include decreased food 
intake due to anorexia, depression, dysphagia, vomiting, abdominal pain, or 
ﬁnancial difﬁculties; defective gastrointestinal absorption or inﬂammation; and 
increased metabolic requirements. Ask about abuse of alcohol, cocaine, amphet-
amines, or opiates, or withdrawal from marijuana, all associated with weight 
loss. Heavy smoking also suppresses appetite.
Assess food intake. Has it been normal, dropped, or even increased?
Rapid changes in weight, over a few 
days, suggest changes in body fluid, 
not tissue.
Edema from extravascular fluid 
retention is visible in heart failure, 
nephrotic syndrome, liver failure,  
and venous stasis.
See Classification of Overweight and 
Obesity by BMI on p. 116.
See Table 4-1, Obesity-Related Health 
Conditions, p. 139, and discussion on  
pp. 114–118.
Many drugs are associated with 
weight gain, such as: tricyclic antide-
pressants; insulin and sulfonylurea; 
contraceptives, glucocorticoids, and 
progestational steroids; mirtazapine 
and paroxetine; gabapentin and  
valproate; and propranolol.
Causes of weight loss include gas-
trointestinal diseases; endocrine 
disorders (diabetes mellitus, hyper-
thyroidism, adrenal insufficiency); 
chronic infections, HIV/AIDS; malig-
nancy; chronic cardiac, pulmonary, 
or renal failure; depression; and 
anorexia nervosa or bulimia. 
See Table 4-2, Eating Disorders and 
Excessively Low BMI, p. 140.
Weight loss with relatively high food 
intake suggests diabetes mellitus, 
hyperthyroidism, or malabsorption. 
Consider also binge eating (bulimia) 
with clandestine vomiting.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
114 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING 
Pursue a thorough psychosocial history. Who cooks and shops for the patient? 
Where does the patient eat? With whom? Are there any problems with obtaining, 
storing, preparing, or chewing food? Does the patient avoid or restrict certain 
foods for medical, religious, or other reasons?
Check the medication history.
Be alert for symptoms and signs of malnutrition. These may be subtle and non-
speciﬁc, such as weakness, easy fatigability, cold intolerance, ﬂaky dermatitis, 
and ankle swelling. Securing a good diet history of eating patterns and quantities 
is essential. Ask general questions about intake at different times throughout the 
day, such as “Tell me what you typically eat for lunch.” “What do you eat for a 
snack?” “When?”
Pain. Pain is one of the most common presenting symptoms in ofﬁce 
practice. Each year, an estimated 100 million Americans experience chronic 
pain at a cost in medical care, disability, and work days lost of $560 to $635 
million.3,4 Acute pain affects another 12% of Americans annually.5 The most 
frequent causes are low back pain, headache or migraine, and knee and neck 
pain; prevalence varies by race, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status. 
Localizing symptoms, “the seven attributes of every symptom,” and the 
psychosocial history are essential to your physical examination, assessment, 
and a comprehensive management plan.
Poverty, old age, social isolation, 
physical disability, emotional or men-
tal impairment, lack of teeth, ill-fitting 
dentures, alcoholism, and drug abuse 
increase risk of malnutrition.
Drugs associated with weight loss 
include anticonvulsants, antidepres-
sants, levodopa, digoxin, metformin, 
and thyroid medication.2
See Table 4-3, Nutrition Screening,  
p. 141.
Turn to the section on Acute and 
Chronic Pain, pp. 134–137, at the end  
of this chapter for an approach to 
assessment and management.
Important Topics for Health Promotion  
and Counseling
● Optimal weight, nutrition, and diet
● Blood pressure and dietary sodium
● Exercise
Optimal Weight, Nutrition, and Diet. Fewer than half of U.S. adults 
maintain a healthy weight, deﬁned as a BMI between 18.5 and 24.9 kg/m2. 
Obesity has increased in every segment of the U.S. population, regardless of age, 
gender, ethnicity, geographic area, or socioeconomic status. Review the alarming 
statistics about the epidemic of obesity nationally and worldwide in the table on 
the next page.6–8
See Calculating the BMI and Measuring 
the Waist Circumference, pp. 122–123.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Health Promotion and  
Counseling: Evidence and 
Recommendations
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  4 |
 
Beginning the Physical Examination: General Survey, Vital Signs, and Pain 
115
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING 
To promote optimal patient weight and nutrition, adopt the four-pronged 
approach outlined here. Reducing weight by even 5% to 10% can improve blood 
pressure, lipid levels, and glucose tolerance, and reduce the risk of diabetes or 
hypertension.
Obesity at a Glance
● Nearly 69% of U.S. adults are overweight or obese (BMI ≥25 kg/m2), including 
71% of men, 66% of women; overall, about 35% of U.S. adults are obese.
● About 15% of U.S. children and adolescents are overweight and 17% are obese.
● Health disparities: the prevalence of overweight or obesity varies by racial/
ethnic and socioeconomic groups:
● Women: black women, 82%; Hispanic women, 77%; non-Hispanic white 
women, 63%.
● Higher-income women are less likely to be obese than low-income women.
● Men: Hispanic men, 79%; non-Hispanic white men, 71%; black men, 69%.
● Youth ages 2 to 19 years: highest prevalence in Hispanic boys and girls  
(41%; 37%), black boys and girls (34%; 36%), children living in low-income, 
low-education, and higher-unemployment households.
● Overweight and obesity increase risk of heart disease, numerous types of 
cancers, type 2 diabetes, stroke, arthritis, sleep apnea, infertility, and depres-
sion. Obesity may increase risk of death.9,10
● More than 80% of people with type 2 diabetes and over 20% of people with 
hypertension are overweight or obese.
● Obesity is increasing worldwide, aﬀecting an estimated 2.1 billion overweight 
and obese individuals.11 The prevalence of overweight and obesity is higher in 
developed countries at all ages. In the world’s poorest countries, poverty is 
associated with underweight and malnutrition; but poverty in a middle-
income country adopting a Western lifestyle increases the risk of obesity.
● Only 65% of obese U.S. adults report that health care professionals have told 
them that they were overweight. Less than half report being advised by a 
health care professional to lose weight, though obese adults with diabetes are 
more likely to receive such advice.12
Sources: Go AS, Mozaﬀarian D, Roger VL, et al. Heart disease and stroke statistics–2014 update: a 
report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2014;129(3):e28; Ogden CL, Carroll MD,  
Kit BK, et al. Prevalence of childhood and adult obesity in the United States, 2011–2012. JAMA. 
2014;311(8):806; Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, et al. Prevalence of obesity among adults: United 
States, 2011–2012. NCHS Data Brief. 2013;(131):1; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Obesity 
and overweight. Data and statistics. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/obesity/data/index.html. 
Accessed December 1, 2014.
See Table 4-1, Obesity-Related Health 
Conditions, p. 139.
Four Steps to Promote Optimal Weight  
and Nutrition
1. Measure BMI and waist circumference; adults with a BMI ≥25 kg/m2, men 
with waist circumferences >40 inches, and women with waist circumfer-
ences >35 inches are at increased risk for heart disease and obesity-related 
diseases. Measuring the waist-to-hip ratio (waist circumference divided by 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
116 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING 
Take advantage of the excellent resources available for patient assessment and 
counseling summarized in the following sections.13 Review the role of weight 
in the growing prevalence of metabolic syndrome, present in about 34% of the 
U.S. population.6
Step 1: Measure the BMI and Assess Risk Factors. Classify the BMI 
according to the national guidelines in the following table. If the BMI is above 
25 kg/m2, assess the patient for additional risk factors for heart disease and other 
obesity-related diseases: hypertension, high low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cho-
lesterol, low high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, high triglycerides, high 
blood glucose, family history of premature heart disease, physical inactivity, and 
cigarette smoking. Patients with a BMI over 25 kg/m2 and two or more risk fac-
tors should pursue weight loss—especially if the waist circumference is elevated.
See definition and discussion of 
metabolic syndrome in Chapter 9, 
Cardiovascular System, p. 370.
Classiﬁcation of Overweight and Obesity by BMI
Obesity Class
BMI (kg/m2)
Underweight
<18.5
Normal
18.5–24.9
Overweight
25.0–29.9
Obesity
I
30.0–34.9
II
35.0–39.9
Extreme obesity
III
≥40
Source: National Institutes of Health and National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: Clinical 
Guidelines on the Identiﬁcation, Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults: 
The Evidence Report. NIH Publication 98–4083. June 1998. Available at http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/
guidelines/obesity/ob_gdlns.pdf. Accessed January 21, 2015.
Step 2: Assess Dietary Intake. Take a diet history and assess the patient’s 
eating patterns. Select a brief screening tool and be sensitive to the impact of 
income and cultural preferences on what the patient chooses to eat.
Step 3: Assess Motivation to Change. Once you have assessed BMI, 
risk factors, and dietary intake, address the patient’s motivation to make lifestyle 
changes that promote weight loss. The Prochaska model helps tailor interven-
tions to the patient’s level of motivation to adopt new eating behaviors.
See Table 4-3, Nutrition Screening,  
p. 141.
See Table 4-4, Obesity: Stages of 
Change Model and Assessing 
Readiness, p. 142.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Four Steps to Promote Optimal Weight  
and Nutrition (continued )
hip circumference) may be a better risk predictor for individuals older than  
75 years. Ratios >0.95 in men and >0.85 in women are considered elevated. 
Determine additional risk factors for cardiovascular diseases, including smok-
ing, high blood pressure, high cholesterol, physical inactivity, and family history.
2. Assess dietary intake.
3. Assess the patient’s motivation to change.
4. Provide counseling about nutrition and exercise.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  4 |
 
Beginning the Physical Examination: General Survey, Vital Signs, and Pain 
117
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING 
Step 4: Provide Counseling About Nutrition and Exercise. You 
should be well informed about diet and nutrition as you counsel overweight 
patients, especially in light of the many and often contradictory diet options in 
the popular press. The U.S. Department of Agriculture released new dietary 
guidelines in 2010 to help clinicians and patients address the obesity epidemic 
more effectively.14 The Department’s new nutrition icon, MyPlate, is appealing 
and easy to understand (Fig. 4-3). Review the MyPlate website and the dietary 
guidelines report, as well as recent guides for identifying and managing over-
weight and obesity from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute and the 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.10,15
A key element of effective counseling is working with the patient to set reason-
able goals. Experts note that patients often have a “dream weight” as much as 
30% below initial body weight.2 However, a 5% to 10% weight loss is more 
realistic and still proven to reduce risk of diabetes and other obesity-associated 
health problems. Educate your patients about common roadblocks to sus-
tained weight loss: hitting a plateau due to feedback physiologic systems that 
maintain body homeostasis; poor adherence to diet due to increasing hunger 
over time as weight declines; and inhibition of leptin, a protein cytokine 
secreted and stored in fat cells that modulates hunger.16 Use a full array of 
strategies to promote weight loss. A safe goal for weight loss is 0.5 to 2 lbs 
per week.
F I G U R E  4 - 3 .  The MyPlate icon 
helps patients understand nutrition. 
(U.S. Department of Agriculture.)
Strategies That Promote Weight Loss
● The most eﬀective diets combine realistic weight loss goals with exercise and 
behavioral reinforcements.
● Encourage patients to walk 30 to 60 minutes 5 or more days a week, or a total 
of at least 150 minutes a week. Pedometers help patients match distance in 
steps with calories burned.
● The total calorie deﬁcit goal, usually 500 to 1,000 kilocalories a day, is more 
important than the type of diet. Since many types of diets have been studied 
and appear to confer similar results, support the patient’s preferences as long 
as they are reasonable.17,18 Consider low-fat diets for those with dyslipidemias.
● Encourage proven behavioral habits such as portion-controlled meals, meal 
planning, food diaries, and activity records.
● Follow professional guidelines for pharmacologic therapies in patients having 
high weights and morbidities who do not respond to conventional treatment.19
If the BMI falls below 18.5 kg/m2, investigate possible anorexia, bulimia, or other 
serious medical conditions.
The USDA Dietary Guidelines 2010 point out that to maintain caloric balance and 
achieve and sustain a healthy weight, most Americans need to lower their caloric 
intake and increase physical activity. The Guidelines emphasize consuming nutrient-
dense foods and beverages such as vegetables, fruits, whole grains, fat-free or low-fat 
See Table 4-2, Eating Disorders and 
Excessively Low BMI, p. 140.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
118 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING 
milk and milk products, seafood, lean meats and poultry, eggs, beans and peas, and 
nuts and seeds.14 Intake of added sugars (primarily sweeteners), solid saturated and/
or trans fats, and reﬁned grains make it difﬁcult to achieve optimal nutrition.
Introduce your patients to the colorful “chooseMyPlate.gov” website and its easy-
to-follow guides for selecting fruits, vegetables, grains, protein, and dairy prod-
ucts. Sodium intake should be less than 2,300 mg/day, saturated fatty acids 
should be ≤10% of total calories, and dietary cholesterol should be ≤300 mg/day. 
Encourage patients to follow simple practical tips for daily meals, the “10 Tips to 
a Great Plate” listed below.
10 Tips to a Great Plate 
 1. Balance calories.
 2. Eat less.
 3. Avoid oversized portions.
 4. Eat nutrient-dense foods more often.
 5. Make half the plate fruits and vegetables.
 6. Switch to fat-free or low-fat milk.
 7. Make half of grain intake whole grains.
 8. Eat foods high in solid fats, salt, and added sugars less often.
 9. Use the Nutrition Facts label to choose lower sodium versions of foods like 
soup, bread, and frozen meals.
10. Drink water or unsweetened beverages instead of sweetened soda, energy 
drinks, or sports drinks.
Source: Choose My Plate–10 Tips to a Great Plate. Available at www.choosemyplate.gov/food-
groups/downloads/TenTips/DGTipsheet1ChooseMyPlate.pdf. Accessed January 21, 2015. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture. 
Help adolescent females and women of childbearing age increase intake of iron, 
vitamin C, and folic acid. Assist adults older than 50 years to identify foods rich 
in vitamin B12. Advise older adults and those with dark skin or low exposure to 
sunlight to increase intake of vitamin D.
Blood Pressure and Dietary Sodium. Excess sodium intake can lead 
to hypertension, a major risk factor for cardiovascular disease. A meta-analysis 
concludes that a difference of 5 g of salt intake a day is linked to a 23% difference 
in the rate of stroke and a 17% difference in the rate of total cardiovascular 
disease.20 The Institute of Medicine (IOM) has determined that a daily dietary 
intake of 2,300 mg of sodium is the tolerable upper intake level for adults.21 
However, the average sodium intake among Americans is 3,400 mg/day and over 
90% of adults exceed the recommended upper intake level.22 While reducing 
sodium intake to 1,500 mg provides better blood pressure control, the IOM 
found no evidence of beneﬁt for overall health outcomes below the 2,300 mg 
level.21 Even without achieving this level, reducing sodium intake by at least 
1,000 mg/day lowers blood pressure.23
Because over 75% of consumed sodium comes from processed foods and less than 
10% of Americans consume 2,300 mg/day or less of recommended dietary sodium, the 
See Table 4-5, Nutrition Counseling: 
Sources of Nutrients, p. 143.
See Table 4-6, Patients with Hyper-
tension: Recommended Changes in 
Diet, p. 143.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  4 |
 
Beginning the Physical Examination: General Survey, Vital Signs, and Pain 
119
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING 
American Heart Association and the IOM have jointly recommended population-
wide salt reduction measures including government standards for manufacturers, 
restaurants, and foodservice operators.24,25 Advise patients to read the Nutrition 
Facts panel on food labels closely to help them adhere to the 2,300-mg/day guide-
line. Urge them to consider the well-investigated Dietary Approaches to Stop 
Hypertension, or DASH Eating Plan, for a model diet.26
Exercise. Physical ﬁtness is a key component of both weight control and weight 
loss. To achieve health beneﬁts, adults should do at least 150 minutes (2 hours and 
30 minutes) of moderate-intensity cardiorespiratory activity, for example, walking 
briskly at a pace of 3 to 4.5 miles (4.8 to 7.2 km) per hour, each week.27,28 Patients 
can increase exercise by such simple measures as parking farther away from their 
place of work or using stairs instead of elevators. Alternatively, adults can engage 
in vigorous-intensity aerobic activity, such as jogging or running, for 75 minutes 
(1 hour and 15 minutes) each week. An equivalent combination of moderate- and 
vigorous-intensity aerobic activity is also beneﬁcial. Greater health beneﬁts can be 
achieved by increasing the frequency, duration, and/or intensity of physical activity.
Moderate and Vigorous Exercise
A 154-lb (69 kg) man who is 5′10″ uses up approximately the number of calories 
listed doing each activity below. Those who weigh more will use more calories, and 
those who weigh less will use fewer. The calorie values listed include both calories 
used by the activity and calories used for normal body functioning.
Approximate Calories Used  
by a 154-lb Man
In 1 hour
In 30 minutes
Moderate Physical Activities:
Hiking
Light gardening/yard work
Dancing
Golf (walking and carrying clubs)
Bicycling (less than 10 miles per hour)
Walking (3.5 miles per hour)
Weight training (general light workout)
Stretching
370
330
330
330
290
280
220
180
185
165
165
165
145
140
110
90
Vigorous Physical Activities:
Running/jogging (5 miles per hour)
Bicycling (more than 10 miles per hour)
Swimming (slow freestyle laps)
Aerobics
Walking (4.5 miles per hour)
Heavy yard work (chopping wood)
Weight lifting (vigorous eﬀort)
Basketball (vigorous)
590
590
510
480
460
440
440
440
295
295
255
240
230
220
220
220
Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture: Choose MyPlate.gov. Physical Activity. How many calories 
does physical activity use? Modiﬁed June 2011. Available at http://www.choosemyplate.gov/food-
groups/physicalactivity_calories_used_table.html. Accessed January 21, 2015.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
120 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE GENERAL SURVEY
The General Survey of the patient’s appearance, height, and weight begins with the 
opening moments of the patient encounter, but your observations of the patient’s 
appearance often crystallize as you start the physical examination. The best clini-
cians continually sharpen their powers of observation and description. As you 
talk with and examine the patient, heighten your focus on the patient’s mood, 
build, and behavior. These details enrich and deepen your emerging clinical 
impression. Your goal is to describe the distinguishing features of the patient so 
clearly that colleagues can spot the patient in a crowd of strangers, avoiding cli-
chés like “middle-aged gentleman” and the uninformative “in no acute distress.”
Many factors contribute to the patient’s body habitus: socioeconomic status, 
nutrition, genetic makeup, physical ﬁtness, mood state, early illnesses, gender, 
geographic location, and age cohort. Nutritional status affects many of the char-
acteristics you scrutinize during the General Survey: height and weight, blood 
pressure, posture, mood and alertness, facial coloration, dentition and condition 
of the tongue and gingiva, color of the nail beds, and muscle bulk, to name a few. 
Your assessment of height, weight, BMI, and risk for obesity should be routine 
for each patient in your clinical practice.
Recall your observations from the ﬁrst moments of the encounter that you have 
been reﬁning throughout your assessment. Does the patient hear you when 
greeted in the waiting room or examination room? Rise with ease? Walk easily or 
stifﬂy? If hospitalized when you ﬁrst meet, what is the patient doing—sitting up 
and enjoying television? . . . or lying in bed? . . . What do you see on the bedside 
table—a magazine? . . . candy bars or chips? . . . a Bible or a rosary? . . . multiple 
beverage containers? . . . or nothing at all? Each observation raises questions or 
hypotheses to consider as your assessment unfolds.
General Appearance
Apparent State of Health. Try to make a general judgment based on 
observations throughout the encounter. Support it with the signiﬁcant details.
Level of Consciousness. Is the patient awake, alert, and responsive to 
you and others in the environment? If not, promptly assess the level of 
consciousness.
Signs of Distress. Does the patient show evidence of the problems listed 
below?
■ Cardiac or respiratory distress
■ Pain
Is the patient acutely or chronically ill, 
frail, or fit and robust?
See Chapter 17, The Nervous System, 
Level of Consciousness, pp. 768–769.
Is there clutching of the chest, pallor, 
diaphoresis, labored breathing, 
wheezing, or coughing?
Is there wincing, diaphoresis, protec-
tiveness of a painful area, grimacing, 
or an unusual posture favoring one 
limb or region of the body?
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
The General Survey
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  4 |
 
Beginning the Physical Examination: General Survey, Vital Signs, and Pain 
121
THE GENERAL SURVEY
■ Anxiety or depression
Skin Color and Obvious Lesions. Inspect for any changes in skin color, 
scars, plaques, or nevi.
Dress, Grooming, and Personal Hygiene. How is the patient 
dressed? Is the clothing suitable for the temperature and weather? Is it clean and 
appropriate to the setting?
Notice the patient’s shoes. Are there cut-outs or holes? Are the shoes run-down?
Is the patient wearing unusual jewelry? Are there body piercings?
Note the patient’s hair, ﬁngernails, and use of make-up. They may be clues to the 
patient’s personality, mood, lifestyle, and self-regard.
Do personal hygiene and grooming seem appropriate for the patient’s age, life-
style, and occupation?
Facial Expression. Observe the facial expression at rest, during 
conversation and social interactions, and during the physical examination. 
Watch closely for eye contact. Is it natural? . . . sustained and unblinking? . . . averted 
quickly? . . . absent?
Odors of the Body and Breath. Odors can be important diagnostic 
clues, like the fruity odor of diabetes or the scent of alcohol.
Are there anxious facial expressions, 
fidgety movements, cold moist palms, 
inexpressive or flat affect, poor eye 
contact, or psychomotor slowing?  
See Chapter 5, Behavior and Mental 
Status, pp. 147–171.
Pallor, cyanosis, jaundice, rashes, 
bruises, or mottling of the extremities 
should be pursued. See Chapter 6, The 
Skin, Hair, and Nails, pp. 173–214.
Excess clothing may reflect the cold 
intolerance of hypothyroidism, hide 
skin rash or needle marks, mask 
anorexia, or signal personal lifestyle 
preferences.
Holes or slippers suggest gout, 
bunions, edema, or other painful foot 
conditions. Run-down shoes can 
contribute to foot and back pain, 
calluses, falls, and infection.
Copper bracelets suggest joint pain. 
Tattoos and piercings can be associ-
ated with alcohol and drug use.29
“Grown-out” hair and nail polish 
suggest the length of a possible 
illness. Bitten fingernails may 
reflect stress.
Neglected appearance may appear 
in depression and dementia, but 
should be compared with the 
patient’s norm.
Watch for the stare of hyperthyroidism, 
the immobile facies of parkinsonism, 
and the flat or sad affect of depression. 
Decreased eye contact may be 
cultural or suggest anxiety, fear, or 
sadness.
Breath odors can reveal the presence 
of alcohol or acetone (diabetes), 
pulmonary infections, uremia, or  
liver failure.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
122 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE GENERAL SURVEY
Never assume that alcohol on a patient’s breath explains changes in mental status 
or neurologic ﬁndings.
Posture, Gait, and Motor Activity. What is the patient’s preferred 
posture?
Is the patient restless or quiet? How often does the patient change position?
Is there any involuntary motor activity? Are some body parts immobile? Which 
ones?
Does the patient walk smoothly, with comfort, self-conﬁdence, and balance, or 
is there a limp, fear of falling, loss of balance, or any movement disorder?
Height and Weight. Measure the patient’s height and weight with shoes 
removed to determine the BMI. Note any changes in height or weight over time.
Is the patient unusually short or tall? Is the build slender, muscular, or stocky? 
Is the body symmetric? Note the general body proportions.
Is the patient emaciated, slender, overweight, or obese? If the patient is obese, is 
the fat distributed evenly, concentrated over the upper torso, or settled around 
the hips?
Make note of any weight changes.
Calculating the BMI. Use your measurements of height and weight to 
determine BMI. Body fat consists primarily of adipose in the form of triglycerides 
and is stored in subcutaneous, intra-abdominal, and intramuscular fat deposits 
that are difﬁcult to measure directly. The BMI incorporates estimated but more 
accurate measures of body fat than weight alone. The National Institutes of 
These changes can have serious but 
treatable causes such as hypoglyce-
mia, subdural hematoma, or postictal 
state.
Patients often prefer sitting upright in 
left-sided heart failure and leaning  
forward with arms braced in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.
Anxious patients appear agitated and 
restless. Patients in pain often avoid 
movement. 
Look for tremors, other involuntary 
movements, or paralysis. See Table 17-5, 
Tremors and Involuntary Movements, 
pp. 782–783.
See Table 17-10, Abnormalities of Gait 
and Posture, p. 789. An impaired gait 
increases risk of falls.
Watch for very short stature in Turner 
syndrome, childhood renal failure, and 
achondroplastic and hypopituitary 
dwarfism; long limbs in proportion to 
the trunk in hypogonadism and  
Marfan syndrome; and height loss in 
osteoporosis and vertebral compres-
sion fractures.
There is generalized fat distribution in 
simple obesity and truncal fat with 
relatively thin limbs in Cushing syn-
drome and metabolic syndrome.
Causes of weight loss include malig-
nancy, diabetes mellitus, hyperthyroid-
ism, chronic infection, depression, 
diuresis, and successful dieting.
See discussion of Optimal Weight, 
Nutrition, and Diet, pp. 114–118.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  4 |
 
Beginning the Physical Examination: General Survey, Vital Signs, and Pain 
123
THE VITAL SIGNS
Health caution that people who are very muscular can have a high BMI, but still 
be healthy. Likewise, the BMI for older adults and those with low muscle mass 
may appear inappropriately “normal.”
To determine the BMI, choose the method best suited to your practice. Use a 
standard BMI table or the electronic medical record software, which frequently 
shows the BMI automatically.30 You can also calculate the BMI using one of the 
methods shown below.
Methods to Calculate Body Mass Index (BMI)
Unit of Measure
Method of Calculation
Weight in pounds, height in inches
(1)  Standard BMI Chart
(2) 
 
Weight (lbs) × 700*
Height (inches)
Weight in kilograms, height in  
meters squared
(3) 
 
Weight (kg)
Height (m )
2
Either unit of measure
(4)  “BMI Calculator” at http://www.
nhlbi.nih.gov/health/educational/
lose_wt/BMI/bmicalc.htm
*Several organizations use 704.5, but the variation in BMI is negligible. Conversion formulas: 2.2 lb = 
1 kg; 1 inch = 2.54 cm; 100 cm = 1 m.
Source: National Institutes of Health–National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: Calculate Your 
Body Mass Index. Available at: http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/educational/lose_wt/BMI/bmicalc.
htm. Accessed January 21, 2015.
Waist Circumference. If the BMI is ≥35 kg/m2, measure the patient’s 
waist circumference just above the hips. Risk for diabetes, hypertension, and 
cardiovascular disease increases signiﬁcantly if the waist circumference is 
35 inches or more in women and 40 inches or more in men.
See Table 9-3, Abnormalities of the 
Arterial Pulse and Pressure Waves,  
p. 402.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
The Vital Signs
The Vital Signs—blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, and temperature—
provide critical initial information that often inﬂuences the tempo and direction 
of your evaluation. If already recorded by ofﬁce staff, review the Vital Signs 
promptly at the outset of the encounter. If the Vital Signs are abnormal, you will 
often retake them yourself during the visit.
Begin by measuring the blood pressure and the heart rate. Count the heart rate 
for one minute by palpating the radial pulse with your ﬁngers, or by listening for 
the apical pulse with your stethoscope at the cardiac apex. Continue either of 
these techniques as you quietly count the respiratory rate, since once patients are 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
124 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE VITAL SIGNS
alerted, their breathing patterns may change. The temperature may be taken in 
various sites, depending on the patient and the equipment available. Learn the 
techniques that ensure accuracy when you measure the vital signs, described in 
the pages to follow.
Blood Pressure
The Complexities of Measuring Blood Pressure. The accuracy of 
blood pressure measurements varies according to how these measurements are 
taken. Ofﬁce screening with manual and automated cuffs remains common, but 
elevated readings increasingly require conﬁrmation with home and ambulatory 
monitoring. In its 2014 draft recommendations, the U.S. Preventive Services 
Task Force reported that 5% to 65% of elevated ofﬁce blood pressures failed to 
be conﬁrmed by ambulatory monitoring and recommended ambulatory blood 
pressure monitoring to conﬁrm the diagnosis of hypertension.31 Numerous 
studies show that ambulatory and home blood pressure monitoring are more 
predictive of cardiovascular disease and end organ damage than manual and 
automated measurements in the ofﬁce.32 Automated ambulatory blood pressure 
monitoring measures blood pressure at preset intervals over 24 to 48 hours, 
usually every 15 to 20 minutes during the day and 30 to 60 minutes during the 
night. It is now considered the reference standard for conﬁrming elevated ofﬁce 
blood pressures.33
Be familiar with the important features of the different methods for measuring 
blood pressure, summarized in the table below, since errors in ofﬁce readings 
raise substantial risks of misdiagnosis and unnecessary treatment.
F I G U R E  4 - 4 .  Auscultatory blood 
pressure measurement with arm at 
heart level.
Methods for Measuring Blood Pressure
Method
Features
Auscultatory oﬃce blood 
pressure with aneroid or 
mercury blood pressure  
cuﬀ (Fig. 4-4)
Common, inexpensive
Subject to patient anxiety (“white coat hyper-
tension”), observer technique, cuﬀ recalibra-
tion every 6 months
Requires measurements over several visits
Ambulatory or home monitoring needed to 
detect masked hypertension
Single measurements with sensitivity and 
speciﬁcity of 75% compared to ambulatory 
monitoring34
Automated oscillometric 
oﬃce blood pressure
Requires optimal patient positioning, cuﬀ size 
and placement, and device calibration
Takes multiple measurements over short period
Requires conﬁrmatory measurements to reduce 
misdiagnosis
Comparable sensitivity and speciﬁcity to manual 
measurements34
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  4 |
 
Beginning the Physical Examination: General Survey, Vital Signs, and Pain 
125
THE VITAL SIGNS
If you recommend home blood pressure monitoring, advise patients about how 
to choose the best upper arm cuff for home use and have it recalibrated. Let them 
know that wrist and ﬁngers monitors are popular but less accurate. Systolic pres-
sure increases in more distal arteries, whereas diastolic pressure falls; and hydro-
static effects introduce errors due to differences in position relative to the heart.
Deﬁnitions for Diagnosing Hypertension. Note the differences in 
the deﬁnitions of hypertension depending on the measurement method used.
Patient education about the correct 
use of home monitors is essential. 
Make sure patients understand all 
the steps needed to ensure accurate 
readings at home, as detailed in this 
section.
Deﬁnitions of Hypertension
● Oﬃce manual or automated blood pressure based on the average of two 
readings on two separate occasions: ≥140/9035,36
● Home automated blood pressure: <135/8532
● Ambulatory automated blood pressure:37
● 24-hour average: ≥ of 130/80
● Daytime (awake) average: ≥135/85
● Nighttime (asleep) average: >120/70
Methods for Measuring Blood Pressure (continued )
Method
Features
Home blood pressure 
monitoring
Accurate automated device applied by patient, 
easy to use, less expensive than ambulatory 
monitoring
Acceptable alternative if ambulatory monitor-
ing not feasible; more predictive of cardio-
vascular risk than oﬃce measurements32
Requires patient education for accurate tech-
nique, repeated measurements (two morn-
ing, two evening readings daily for 1 week); 
nighttime readings not recorded32
Detects white coat hypertension—present in 20%32
Detects masked hypertension—present in 10% 
(blood pressure is higher than oﬃce readings)32
Sensitivity 85%, speciﬁcity 62% compared to 
ambulatory monitoring34
Ambulatory blood pressure 
monitoring
Automated; clinical and research “gold standard”
Provides 24-hour average blood pressures and 
averages of daytime (awake), nighttime 
(asleep), systolic, and diastolic blood pressures
Shows whether nocturnal blood pressure “dips” 
(normal) or stays elevated ( = cardiovascular 
disease risk factor)
More expensive; may not be covered by insurance
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
126 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE VITAL SIGNS
Types of Hypertension. Three types of hypertension are especially 
important to recognize: white coat hypertension, masked hypertension, and nocturnal 
hypertension. Suspicion of these entities and assessing the effects of treatment are 
indications for ambulatory blood pressure monitoring.
■ White coat hypertension (isolated clinic hypertension): White coat hyper-
tension is deﬁned as blood pressure ≥140/90 in medical settings and mean 
awake ambulatory readings <135/85. This phenomenon, reported in up to 
20% of patients with elevated ofﬁce blood pressure, is important to identify 
since it carries normal to slightly increased cardiovascular risk and does not 
require treatment.32,37 It is attributed to a conditioned anxiety response. Poor 
measurement technique, including rounding of measurements to zero, the 
presence of a physician or nurse, and even the prior diagnosis of hyperten-
sion can also substantially alter ofﬁce readings. Replacing manual ofﬁce mea-
surements with an automated device that makes several readings with the 
patient seated alone in a quiet room has been shown to reduce the “white 
coat effect.”38
■ Masked hypertension: Masked hypertension, deﬁned as ofﬁce blood pres-
sure <140/90, but an elevated daytime blood pressure of >135/85 on 
home or ambulatory testing, is more serious. Untreated adults with 
masked hypertension, an estimated 10% to 30% of the general popula-
tion, have increased risk of cardiovascular disease and end-organ 
damage.32,37
■ Nocturnal hypertension: Physiologic blood pressure “dipping” occurs in 
most patients at night as they shift from wakefulness to sleep. A nocturnal 
fall of <10% of daytime values is associated with poor cardiovascular out-
comes and can only be identiﬁed on 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure 
monitoring. Two other patterns have poor cardiovascular outcomes, a 
nocturnal rising pattern and a marked nocturnal fall of >20% of daytime 
values.37
Choosing the Correct Blood Pressure Cuff (Sphygmoma-
nometer). More than 76 million Americans have elevated blood pressure.39 
To detect blood pressure elevations, an accurate instrument is essential. Four 
types of ofﬁce blood pressure devices are currently used: mercury, aneroid, 
electronic, and “hybrid,” which combines features of both electronic and 
ambulatory devices. In hybrid devices, the mercury column is replaced by an 
electronic pressure gauge; blood pressure can be displayed as a simulated 
mercury column, an aneroid reading, or a digital readout. All measuring 
instruments should be routinely tested for accuracy using international 
protocols.40,41
Some ofﬁces continue to use mercury cuffs, although these are no longer com-
mercially available. Experts recommend that mercury cuffs, now modiﬁed to 
minimize risk of environmental spill, can still be used for routine ofﬁce measure-
ments and evaluating the accuracy of nonmercury devices.42
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  4 |
 
Beginning the Physical Examination: General Survey, Vital Signs, and Pain 
127
THE VITAL SIGNS
Making Accurate Blood Pressure Measurements. Take the time 
to make sure your BP measurement will be accurate. Proper technique is 
important and reduces the inherent variability arising from the patient or 
examiner, the equipment, and the procedure itself.36
Selecting the Correct Size Blood Pressure Cuff
It is important for clinicians and patients to use a cuﬀ that ﬁts the patient’s arm. 
Follow the guidelines outlined here for selecting the correct size:
● Width of the inﬂatable bladder of the cuﬀ should be about 40% of upper arm 
circumference (about 12 to 14 cm in the average adult).
● Length of the inﬂatable bladder should be about 80% of upper arm circumfer-
ence (almost long enough to encircle the arm).
● The standard cuﬀ is 12 × 23 cm, appropriate for arm circumferences up to 28 cm.
If the cuff is too small (narrow), the 
blood pressure will read high; if the 
cuff is too large (wide), the blood 
pressure will read low on a small arm 
and high on a large arm.
Steps to Ensure Accurate Blood Pressure 
Measurement
1. The patient should avoid smoking, caﬀeine, or exercise for 30 minutes prior 
to measurement.
2. The examining room should be quiet and comfortably warm.
3. The patient should sit quietly for 5 minutes in a chair with feet on the ﬂoor, 
rather than on the examining table.
4. The arm selected should be free of clothing, ﬁstulas for dialysis, scars from 
brachial artery cutdowns, or lymphedema from axillary node dissection or 
radiation therapy.
5. Palpate the brachial artery to conﬁrm a viable pulse and position the arm so 
that the brachial artery, at the antecubital crease, is at heart level—roughly 
level with the fourth interspace at its junction with the sternum.
6. If the patient is seated, rest the arm on a table a little above the patient’s 
waist; if standing, try to support the patient’s arm at the midchest level.
If the brachial artery is below heart 
level, the blood pressure reading will 
be higher; if the brachial artery is 
above heart level, the reading will be 
lower.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
128 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE VITAL SIGNS
Position the Cuff and Arm. With the arm at heart level, center the inﬂat-
able bladder over the brachial artery. The lower border of the cuff should be 
about 2.5 cm above the antecubital crease. Secure the cuff snugly. Slightly ﬂex 
the patient’s arm at the elbow.
Estimate the Systolic Pressure and Add 30 mm Hg. To decide how 
high to raise the cuff pressure, ﬁrst estimate the systolic pressure by palpation. 
As you palpate the radial artery with the ﬁngers of one hand, rapidly inﬂate the 
cuff until the radial pulse disappears. Read this pressure on the manometer and 
add 30 mm Hg. Using this sum for subsequent inﬂations prevents discomfort 
from unnecessarily high cuff pressures. It also avoids the occasional error caused 
by an auscultatory gap—a silent interval that may be present between the systolic 
and the diastolic pressures (Fig. 4-5). Deﬂate the cuff promptly and completely 
and wait for 15 to 30 seconds.
Position the Stethoscope Bell Over the Brachial Artery. Now 
place the bell of a stethoscope lightly over the brachial artery, taking care to 
make an air seal with the full rim (Fig. 4-6). Because the sounds to be heard, 
the Korotkoff sounds, are relatively low in pitch, they are generally better 
heard with the bell.
A loose cuff or a bladder that balloons 
outside the cuff leads to falsely high 
readings.
An unrecognized auscultatory gap 
may lead to serious underestimation 
of systolic pressure (150 instead of 
200 in the example below) or overesti-
mation of diastolic pressure. 
F I G U R E  4 - 6 .  Place the bell over the brachial artery.
200
160
120
80
40
0
mm Hg
Systolic
pressure
Auscultatory gap
Diastolic
pressure
F I G U R E  4 - 5 .  Auscultatory gap.
If you find an auscultatory gap, record 
your findings completely (e.g., 200/98 
with an auscultatory gap from 170 to 
150).
An auscultatory gap (Fig. 4-6) is asso-
ciated with arterial stiffness and ath-
erosclerotic disease.43
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  4 |
 
Beginning the Physical Examination: General Survey, Vital Signs, and Pain 
129
THE VITAL SIGNS
Identify the Systolic Blood Pressure. Inﬂate the cuff again rapidly to 
the target level, and then deﬂate the cuff slowly at a rate of about 2 to 3 mm Hg 
per second. Note the level when you hear the sounds of at least two consecutive 
beats. This is the systolic pressure (Fig. 4-7).
120
160
80
40
mm Hg
Arterial
pulse
tracing
Effect of cuff
on arterial blood flow
Auscultatory
findings
Artery 
occluded;
no flow
Artery
compressed;
blood flow
audible
Artery not
compressed;
flow free
and inaudible
Silence
Silence
Systolic
pressure
Diastolic
pressure
Sounds of
turbulent flow
F I G U R E  4 - 7 .  Auscultating systolic and diastolic Koratkoff sounds.
Identify the Diastolic Blood Pressure. Continue to deﬂate the cuff 
slowly until the sounds become mufﬂed and disappear. To conﬁrm the disap-
pearance point, listen as the pressure falls another 10 to 20 mm Hg. Then 
deﬂate the cuff rapidly to zero. The disappearance point, which is usually only 
a few mm Hg below the mufﬂing point, provides the best estimate of diastolic 
pressure (Fig. 4-7).
Average Two or More Readings. Read both the systolic and the diastolic 
levels to the nearest 2 mm Hg. Wait 2 or more minutes and repeat. Average your 
readings. If the ﬁrst two readings differ by more than 5 mm Hg, take additional 
readings.
When using an aneroid instrument, hold the dial so that it faces you directly. 
Avoid slow or repetitive inﬂations of the cuff because the resulting venous con-
gestion can cause false readings.
In some people, the muffling point and 
the disappearance point are farther 
apart. Occasionally, as in aortic regur-
gitation, the sounds never disappear. If 
the difference is 10 mm Hg or greater, 
record both figures (e.g., 154/80/68).
By making the sounds less audible, 
venous congestion may produce arti-
ficially low systolic and high diastolic 
pressures.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
130 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE VITAL SIGNS
Measure Blood Pressure in Both Arms At Least Once. Normally, there 
may be a difference in pressure of 5 mm Hg and sometimes up to 10 mm Hg. 
Subsequent readings should be made on the arm with the higher pressure.
Classiﬁcation of Normal and Abnormal Blood Pressure. The 
Seventh Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment 
of High Blood Pressure Report recommends using the mean of two or more properly 
measured seated blood pressure readings, taken on two or more ofﬁce visits, for 
establishing of the blood pressure. The blood pressure measurement should be 
veriﬁed in the contralateral arm.36 This report identiﬁes four levels of systolic and 
diastolic hypertension, afﬁrmed by the American Society of Hypertension in 
2013.44 Note that either component may be high. In 2013, the Eighth Joint 
National Committee (JNC 8) issued the JNC 8 report based on rigorous scientiﬁc 
review of clinical trial data.35 This report focuses more narrowly on thresholds 
and goals for pharmacologic treatment. For patients ages ≥18 years to <60 years 
in the general population, JNC 8 recommends treatment to lower blood pressure 
for a diastolic blood pressure of ≥90 (strong evidence) and systolic blood pressure 
of ≥140 (expert opinion). For patients ages ≥60 years, JNC 8 recommends 
treatment for blood pressures ≥150/90. The JNC 8 report also recommends a 
higher treatment threshold than JNC 7 for patients with diabetes and chronic 
kidney disease (CKD), ≥140/90.
A pressure difference of more than 10 
to 15 mm Hg occurs in subclavian steal 
syndrome, supravalvular aortic steno-
sis, and aortic dissection, and should 
be investigated.
Blood Pressure Classiﬁcation for Adults (JNC 8, 
American Society of Hypertension, JNC 7)35,36,44
Category
Systolic (mm Hg)
Diastolic (mm Hg)
Normal36
Prehypertension36,44
Stage 1 hypertension35
Ages ≥18 to <60 years;  
diabetes or renal  
disease
Age ≥60 yearsa
Stage 2 hypertension36,44
<120
120–139
140–159
150–159
≥160
<80
80–89
90–99
90–99
≥100
aThe American Society of Hypertension raises this cutoﬀ to age ≥80 years.
Assessment of hypertension also 
includes its effects on target “end 
organs”—the eyes, heart, brain, and 
kidneys. Look for hypertensive retinop-
athy, left ventricular hypertrophy, and 
neurologic deficits suggesting stroke. 
Renal assessment requires urinalysis 
and blood tests of renal function.
When the systolic and diastolic levels fall in different categories, use the higher 
category. For example, 170/92 mm Hg is stage 2 hypertension; 135/98 mm Hg 
is stage 1 hypertension. In isolated systolic hypertension, systolic blood pressure is 
≥140 mm Hg, and diastolic blood pressure is <90 mm Hg.
Treatment of isolated systolic hyper-
tension in patients ages ê60 years 
reduces mortality and complications 
from cardiovascular disease. The prev-
alence of isolated systolic hyperten-
sion in Americans ages 18 to 49 years 
is increasing, also placing them at 
higher cardiovascular risk.45,46
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  4 |
 
Beginning the Physical Examination: General Survey, Vital Signs, and Pain 
131
THE VITAL SIGNS
Low Blood Pressure. Interpret relatively low levels of blood pressure in 
the light of past readings and the patient’s clinical state.
Orthostatic Hypotension. If indicated, assess orthostatic hypotension, 
common in older adults. Measure blood pressure and heart rate in two 
positions—supine after the patient is resting from 3 to 10 minutes, then within 
3 minutes once the patient stands up. Normally, as the patient rises from the 
horizontal to the standing position, systolic pressure drops slightly or remains 
unchanged, whereas diastolic pressure rises slightly. Orthostatic hypotension is 
a drop in systolic blood pressure of at least 20 mm Hg or in diastolic blood 
pressure of at least 10 mm Hg within 3 minutes of standing.47,48
Special Situations
Weak or Inaudible Korotkoff Sounds. Consider technical problems 
such as erroneous placement of your stethoscope, failure to make full skin 
contact with the bell, and venous engorgement of the patient’s arm from repeated 
inﬂations of the cuff. Also consider the possibilities of vascular disease or shock. 
When you cannot hear Korotkoff sounds at all, alternative methods using a 
Doppler probe or direct arterial pressure tracings may be necessary.
White Coat Hypertension. Encourage the patient to relax and remeasure 
the blood pressure later in the encounter. Consider automated ofﬁce readings or 
ambulatory recordings.
The Obese or Very Thin Patient. For the obese arm, use a cuff 16 cm 
in width. If the upper arm is short despite a large circumference, use a thigh cuff 
or a very long cuff. If the arm circumference is >50 cm and not amenable to use 
of a thigh cuff, wrap an appropriately sized cuff around the forearm, hold the 
forearm at heart level, and feel for the radial pulse.42 Other options include using 
a Doppler probe at the radial artery or an oscillometric device. For the very thin 
arm, consider using a pediatric cuff.
Arrhythmias. Irregular rhythms produce variations in pressure and 
therefore unreliable measurements. Ignore the effects of an occasional premature 
contraction. With frequent premature contractions or atrial ﬁbrillation, determine 
the average of several observations and note that your measurements are 
approximate. Ambulatory monitoring for 2 to 24 hours is recommended.42
The Hypertensive Patient with Systolic Blood Pressure Higher 
in the Arms than in the Legs. Compare blood pressure in the arms and 
the legs and assess “femoral delay” at least once in every hypertensive patient.
■ Coarctation of the aorta arises from narrowing of the thoracic aorta, usually 
distal to origin of the left subclavian artery, and classically presents with 
systolic hypertension greater in the arms than the legs. In normal patients, 
the systolic blood pressure should be 5 to 10 mm Hg higher in the lower 
extremities than in the arms.
A pressure of 110/70 mm Hg would 
usually be normal, but could also 
indicate significant hypotension if 
past pressures have been high.
Causes of orthostatic hypotension 
include drugs, moderate or severe 
blood loss, prolonged bed rest, and 
diseases of the autonomic nervous 
system.
See Chapter 20, Physical Examination 
of the Older Adult, pp. 989–997.
In rare cases, patients are pulseless 
due to occlusive disease in the 
arteries of all the limbs from Takayasu 
arteritis, giant cell arteritis, or 
atherosclerosis.
See definition of white coat 
hypertension on p. 126.
Using a small cuff overestimates 
systolic blood pressure in obese 
patients.49
Detection of an irregularly irregular 
rhythm suggests atrial fibrillation. For 
all irregular patterns, obtain an ECG to 
identify the type of rhythm.
In coarctation of the aorta and occlusive 
aortic disease there is systolic hyper-
tension in the upper extremities and 
lower blood pressure in the legs, and 
diminished or delayed femoral pulses, 
sometimes termed femoral delay.50
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
132 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE VITAL SIGNS
■ To determine blood pressure in the leg, use a wide, long thigh cuff that 
has a bladder size of 18 × 42 cm, and apply it to the midthigh. Center 
the bladder over the posterior surface, wrap it securely, and listen over 
the popliteal artery. If possible, the patient should be prone. Alterna-
tively, ask the supine patient to flex one leg slightly, with the heel resting 
on the bed.
■ Palpate the radial or brachial and the femoral pulses at the same time, and 
compare their volume and timing. Normally, volume is equal and the pulses 
occur simultaneously.
Heart Rate and Rhythm
Examine the arterial pulses, the heart rate and rhythm, and the amplitude and 
contour of the pulse wave.
Heart Rate. The radial pulse is 
commonly used to assess the heart 
rate (Fig. 4-8). With the pads of 
your index and middle ﬁngers, 
compress the radial artery until a 
maximal pulsation is detected. If the 
rhythm is regular and the rate seems 
normal, count the rate for 30 seconds 
and multiply by 2. If the rate is 
unusually fast or slow, count for 
60 seconds. The usual range of 
normal is 60 to 90 to 100 beats per 
minute.51
Rhythm. Begin by palpating the radial pulse. If there are any irregularities, 
assess the rhythm at the apex by listening with your stethoscope. Premature 
beats of low amplitude may not be transmitted to the peripheral pulses, leading 
to underestimates of the heart rate. Is the rhythm regular or irregular? If irregular, 
try to identify a pattern: (1) Do early beats appear in a basically regular rhythm? 
(2) Does the irregularity vary consistently with respiration? (3) Is the rhythm 
totally irregular?
Respiratory Rate and Rhythm
Observe the rate, rhythm, depth, and effort of breathing. Count the number of res-
pirations in 1 minute either by visual inspection or by subtly listening over the 
patient’s trachea with your stethoscope during your examination of the head and 
neck or chest. Normally, adults take approximately 20 breaths per minute in a 
quiet, regular pattern. An occasional sigh is normal. Check to see if expiration is 
prolonged.
F I G U R E  4 - 8 .  Palpate the radial pulse.
An elevated resting heart rate is asso-
ciated with increased risk of cardio-
vascular disease and mortality.52
See Table 9-1, Selected Heart Rates 
and Rhythms, p. 400, and Table 9-2, 
Selected Irregular Rhythms, p. 401.
Always check an ECG to identify the 
type of rhythm.
Prolonged expiration is common in 
COPD.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
See Table 8-4, Abnormalities in Rate 
and Rhythm of Breathing, p. 335.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  4 |
 
Beginning the Physical Examination: General Survey, Vital Signs, and Pain 
133
THE VITAL SIGNS
Temperature
The core body temperature, measured internally, is approximately 37°C (98.6°F) 
and ﬂuctuates approximately 1°C over the course of the day. It is lowest in the 
early morning and highest in the afternoon and evening. Women have a wider 
range of normal temperature than men.53
Although the research gold standard for core body temperature is the blood 
temperature in the pulmonary artery, clinical practice relies on noninvasive 
oral, rectal, axillary, tympanic membrane, and temporal artery measure-
ments.44 Tympanic membrane and temporal artery temperatures use infrared 
thermometry.
■ Oral and rectal temperature measurements remain common. Oral tempera-
tures are generally lower than the core body temperature. They are also lower 
than rectal temperatures by an average of 0.4 to 0.5°C (0.7 to 0.9°F), and 
higher than axillary temperatures by approximately 1°. Axillary temperatures 
take 5 to 10 minutes to register and are considered less accurate than other 
measurements.
■ Tympanic membrane temperatures can be more variable than oral or rectal 
temperatures. Studies vary in methodology, but suggest that in adults, oral 
and temporal artery temperatures correlate more closely with the pulmonary 
artery temperature, but are about 0.5°C lower.54–56
Oral Temperatures. For oral temperatures, options include electronic or 
glass thermometers. Due to breakage and mercury exposure, glass thermometers 
are being replaced by electronic thermometers. If using an electronic thermometer, 
carefully place the disposable cover over the probe and insert the thermometer 
under the tongue. Ask the patient to close both lips, and then watch closely for 
the digital readout. An accurate temperature recording usually takes about 
10 seconds.
For glass thermometers, shake the thermometer down to 35°C (96°F) or below, 
insert it under the tongue, instruct the patient to close both lips, and wait for 3 
to 5 minutes. Then read the thermometer, reinsert it for a minute, and read it 
again. If the temperature is still rising, repeat this procedure until the reading 
remains stable. Note that hot or cold liquids, and even smoking, can alter the 
temperature reading. In these situations, delay taking the temperature for 10 to 
15 minutes.
Rectal Temperatures. For a rectal temperature, ask the patient to lie on 
one side with the hip ﬂexed. Select a rectal thermometer with a stubby tip, 
lubricate it, and insert it about 3 cm to 4 cm (1.5 inches) into the anal canal, 
in a direction pointing to the umbilicus. Remove it after 3 minutes, then 
read. Alternatively, use an electronic thermometer after lubricating the probe 
cover. Wait about 10 seconds for the digital temperature recording to 
appear.
Fever, or pyrexia, refers to an elevated 
body temperature. Hyperpyrexia 
refers to extreme elevation in temper-
ature, above 41.1°C (106°F), whereas 
hypothermia refers to an abnormally 
low temperature, below 35°C (95°F) 
rectally.
Causes of fever include infection, 
trauma such as surgery or crush inju-
ries, malignancy, drug reactions, and 
immune disorders such as collagen 
vascular disease.
The chief cause of hypothermia is 
exposure to cold. Other causes 
include reduced movement as in 
paralysis, interference with vasocon-
striction from sepsis or excess alcohol, 
starvation, hypothyroidism, and 
hypoglycemia. Older adults are espe-
cially susceptible to hypothermia and 
also less likely to develop fever.
Rapid respiratory rates tend to 
increase the discrepancy between 
oral and rectal temperatures. In these 
situations, rectal temperatures are 
more reliable.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
134 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ACUTE AND CHRONIC PAIN
Tympanic Membrane Temperatures. The tympanic membrane shares 
the same blood supply as the hypothalamus, where temperature regulation 
occurs in the brain. Accurate temperature readings require access to the tympanic 
membrane. Make sure the external auditory canal is free of cerumen, which can 
lower temperature readings. Position the probe in the canal so that the infrared 
beam is aimed at the tympanic membrane, or otherwise the measurement will 
be invalid. Wait for 2 to 3 seconds until the digital temperature reading appears.
Temporal Artery Temperatures. This method takes advantage of the 
location of the temporal artery, which branches off the external carotid artery and 
lies within a millimeter of the skin surface of the forehead, cheek, and behind the 
ear lobes. Place the probe against the center of the forehead, depress the infrared 
scanning button, and brush the device across the forehead, down the cheek, and 
behind an earlobe. Read the display, which records the highest measure 
temperature. Industry information suggests that combined forehead and behind-
the-ear contact is more accurate than scanning only the forehead.
Chronic pain may be a spectrum dis-
order related to mental health and 
somatic conditions. See Chapter 5, 
Behavior and Mental Status, Symp-
toms and Behavior, pp. 148–153.
Numerous validated brief screening 
tools are available for office use.58,61
See Chapter 3, The Seven Attributes  
of a Symptom, p. 79.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Acute and Chronic Pain
Assessing Acute and Chronic Pain
The International Association for the Study of Pain deﬁnes pain as “an unpleasant 
sensory and emotional experience” associated with tissue damage. The experi-
ence of pain is complex and multifactorial. Pain involves sensory, emotional, and 
cognitive processing, but may lack a speciﬁc physical etiology.57
Chronic pain is deﬁned in several ways: pain not associated with cancer or other 
medical conditions that persists for more than 3 to 6 months; pain lasting more 
than 1 month beyond the course of an acute illness or injury; or pain recurring 
at intervals of months or years. Chronic noncancer pain affects an estimated 100 
million Americans and 5% to 33% of patients in primary care settings.58,59 More 
than 40% of patients report that their pain is poorly controlled. Treatment and 
management represent a growing concern to leading educators and professional 
societies, warranting a special report by the IOM in 2011 on Relieving Pain in 
America, A Blueprint for Transforming Prevention, Care, Education, and Research58
and targeted interdisciplinary curricula.60
Adopt a multidisciplinary, measurement-based approach to assessing pain, care-
fully listening to the patient’s story, the many features of pain, and contributing 
factors.58,61
The Patient’s History. Elicit the full history of the patient’s pain, tailoring 
your approach to each patient’s unique experience. Ask the patient to describe 
the pain and how it started. Is it related to a site of injury, movement, or time of 
day? What is the quality of the pain—sharp, dull, burning? Ask if the pain 
radiates or follows a particular pattern. What makes the pain better or worse? 
Pursue the seven features of pain, as you would with any symptom. Ask the 
patient to point to the pain because verbal descriptions can be imprecise.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  4 |
 
Beginning the Physical Examination: General Survey, Vital Signs, and Pain 
135
ACUTE AND CHRONIC PAIN
Ask about treatments that the patient has tried, including medications, physical 
therapy, and alternative medicines. A comprehensive medication history identi-
ﬁes drugs that interact with analgesics and reduce their efﬁcacy.
Explore any comorbid conditions such as arthritis, diabetes, HIV/AIDS, sub-
stance abuse, sickle cell disease, or psychiatric disorders. These can have signiﬁ-
cant effects on the patient’s experience of pain.
Chronic pain is the leading cause of disability and impaired performance at 
work. Inquire about the effects of pain on the patient’s daily activities, mood, 
sleep, work, and sexual activity.
Assessing Severity of the Pain. Use a consistent method to assess 
pain severity. Three scales are common: the Visual Analog Scale and two 
scales using ratings from 1 to 10—the Numeric Rating Scale and the Wong-
Baker FACES Pain Rating Scale. Numerous more detailed multidimensional 
tools like the Brief Pain Inventory and the McGill Pain Questionnaire are 
also available, but take longer to administer.62 The Wong-Baker FACES® 
Pain Raiting Scale can be used by children as well as patients with language 
barriers or cognitive impairment.63 The Faces Pain Scale by the International 
Association for the Study of Pain64 is reproduced in Figure 4-9.
0
2
4
6
8
10
F I G U R E  4 - 9 .  Pain rating scale. Explain to the person that each face is for a person 
who feels happy because he has no pain (hurt) or sad because he has some or a lot of 
pain. Face 0 is very happy because he doesn’t hurt at all. Face 2 hurts just a little bit. 
Face 4 hurts a little more. Face 6 hurts even more. Face 8 hurts a whole lot. Face 10 
hurts as much as you can imagine, although you don’t have to be crying to feel this 
bad. Ask the person to choose the face that best describes how he is feeling. (Faces Pain 
Scale—Revised (FPS-R).  www.iasp-pain.org/fpsr. Copyright © 2001, International Association for the Study of Pain®. Reproduced 
with permission.)
Health Disparities. Health disparities in pain treatment and delivery of 
care are well documented, ranging from lower use of analgesics in emergency 
rooms for African-American and Hispanic patients to disparities in use of 
analgesics for cancer, postoperative, and low back pain.58 Studies show that 
clinician stereotypes, language barriers, and unconscious clinician biases in 
decision making all contribute to these disparities. Critique your own 
communication style, seek information and best practice standards, and improve 
your techniques of patient education and empowerment as ﬁrst steps to ensure 
uniform and effective pain management.
Types of Pain. Review the summary of types of pain on the next page to aid 
in your diagnosis and management.66
See IOM report, Unequal Treatment: 
Confronting Racial and Ethnic  
Disparities in Health Care, 2002.65
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
136 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ACUTE AND CHRONIC PAIN
Types of Pain
Nociceptive 
(somatic)
Nociceptive (somatic) pain is linked to tissue damage 
to the skin, musculoskeletal system, or viscera (vis-
ceral pain), but the sensory nervous system is intact, 
as in arthritis or spinal stenosis. It can be acute or 
chronic. It is mediated by the afferent A-delta and 
C-fibers of the sensory system. The involved afferent 
nociceptors can be sensitized by inflammatory medi-
ators and modulated by both psychological processes 
and neurotransmitters like endorphins, histamines, 
acetylcholine, serotonin, norepinephrine, and  
dopamine.
Neuropathic pain
Neuropathic pain is a direct consequence of a lesion  
or disease aﬀecting the somatosensory system. Over 
time, neuropathic pain may become independent of 
the inciting injury, becoming burning, lancinating, or 
shock-like in quality, It may persist even after healing 
from the initial injury has occurred. Mechanisms pos-
tulated to evoke neuropathic pain include central ner-
vous system brain or spinal cord injury from stroke or 
trauma; peripheral nervous system disorders causing 
entrapment or pressure on spinal nerves, plexuses, or 
peripheral nerves; and referred pain syndromes with 
increased or prolonged pain responses to inciting stim-
uli. These triggers appear to induce changes in pain 
signal processing through “neuronal plasticity,” lead-
ing to pain that persists beyond healing from the initial 
injury.
Central  
sensitization
In central sensitization pain, there is alteration of central 
nervous system processing of sensation, leading to 
ampliﬁcation of pain signals. There is a lower pain 
threshold to nonpainful stimuli, and the response to pain 
may be more severe than expected. Mechanisms are the 
subject of ongoing research. An example is ﬁbromyalgia, 
which has a strong overlap with depression, anxiety, and 
somatization disorders and responds best to medica-
tions that modify neurotransmitters like serotonin and 
dopamine.
Psychogenic pain
Psychogenic pain involves the many factors that inﬂuence 
the patient’s report of pain—psychiatric conditions like 
anxiety or depression, personality and coping style, cul-
tural norms, and social support systems. 
Idiopathic pain
Idiopathic pain is pain without an identiﬁable etiology.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  4 |
 
Beginning the Physical Examination: General Survey, Vital Signs, and Pain 
137
ACUTE AND CHRONIC PAIN
Managing Chronic Pain. Managing pain is a complex clinical challenge. 
Experts recommend a stepped-care approach, with an emphasis on measurement 
and tracking tools to follow responses to treatment and referrals to specialists, 
summarized below.67
Managing Chronic Pain: Steps for 
Measurement-Based Care
Step 1:  Measure pain intensity and pain interference. A validated two-item 
questionnaire is available for primary care asking patients to rate pain in 
the past month and interference with daily activities on a scale of 1 to 10.61
Step 2:  Measure mood. Treatable depression, anxiety, and posttraumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD) frequently accompany chronic pain. The PHQ-4 is a 
4-item questionnaire for detecting anxiety and depression.68 The 
Primary Care-PTSD is a 4-question screen for PTSD.69
Step 3:  Measure the eﬀect of pain on sleep. Opioid doses correlate with sleep-
disordered breathing and sleep apnea.
Step 4:  Measure risk of co-occurring substance abuse, estimated at 18% to 
30%.
Step 5:  Measure the opioid dose and calculate the opioid dose equivalency using 
available web-based calculators.
Source: Tauben D. Chronic pain management: measurement-based stepped care solutions. Pain: 
Clinical Updates. International Association for the Study of Pain. December 2012. Available at 
http://www.iasp-pain.org/PublicationsNews/NewsletterIssue.aspx?ItemNumber=2064. Accessed 
January 28, 2015.
Treating pain requires sophisticated knowledge of nonopioid, opioid, and 
adjuvant analgesics and behavioral and physical therapy, areas that are beyond 
the scope of this book. Over recent decades, clinicians have become increas-
ingly attentive to chronic pain in response to numerous guidelines for treat-
ment and care. In parallel, prescriptions for some opioids have increased more 
than 800% in the past 10 years.70 Roughly a third of all patients with chronic 
noncancer pain, or more than 3% of U.S. adults, take opioids, primarily for 
arthritis and low back pain.71 At the same time, rates of death from opioid 
overdose among medically prescribed opioid users have climbed to 148 per 
100,000.72 Recent studies show that the death rate is directly related to the 
maximum prescribed dose of daily opioids. Risk of overdose increases more 
than four- to eightfold for patients taking the highest doses, namely 100 mg/
day or more.72,73 Risk factors for fatal overdose include age 65 years or older, 
depression, substance abuse, and concurrent benzodiazepine treatment. To 
avoid such hazards, make a commitment to acquiring skills in pain assessment 
and therapeutics, and take advantage of the validated substance abuse screen-
ing and brief intervention protocols that have been shown to reduce substance-
use–related problems.74–77
Focus on the Four A’s to monitor 
patient outcomes:
● Analgesia
● Activities of daily living
● Adverse effects
● Aberrant drug-related behaviors
See Chapter 3, Interviewing and the 
Health History, for definitions of 
tolerance, physical dependence, and 
addiction, p. 96.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
138 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
Your write-up of the physical examination begins with a general description of 
the patient’s appearance, based on the General Survey. Note that initially you 
may use sentences to describe your ﬁndings; later you will use phrases. The style 
below contains phrases appropriate for most write-ups.
Recording the Physical Examination—The 
General Survey and Vital Signs
Choose vivid and graphic adjectives, as if you are painting a picture in words. 
Avoid clichés such as “well-developed,” “well-nourished,” or “in no acute dis-
tress,” because they are too general to convey the special features of the patient 
before you.
Record the vital signs taken at the time of your examination rather than 
earlier in the day. (Common abbreviations for blood pressure, heart rate, and 
respiratory rate are self-explanatory.)
“Mrs. Scott is a young, healthy-appearing woman, well-groomed, ﬁt, and 
cheerful. Height is 5′4″, weight 135 lbs, BMI 24, BP 120/80, right and left arms, 
HR 72 and regular, RR 16, temperature 37.5°C.”
OR
“Mr. Jones is an elderly man who looks pale and chronically ill. He is alert, with 
good eye contact but unable to speak more than two or three words at a time 
due to shortness of breath. He has intercostal muscle retraction when breathing 
and sits upright in bed. He is thin, with diﬀuse muscle wasting. Height is 6′2″, 
weight 175 lbs, BP 160/95, right arm, HR 108 and irregular, RR 32 and labored, 
temperature 101.2°F.”
These findings suggest exacerbation 
of COPD.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Recording Your Findings
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  4 |
 
Beginning the Physical Examination: General Survey, Vital Signs, and Pain 
139
Table 4-1 Obesity-Related Health Conditions
Cardiovascular
■ Hypertension
■ Coronary artery disease
■ Atrial ﬁbrillation
■ Heart failure
■ Cor pulmonale
■ Varicose veins
Endocrine
■ Metabolic syndrome
■ Type 2 diabetes
■ Dyslipidemia
■ Polycystic ovarian syndrome/androgenicity
■ Amenorrhea/infertility/menstrual disorders
Gastrointestinal
■ Gastroesophageal reﬂux disease (GERD)
■ Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)
■ Cholelithiasis
■ Hernias
■ Cancer: colon, pancreas, esophagus, liver
Genitourinary
■ Urinary stress incontinence
■ Obesity-related glomerulopathy
■ Hypogonadism (male)
■ Cancer: breast, cervical, ovarian, uterine
■ Pregnancy complications
■ Nephrolithiasis, chronic renal disease
Integument
■ Striae distensae (stretch marks)
■ Status pigmentation of legs
■ Lymphedema
■ Cellulitis
■ Intertrigo, carbuncles
■ Acanthosis nigricans/skin tags
Musculoskeletal
■ Hyperuricemia and gout
■ Immobility
■ Osteoarthritis (knees, hips)
■ Low back pain
Neurologic
■ Stroke
■ Idiopathic intracranial hypertension
■ Meralgia paresthetica
Psychological
■ Depression/low self-esteem
■ Body image disturbance
■ Social stigmatization
Respiratory
■ Dyspnea
■ Obstructive sleep apnea
■ Hypoventilation syndrome/Pickwickian syndrome
■ Pulmonary embolism
■ Asthma
Used with permission from Kushner RF. Roadmaps for Clinical Practice: Case Studies in Disease Prevention and Health Promotion—Assessment and Management of Adult 
Obesity: A Primer for Physicians. Chicago, IL: American Medical Association; 2003. © American Medical Association 2003. All Rights Reserved.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
140 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
140 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 4-2 Eating Disorders and Excessively Low BMI
In the United States, an estimated 5 to 10 million women and 1 million men suffer from eating disorders. The lifetime prevalence 
estimates for anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge eating disorders are 0.9%, 1.5%, and 3.5%, respectively, among 
women; and 0.3%, 0.5%, and 2.0%, respectively, among men. These severe disturbances of eating behavior are often difﬁcult to 
detect, especially in teens wearing baggy clothes or in individuals who binge and then induce vomiting or evacuation. Be familiar 
with the two principal eating disorders, anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa. Both conditions are characterized by distorted 
perceptions of body image and weight. Early detection is important because prognosis improves when treatment occurs in the 
early stages of these disorders.
Clinical Features
Anorexia Nervosa
Bulimia Nervosa
■  Refusal to maintain minimally normal body weight (or BMI 
above 17.5 kg/m2)
■  Afraid of gaining weight or becoming fat
■  Frequently starving but in denial; lacking insight
■  Often brought in by family members
■  May present as failure to make expected weight gains in 
childhood or adolescence, amenorrhea in women, loss of 
libido or potency in men
■  Associated with depressive symptoms such as depressed 
mood, irritability, social withdrawal, insomnia, decreased 
libido
■  Additional features supporting diagnosis: self-induced 
vomiting or purging, excessive exercise, use of appetite 
suppressants and/or diuretics
■  Biologic complications
■  Gynecological: amenorrhea
■  Endocrine: hypercortisolemia, hypoglycemia, osteoporosis, 
euthyroid hypothyroxinemia
■  Cardiovascular disorders: bradycardia, hypotension, 
arrhythmias, cardiomyopathy
■  Metabolic disorders: hypokalemia, hypochloremic metabolic 
alkalosis, increased blood urea nitrogen (BUN), edema
■  Other: dry skin, dental caries, delayed gastric emptying, 
constipation, anemia, fatigue, weakness
■  Repeated binge eating followed by self-induced vomiting, 
misuse of laxatives, diuretics or other medications, fasting, 
or excessive exercise
■  Often with normal weight
■  Overeating at least once a week during 3-month period; 
large amounts of food consumed in short period (∼2 hrs)
■  Preoccupation with eating; craving and compulsion to eat; 
lack of control over eating; alternating with periods of 
starvation
■  Dread of fatness (usually leading to underweight)
■  Subtypes of
■  Purging: bulimic episodes accompanied by self-induced 
vomiting or use of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas
■  Nonpurging: bulimic episodes accompanied by 
compensatory behavior such as fasting, or excessive 
exercising
■  Biologic complications. See changes listed for anorexia 
nervosa, especially weakness, fatigue, mild cognitive 
disorder; also erosion of dental enamel, parotid gland 
swelling, pancreatitis, mild neuropathies, seizures, 
hypokalemia, hypochloremic metabolic acidosis, 
hypomagnesemia
Sources: Hudson JI, Hiripi E, Pope HG Jr, et al. The prevalence and correlates of eating disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Biol Psychiatry. 
2007;61:348; World Health Organization. The ICD-10 Classiﬁcation of Mental and Behavioral Disorders: Diagnostic Criteria for Research. Geneva: World Health 
Organization, 1993; American Psychiatric Association. DSM-5: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 5th ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric 
Association, 2013; Andersen AE. Eating Disorders: In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan and Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. New York, 
NY: Wolters Kluwer; Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2009.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  4 |
 
Beginning the Physical Examination: General Survey, Vital Signs, and Pain 
141
Table 4-3 Nutrition Screening
Mini Nutritional Assessment
MNA®
 
 
 
Last name:                                                                              First name:
Sex:
Age:
Weight, kg:
Height, cm:
Date:  
Screening
A Has food intake declined over the past 3 months due to loss of appetite, digestive problems, chewing or
swallowing difficulties?
0 = severe decrease in food intake
1 = moderate decrease in food intake
2 = no decrease in food intake
B
Weight loss during the last 3 months
0 = weight loss greater than 3 kg (6.6 lbs)
1 = does not know
2 = weight loss between 1 and 3 kg (2.2 and 6.6 lbs)
3 = no weight loss 
C
Mobility
0 = bed or chair bound
1 = able to get out of bed / chair but does not go out
2 = goes out
D
Has suffered psychological stress or acute disease in the past 3 months?
0 = yes
2 = no 
E
Neuropsychological problems
0 = severe dementia or depression
1 = mild dementia
2 = no psychological problems 
F1 Body Mass Index (BMI) (weight in kg) / (height in m)2
0 = BMI less than 19
1 = BMI 19 to less than 21
2 = BMI 21 to less than 23
3 = BMI 23 or greater 
IF BMI IS NOT AVAILABLE, REPLACE QUESTION F1 WITH QUESTION F2.
DO NOT ANSWER QUESTION F2 IF QUESTION F1 IS ALREADY COMPLETED.
Complete the screen by filling in the boxes with the appropriate numbers. Total the numbers for the final screening score.
 
F2 Calf circumference (CC) in cm
0 = CC less than 31
 
Screening score (max. 14 points)
12 - 14 points: Normal nutritional status
8 - 11 points: At risk of malnutrition
0 - 7 points: Malnourished
References
1. Vellas B, Villars H, Abellan G, et al. Overview of the MNA® - Its History and Challenges. J Nutr Health Aging. 2006;10:456-465.
2. Rubenstein LZ, Harker JO, Salva A, Guigoz Y, Vellas B. Screening for Undernutrition in Geriatric Practice: Developing the Short-Form Mini   
Nutritional Assessment (MNA-SF). J. Geront. 2001; 56A: M366-377
3. Guigoz Y. The Mini-Nutritional Assessment (MNA ) Review of the Literature - What does it tell us? J Nutr Health Aging. 2006; 10:466-487.
4. Kaiser MJ, Bauer JM, Ramsch C, et al.  Validation of the Mini Nutritional Assessment Short-Form (MNA®-SF): A practical tool for  
identification of nutritional status. J Nutr Health Aging. 2009; 13:782-788.
® Société des Produits Nestlé, S.A., Vevey, Switzerland, Trademark Owners © Nestlé, 1994, Revision 2009. N67200 12/99 10M
For more information: www.mna-elderly.com
3 = CC 31 or greater
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
142 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
142 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 4-4  Obesity: Stages of Change Model  
and Assessing Readiness
Stage
Characteristic
Patient Verbal Cue
Appropriate 
Intervention
Sample Dialogue
Precontemplation
Unaware of problem, 
no interest in change
“I’m not really interested in 
weight loss. It’s not a 
problem.”
Provide information 
about health risks and 
beneﬁts of weight loss
“Would you like to read 
some information about 
the health aspects of 
obesity?”
Contemplation
Aware of problem, 
beginning to think of 
changing
“I know I need to lose 
weight, but with all that’s 
going on in my life right 
now, I’m not sure I can.”
Help resolve 
ambivalence; discuss 
barriers
“Let’s look at the beneﬁts 
of weight loss, as well as 
what you may need to 
change.”
Preparation
Realizes beneﬁts of 
making changes and 
thinking about how to 
change
“I have to lose weight, and 
I’m planning to do that.”
Teach behavior 
modiﬁcation; provide 
education
“Let’s take a closer look at 
how you can reduce some 
of the calories you eat and 
how to increase your 
activity during the day.”
Action
Actively taking steps 
toward change
“I’m doing my best. This is 
harder than I thought.”
Provide support and 
guidance, with a focus 
on the long term
“It’s terriﬁc that you’re 
working so hard. What 
problems have you had so 
far? How have you solved 
them?”
Maintenance
Initial treatment goals 
reached
“I’ve learned a lot through 
this process.”
Relapse control
“What situations continue 
to tempt you to overeat? 
What can be helpful for 
the next time you face 
such a situation?”
Sources: American Medical Association. Roadmaps for Clinical Practice—Case Studies in Disease Prevention and Health Promotion—Assessment and Management 
of Adult Obesity: A Primer for Physicians. Communication and Counseling Strategies. Booklet 8. Chicago, November 2003. Adapted from Prochaska JO, 
DiClemente CC. Toward a comprehensive model of change. In: Miller WR, ed. Treating Addictive Behaviors. New York, NY: Plenum, 1986:3.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 4-5 Nutrition Counseling: Sources of Nutrients
Nutrient
Food Source
Calcium
Dairy foods such as milk, natural cheeses, and yogurt
Calcium-fortiﬁed cereals, fruit juice, soy milk, and tofu
Dark green leafy vegetables like collard, turnip, and mustard greens; kale; bok choy
Sardines
Iron
Lean meat, dark turkey meat, liver
Clams, mussels, oysters, sardines, anchovies
Iron-fortiﬁed cereals
Enriched and whole grain bread
Spinach, peas, lentil, turnip greens, and artichokes
Dried prunes and raisins
Folate
Cooked dried beans and peas
Oranges, orange juice
Liver
Spinach, mustard greens
Black-eyed peas, lentils, okra, chick peas, peanuts
Folate-fortiﬁed cereals
Vitamin D
Vitamin D–fortiﬁed milk, orange juice, and cereals
Cod liver oil; swordﬁsh, salmon, herring, mackerel, tuna, trout
Egg yolk
Mushrooms
Source: Adapted from U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2010. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce; 2010; Choose MyPlate.gov. Available at http://www.choosemyplate.gov/index.html. Accessed December 15, 2014; Ofﬁce of 
Dietary Supplements, National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Fact Sheets: Calcium; Vitamin D. Available at http://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/list-all/. 
Accessed December 15, 2014.
Table 4-6  Patients with Hypertension: Recommended 
Changes in Diet
Dietary Change
Food Source
Increase foods high in 
potassium
Baked white or sweet potatoes, white beans, beet greens, soybeans, spinach, lentils, kidney beans
Yogurt
Tomato paste, juice, puree, and sauce
Bananas, plantains, many dried fruits, orange juice
Decrease foods high in 
sodium
Canned foods (soups, tuna ﬁsh)
Pretzels, potato chips, pizza, pickles, olives
Many processed foods (frozen dinners, ketchup, mustard)
Batter-fried foods
Table salt, including for cooking
Source: Adapted from: U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2010. Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce; 2010; Choose MyPlate.gov. Available at http://www.choosemyplate.gov/index.html. Accessed December 15, 2014; Ofﬁce 
of Dietary Supplements, National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Fact Sheets: Calcium; Vitamin D. Available at http://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/list-all/. 
Accessed December 15, 2014.
 
C H A P T E R  4 |
 
Beginning the Physical Examination: General Survey, Vital Signs, and Pain 
143
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
144 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
References
 1. Balachandran JS, Patel SR. In the clinic: obstructive sleep apnea. 
Ann Intern Med. 2014;161:ITC-1.
 2. Bray GA, Wilson JF. In the clinic. Obesity. Ann Intern Med. 2008; 
154:ITC4–1.
 3. American Academy of Pain Medicine. AAPM Facts and Figures on 
Pain. Available at http://www.painmed.org/patientcenter/facts_on_
pain.aspx. Accessed January 21, 2015.
 4. Institute of Medicine of the National Academies Report. Relieving 
Pain in America: A Blueprint for Transforming Prevention, Care, Edu-
cation, and Research. Washington, DC: The National Academies 
Press; 2011.
 5. Riskowski JL. Associations of socioeconomic position and pain 
prevalence in the United States: ﬁndings from the National Health 
and Nutrition Examination Survey. Pain Med. 2014;15:1508.
 6. Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger VL, et al. Heart disease and stroke 
statistics–2014 update: a report from the American Heart Associa-
tion. Circulation. 2014;129(3):e28.
 7. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, et al. Prevalence of childhood and 
adult obesity in the United States, 2011–2012. JAMA. 2014;311(8): 
806.
 8. May AL, Freedman D, Sherry B, et al. Obesity–United States, 
1999–2010. MMWR Surveill Summ. 2013;62(Suppl 3):120.
 9. Bogers RP, Bemelmans WJ, Hoogenveen RT, et al. Association of 
overweight with increased risk of coronary heart disease partly 
independent of blood pressure and cholesterol levels: a meta-anal-
ysis of 21 cohort studies including more than 300,000 persons. 
Arch Intern Med. 2007;167(16):1720.
 10. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI), North Ameri-
can Association for the Study of Obesity (NAASO). Practical Guide 
on the Identiﬁcation, Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and 
Obesity in Adults. Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health; 
2000. Available at http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/ﬁles/docs/guidelines/
prctgd_c.pdf. Accessed January 21, 2015.
 11. Ng M, Fleming T, Robinson M, et al. Global, regional, and national 
prevalence of overweight and obesity in children and adults during 
1980–2013: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease 
Study 2013. Lancet. 2014;384(9945):766.
 12. Schauer GL, Halperin AC, Mancl LA, et al. Health professional 
advice for smoking and weight in adults with and without diabe-
tes: ﬁndings from BRFSS. J Behav Med. 2013;36:10.
 13. Kushner RF, Ryan DH. Assessment and lifestyle management of 
patients with obesity: clinical recommendations from systematic 
reviews. JAMA. 2014;312:943.
 14. U.S. Department of Agriculture, U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services. Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2010. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce; 2010. Available at http://
www.cnpp.usda.gov/DietaryGuidelines. Accessed January 21, 
2015.
 15. Le Blanc E, O’Connor E, Whitlock EP, et al. Screening for and 
Management of Obesity and Overweight in Adults. Evidence 
Report No. 89. AHRQ Publication No. 11–05159-EF-1. Rockville, 
MD. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, October 2011. 
Available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmedhealth/
PMH0016399/. Accessed January 21, 2015. 
 16. Kelesidis T, Kelesidis I, Chou S, et al. Narrative review: the role of 
leptin in human physiology: emerging clinical applications. Ann 
Intern Med. 2010;152(2):93.
 17. Foster GD, Wyatt HR, Hill JO, et al. Weight and metabolic out-
comes after 2 years on a low-carbohydrate versus low-fat diet: a 
randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2010;153(3):147.
 18. Sacks FM, Bray GA, Carey VJ, et al. Comparison of weight-loss 
diets with different compositions of fat, protein, and carbohy-
drates. N Engl J Med. 2009;360(9):859.
 19. Lau DC, Douketis JD, Morrison KM, et al. 2006 Canadian clinical 
practice guidelines on the management and prevention of obesity 
in adults and children [summary]. CMAJ. 2007;176(8):S1.
 20. Strazzullo P, D’Elia L, Kandala NB, et al. Salt intake, stroke, and 
cardiovascular disease: meta-analysis of prospective studies. BMJ. 
2009;339:b4567.
 21. Institute of Medicine. Sodium Intake in Populations: Assessment of 
Evidence. Report Brief. Washington, DC: The Institute of Medicine; 
2013.
 22. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Trends in the prev-
alence of excess dietary sodium intake—United States, 2003–2010. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2013;62(50):1021.
 23. Eckel RH, Jakicic JM, Ard JD, et al. 2013 AHA/ACC guideline on 
lifestyle management to reduce cardiovascular risk: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129(25 Suppl 2):S76.
 24. Appel LJ, Frohlich ED, Hall JE, et al. The importance of population-
wide sodium reduction as a means to prevent cardiovascular dis-
ease and stroke: a call to action from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2011;123(10):1138.
 25. Institute of Medicine. Strategies to Reduce Sodium Intake in the 
United States. Washington, DC; 2010.
 26. National Heart L, and Blood Institute. Your Guide to Lowering Your 
Blood Pressure with DASH. U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services; 2006. 
 27. 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; 2008.
 28. Garber CE, Blissmer B, Deschenes MR, et al. American College of 
Sports Medicine position stand. Quantity and quality of exercise 
for developing and maintaining cardiorespiratory, musculoskele-
tal, and neuromotor ﬁtness in apparently healthy adults: guidance 
for prescribing exercise. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2011;43(7):1334.
 29. Laumann A, Derick A. Tattoos and body piercings in the United 
States: a national data set. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2006;55:413.
 30. National Heart Lung Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health. 
Body Mass Index Tables 1 and 2. Available at: http://www.nhlbi.
nih.gov/health/educational/lose_wt/BMI/bmi_tbl.htm. Accessed 
January 21, 2015.
 31. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Draft Recommendation State-
ment: High Blood Pressure in Adults: Screening. December 2014. 
Available at http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Doc-
ument/RecommendationStatementDraft/hypertension-in-adults-
screening-and-home-monitoring. Accessed January 28, 2015.
 32. Pickering TG, Miller NH, Ogebegbe G, et al. Call to action on use 
and reimbursement for home blood pressure monitoring: execu-
tive Summary. A joint scientiﬁc statement from the American Heart 
Association, American Society of Hypertension, and Preventive 
Cardiovascular Nurses Association. Hypertension. 2008;52:1.
 33. Piper MA, Evans CV, Burda BU, et al. Diagnostic and predictive 
accuracy of blood pressure screening methods with consideration 
of rescreening intervals: an updated systematic review for the U.S. 
Preventive Services Task force. Ann Intern Med. 2014;162(3):192.
 34. Hodgkinson J, Mant J, Guo B, et al. Relative effectiveness of clinic 
and home blood pressure monitoring compared with ambulatory 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  4 |
 
Beginning the Physical Examination: General Survey, Vital Signs, and Pain 
145
REFERENCES
blood pressure monitoring in diagnosis of hypertension: system-
atic review. BMJ. 2011;342:d3621.
 35. James PA, Oparil S, Carter BL, et al. 2014 Evidence-based guide-
line for the management of high blood pressure in adults–report 
from the panel members appointed to the Eighth Joint National 
Committee (JNC 8). JAMA. 2014;311:507.
 36. Chobanian AV, Bakris GL, Black HR, et al. The Seventh Report of 
the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evalua-
tion, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure—The JNC 7 Report. 
JAMA. 2003;289:2560. Available at http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/
health-pro/guidelines/current/hypertension-jnc-7/complete-
report. Accessed January 22, 2015.
 37. O’Brien E, Parati G, Stergiou G, et al. European Society of Hyper-
tension position paper on ambulatory blood pressure monitoring. 
J Hypertens. 2013;31:1731.
 38. Myers MG, Godwin M, Dawes M, et al. Conventional versus auto-
mated measurement of blood pressure in primary care patients 
with systolic hypertension: randomised parallel design controlled 
trial. BMJ. 2011;342;d286. doi: 10.1136/bmj.d286.
 39. Roger VL, Go AS, Lloyed-Jone DM, et al. Executive summary: 
heart disease and stroke statistics–2012 update: a report from the 
American Heart Association. Circulation. 2012;125:188.
 40. O’Brien E, Asmar R, Beilin L, et al. European Society of Hyperten-
sion recommendations for conventional, ambulatory, and more 
blood pressure measurement. J Hypertens. 2005;21:821.
 41. O’Brien E, Pickering T, Asmar R, et al. International protocol for 
validation of blood pressure measuring devices in adults. Blood 
Press Monit. 2002;7:3.
 42. Pickering TG, Hall JE, Appel LJ, et al. Recommendations for blood 
pressure measurement in humans and experimental animals. Part 
1: blood pressure measurement in humans: a statement for profes-
sionals from the Subcommittee of Professional and Public Educa-
tion of the American Heart Association Council on High Blood 
Pressure Research. Circulation. 2005;111:697.
 43. Cavallini MC, Roman MJ, Blank SG, et al. Association of the aus-
cultatory gap with vascular disease in hypertensive patients. Ann 
Intern Med. 1996;124:877.
 44. Weber MA, Schiffrin EL, White WB, et al. Clinical practice guide-
lines for the management of hypertension in the community: A 
statement by the American Society of Hypertension and the Inter-
national Society of Hypertension. J Clin Hypertens. 2014;16:14.
 45. Chobanian A. Isolated systolic hypertension in the elderly. N Engl 
J Med. 2007;357:789.
 46. Yano Y, Stamler J, Garside DB, et al. Isolated systolic hypertension 
in young and middle-aged adults and 31-year risk for cardiovascu-
lar mortality. The Chicago Heart Association Detection Project in 
Industry Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;65:327.
 47. Freeman R. Neurogenic orthostatic hypotension. N Engl J Med. 2008; 
358:615.
 48. Carslon JE. Assessment of orthostatic blood pressure: measure-
ment technique and clinical applications. South Med J. 1999;92:167.
 49. Fonseca-Reyes S, de Alba-García JG, Parra-Carrillo JZ, et al. Effect 
of standard cuff on blood pressure readings in patients with obese 
arms. How frequent are arms of a ‘large circumference’?  
Blood Press Monit. 2003;8:101.
 50. Warnes CA, Williams RG, Bashore TM, et al. ACC/AHA 2008 
Guidelines for the Management of Adults with Congenital Heart 
Disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2008;52:1558.
 51. Mason JW, Ramseth DJ, Chanter DO, et al. Electrocardiographic 
reference ranges derived from 79,743 ambulatory subjects. J Elec-
trocardiol. 2007;40:228.
 52. Aladin AI, Whelton SP, Al-Mallah MH, et al. Relation of resting 
heart rate to risk for all-cause mortality by gender after considering 
exercise capacity (the Henry Ford Exercise Testing Project). Am J 
Cardiology. 2014:114:1701.
 53. Sund-Levander M, Forsberg C, Wahren LK. Normal oral, rectal, 
tympanic and axillary body temperature in adult men and women: 
a systematic literature review. Scand J Caring Sci. 2002;16:122.
 54. Jeffries S, Wetherall M, Young P, et al. A systematic review of the 
accuracy of peripheral thermometry in estimated core temperatures 
among febrile critically ill patients. Crit Care Resusc. 2011;13:194.
 55. Lawson L, Bridges EJ, Ballou I, et al. Accuracy and precision of 
noninvasive temperature measurement in adult intensive care 
patients. Am J Crit Care. 2007;16:485.
 56. McCallum L, Higgins D. Measuring body temperature. Nurs Times. 
2012;108:20.
 57. International Association for the Study of Pain. IASP Taxonomy. 
Updated May 2012. Available at http://www.iasp-pain.org/
Taxonomy?navItemNumber=576. Accessed January 28, 2015.
 58. Institute of Medicine. Relieving Pain in America: A Blueprint for 
Transforming Prevention, Care, Education, and Research (2011). 
Available at http://www.nap.edu/download.php?record_id= 
13172. Accessed January 28, 2015. 
 59. Breuer B, Cruciani R, Portenoy RK. Pain management by primary 
care physicians, pain physicians, chiropractors, and acupunctur-
ists: a national survey. South Med J. 2010;103:738.
 60. International Association for the Study of Pain. IASP Interprofes-
sional Pain Curriculum Online. Updated January 2014. Available 
at http://www.iasp-pain.org/Education/CurriculumDetail.aspx? 
ItemNumber = 2057. Accessed January 29, 2015.
 61. Washington State Agency Medical Directors’ Group. Interagency 
Guideline On Opioid Dosing For Chronic Non-Cancer Pain: An Educa-
tion Aid To Improve Care And Safety With Opioid Treatment. Olympia, 
Washington: Washington State Department of labor and Indus-
tries, 2010. Available at http://www.agencymeddirectors.wa.gov/
opioiddosing.asp. Accessed January 28, 2015.
 62. Keller S, Bann CM, Dodd SL, et al. Validity of the brief pain inven-
tory for use in documenting the outcomes of patients with noncan-
cer pain. Clin J Pain. 2004;20:309.
 63. Bieri D, Reeve R, Champion GD, et al. The Faces Pain Scale for the 
self-assessment of the severity of pain experienced by children: 
development, initial validation and preliminary investigation for 
ratio scale properties. Pain. 1990;41:139.
 64. International Society for the Study of Pain. Faces Pain Scale–
Revised Home. Updated September 2014. Available at http://www.
iasp-pain.org/Education/Content.aspx?ItemNumber= 
1519&navItemNumber=577. Accessed January 28, 2015.
 65. Smedley BR, Stith AY, Nelson AR, eds. Committee on Understanding 
and Eliminating Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health Care. Unequal 
Treatment: Confronting Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health Care. 
Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2002.
 66. Haanpaa M, Attal N, Backonja M, et al. NeuPSIG guidelines on 
neuropathic pain assessment. Pain. 2011;152:14.
 67. Tauben D. Chronic pain management: measurement-based 
stepped care solutions. Pain: Clinical Updates. International Asso-
ciation for the Study of Pain. December 2012. Available at http://
www.iasp-pain.org/PublicationsNews/NewsletterIssue.
aspx?ItemNumber=2064. Accessed January 28, 2015.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
146 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
 68. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB, et al. An ultra-brief screening 
scale for anxiety and depression: the PHQ-4. Psychosomatics. 
2009;50:613.
 69. Ouimette P, Wade M, Prins A, et al. Identifying PTSD in primary 
care: comparison of the Primary Care-PTSD screen (PC-PTSD) and 
the General Health Questionnaire-12 (GHQ). J Anxiety Disord. 
2008;22:337.
 70. McClellan TA, Turner BJ. Chronic non-cancer pain management 
and opioid overdose: time to change prescribing practices. Ann 
Intern Med. 2010;152:123.
 71. Altman RD, Smith HS. Opioid therapy for osteoarthritis and 
chronic low back pain. Postgrad Med. 2010;122:87.
 72. Dunn KM, Saunders KW, Rutter CM, et al. Opioid prescriptions for 
chronic pain and overdose. A cohort study. Ann Intern Med. 
2010;152:85.
 73. Bohnert AS, Valenstein M, Bair MJ, et al. Association between opi-
oid prescribing patterns and opioid overdose-related deaths. 
JAMA. 2011;305:1315.
 74. Madras BK, Compton WM, Avula D, et al. Screening, brief inter-
ventions, referral to treatment (SBIRT) for illicit drug and alcohol 
use at multiple healthcare sites: comparison at intake and 6 months 
later. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2009;99:280.
 75. Gilron I, Watson PN, Cahill CM, et al. Neuropathic pain: a practi-
cal guide for the clinician. CMAJ. 2006;175:256.
 76. Butler SF, Budman SH, Fernandez K, et al. Validations of a screener 
and opioid assessment measure for patients with chronic pain. 
Pain. 2004;112(1–2):65.
 77. Webster LR, Webster RM. Predicting aberrant behaviors in opioid-
treated patients: preliminary validation of the Opioid Risk Tool. 
Pain Med. 2005;6:432.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  5 |
 
Behavior and Mental Status 
147
As clinicians, we are uniquely poised to detect clues to mental illness and harm-
ful behavior through empathic listening and close observation. Nonetheless, 
these clues are often missed. Recognizing mental illness is especially important 
given its signiﬁcant prevalence and morbidity, the high likelihood that it is treat-
able, the shortage of psychiatrists, and the increasing importance of primary care 
clinicians as the ﬁrst to encounter the patient’s distress.1,2 The prevalence of 
mental health disorders in U.S. adults in 2012 was 18%, affecting 43.7 million 
people; yet, only 41% received treatment.3 Even for those receiving care, adher-
ence to treatment guidelines in primary care ofﬁces is <50% and disproportion-
ately lower for ethnic minorities.4–6
C H A P T E R 5
Behavior and Mental Status
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate  
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com
F I G U R E  5 - 1 .  Assessment of 
mental status can be challenging.
See Chapter 17, The Nervous System, 
pp. 711–796.
Recognizing Mental Disorders
This chapter presents:
● Common symptoms and behaviors suggestive of mental health disorders
● Concepts that guide history taking and the general assessment of mental 
health
● Priorities for mental health promotion and counseling, and
● Components of the mental status examination, a structured framework for for-
mal assessment of behavioral and mental health disorders, and a major com-
ponent of the examination of the nervous system (Fig. 5-1).
Mental health disorders are commonly masked by other clinical conditions, 
calling for sensitive and careful inquiry. Learn to look for the interaction of 
anxiety and depression in patients with substance abuse, termed “dual diagno-
sis,” because both must be treated for the patient to achieve optimal function. 
Watch for underlying psychiatric conditions in “difﬁcult encounters” and 
patients with unexplained symptoms.7 Explore the outlook of patients with 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
148 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
SYMPTOMS AND BEHAVIOR
chronic illness, a group that is especially vulnerable to depression and anxiety.8
Finally, bear in mind that nearly half of those with any single mental disorder 
meet the criteria for one or more additional disorders, with severity strongly 
related to comorbidity.9
See Table 5-1, Somatic Symptom and 
Related Disorders, p. 169, for types  
of somatic symptom disorders and 
guidelines for management. 
Symptoms and Behavior
Understanding Symptoms:  
What Do They Mean?
Changing Paradigms for Understanding Symptoms. Sorting 
the array of symptoms encountered in an ofﬁce visit is an ongoing challenge. 
Unlike physical signs, symptoms are not observable. Traditionally, dualistic or 
binary explanatory models of symptoms have prevailed. Symptoms have been 
viewed as psychological, reﬂecting a mental or emotional state, or physical, 
relating to a body sensation such as pain, fatigue, or palpitations. Physical 
symptoms, often termed somatic in the mental health literature, prompt more 
than 50% of U.S. ofﬁce visits.10 Common somatic complaints include: pain 
from headache, backache, or musculoskeletal conditions; gastrointestinal 
symptoms; sexual or reproductive symptoms; and neurologic symptoms such 
as dizziness or loss of balance.
Approximately 5% of somatic symptoms are acute, triggering immediate evalua-
tion.11 Another 70% to 75% are minor or self-limited and resolve in 6 weeks. Nev-
ertheless, approximately 25% of patients have persisting and recurrent symptoms 
that elude assessment and fail to improve. Overall, 30% of symptoms are medically 
unexplained. Some involve single complaints that persist longer than others, for 
example, back pain, headache, or musculoskeletal pain. Others present as clusters 
in functional syndromes, such as irritable bowel syndrome, ﬁbromyalgia, chronic 
fatigue, temporomandibular joint disorder, and multiple chemical sensitivity.
Experts now propose that physical and psychological symptoms are interactive 
and represent “a varying mix of disease and nondisease input” that lies along a 
spectrum from medical to mental disorders.11 Evidence shows that symptom 
etiology is often multifactorial, lacking a single cause; and that often, there are 
several related symptoms or symptom clusters rather than single complaints.
The integrative continuum model leads to explanations that are less likely to be 
“simpliﬁed, reductionistic, or mechanistic.” Watch for emerging schemas that 
place symptoms along a causative spectrum with ﬁve nodal points: symptoms 
like wheezing, with a clear medical cause; functional somatic syndromes like 
irritable bowel syndrome; “symptom-only diagnoses” such as low back pain; 
symptoms associated with psychological conditions, like fatigue in depression; 
and ﬁnally, medically unexplained symptoms.
Changes have also occurred in the classiﬁcation of somatic syndromes in the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition (DSM-5) of 
2013. When patients have “distressing somatic symptoms plus abnormal 
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors in response to these symptoms,” clinicians can 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  5 |
 
Behavior and Mental Status 
149
SYMPTOMS AND BEHAVIOR
consider the diagnosis of somatic symptom and related disorders.12 These patients 
have prominent somatic symptoms associated with signiﬁcant distress and 
impairment and are seen more often in primary care and medical settings than 
in psychiatric and mental health settings. They may have accompanying medical 
disorders. The DSM-5 notes that “a distinctive characteristic of the many indi-
viduals with somatic symptom disorder is not the somatic symptoms per se, but 
instead the way they present and interpret them.” This change in diagnostic 
criteria emphasizes the presence of positive symptoms, and moves away from 
relying on medically unexplained symptoms and the absence of a medical cause, 
which can be difﬁcult to determine. The prevalence of somatic symptom disor-
ders is estimated at 5% to 7%.
Medically Unexplained Symptoms. Patients with medically unexplained 
symptoms fall into heterogeneous groupings ranging from selected impairment 
to behaviors meeting DSM-5 criteria for mood and somatic symptom disorders.13,14 
Many patients do not report symptoms of anxiety and depression, the most 
common mental health disorders in the general population, but focus on physical 
concerns instead (Fig. 5-2). Two-thirds of patients with depression, for example, 
present with physical complaints, and half report multiple unexplained or 
somatic symptoms.14 Furthermore, functional syndromes have been shown to 
“frequently co-occur and share key symptoms and selected objective 
abnormalities.”15 Overlap rates for ﬁbromyalgia and chronic fatigue syndrome in 
an analysis of 53 studies ranged from 34% to 70%. Failure to recognize the 
admixture of physical symptoms, functional syndromes, and common mental 
disorders—anxiety, depression, unexplained and somatoform symptoms, and 
substance abuse—add to the burden of patient undertreatment and poor quality 
of life. Authors of the ﬁrst randomized controlled intervention trial for patients 
with medically unexplained symptoms advise viewing such symptoms as “a 
generalized warning sign of underlying psychological distress, of which 
depression is an advanced manifestation.”16
The “Difﬁcult Encounter.” Patients with unexplained and somatic symp-
toms are often frequent users of the health care system and labeled as “difﬁcult 
patients.” Patient depression and anxiety “make physician ratings of difﬁcult 
encounters three times more likely, and somatization increases this likelihood 
nine-fold.”17 A growing literature reveals that 15% to 20% of primary care visits, 
or up to three to four visits a day, are considered difﬁcult.7 In the difﬁcult encoun-
ter dyad, clinician factors have emerged that include job stress and burnout, 
anxiety and depression in the clinician, less clinical experience, and aversion to 
the psychosocial aspects of care.18,19 Clinicians are urged to identify the many 
variables associated with these encounters, identify their own underlying nega-
tive emotions, adapt their approach and redirect the encounter, and explore what 
makes the encounter difﬁcult with the patient.20,21 In the words of an expert:
“Celebrate the well-navigated difﬁcult encounter. Dealing with difﬁculty signiﬁes 
mastery rather than weakness. Olympic dives are rated in terms of difﬁculty, as 
are mountain climbs, hiking trails, musical works, crossword puzzles, and highly 
technical procedures. Partnering with patients in the challenging aspects of their 
health, lives, or medical care is a stepping stone to surmounting together the difﬁ-
cult encounter.”7
F I G U R E  5 - 2 .  Clinicians often 
encounter symptoms not easily 
diagnosed.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
150 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
SYMPTOMS AND BEHAVIOR
Mental Health Screening
Unexplained conditions lasting more than 6 weeks are increasingly recognized 
as chronic disorders that should prompt screening for depression, anxiety, or 
both. Because screening all patients is time consuming and expensive, experts 
recommend a two-tier approach: brief screening questions with high sensitivity 
and speciﬁcity for patients at risk, followed by more detailed investigation when 
indicated.
Several groups of patients warrant brief screening because of high risk of coex-
isting depression and anxiety. Recent studies have helped clarify overlap symp-
toms and functional syndromes and provide streamlined practical screening tools 
suitable for ofﬁce care.27 A well-established instrument to aid in ofﬁce diagnosis 
is the PRIME-MD (Primary Care Evaluation of Mental Disorders); however, it 
Mental Disorders and Unexplained Symptoms 
in Primary Care Settings
Mental Disorders in Primary Care
● Approximately 20% of primary care outpatients have mental disorders,  
but 50% to 75% of these disorders are undetected and untreated.22,23
● Prevalence of mental disorders in primary care settings is roughly as  
follows22,24–26:
● Anxiety—20%
● Mood disorders including dysthymia, depressive, and bipolar disor-
ders—25%
● Depression—10%
● Somatoform disorders—10% to 15%
● Alcohol and substance abuse—15% to 20%
Explained and Unexplained Symptoms
● Physical symptoms account for approximately 50% of oﬃce visits.
● Roughly one-third of physical symptoms are unexplained; in 20% to 25% of 
patients, physical symptoms become chronic or recurring.10,14
● In patients with unexplained symptoms, the prevalence of depression and anxi-
ety exceeds 50% and increases with the total number of reported physical 
symptoms,10,14 making detection and “dual diagnosis” important clinical goals.
Common Functional Syndromes
● Co-occurrence rates for common functional syndromes such as irritable bowel 
syndrome, ﬁbromyalgia, chronic fatigue, temporomandibular joint disorder, 
and multiple chemical sensitivity reach 30% to 90%, depending on the disor-
ders compared.15
● The prevalence of symptom overlap is high in the common functional syn-
dromes namely, complaints of fatigue, sleep disturbance, musculoskeletal 
pain, headache, and gastrointestinal problems.
● The common functional syndromes also overlap in rates of functional impair-
ment, psychiatric comorbidity, and response to cognitive and antidepressant 
therapy.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  5 |
 
Behavior and Mental Status 
151
SYMPTOMS AND BEHAVIOR
contains 26 questions and takes up to 10 minutes to complete.25 The DSM-5 
acknowledges the diagnostic challenges facing primary care providers and has 
reduced the total number of disorders as well as their subcategories in the 
reclassiﬁcation of Somatic Symptoms and Related Disorders. Improved screen-
ing tools for ofﬁce use and management will continue to emerge.
Patient Indications for Mental Health Screening
● Medically unexplained physical symptoms—more than half have depression 
or anxiety disorder
● Multiple physical or somatic symptoms or “high symptom count”
● High severity of the presenting somatic symptom
● Chronic pain
● Symptoms for more than 6 weeks
● Physician rating as a “diﬃcult encounter”
● Recent stress
● Low self-rating of overall health
● Frequent use of health care services
● Substance abuse
Chronic pain may be a spectrum dis-
order in patients with anxiety, depres-
sion, or somatic symptoms. See 
Chapter 4, Beginning the Physical 
Examination: General Survey, Vital 
Signs, and Pain, pp. 111–146.
High-Yield Screening Questions for Ofﬁce Practice
Depression
● Over the past 2 weeks, have you felt down, depressed, or hopeless?22,28,29
● Over the past 2 weeks, have you felt little interest or pleasure in doing things 
(anhedonia)?
Anxiety
Anxiety disorders include generalized anxiety disorder, social phobia, panic  
disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, and acute stress disorder.30–33
● Over the past 2 weeks, have you been feeling nervous, anxious, or on edge?
● Over the past 2 weeks, have you been unable to stop or control worrying?
● Over the past 4 weeks, have you had an anxiety attack—suddenly feeling fear 
or panic?
Illness Anxiety Disorder (Replaces Hypochondriasis in DSM-5)
● Whiteley Index: 14-item self-rating scale34,35
Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
● CAGE questions adapted for alcohol and drug abuse—see Chapter 3, Inter-
viewing and the Health History, p. 97.
Multidimensional
● PRIME-MD (Primary Care Evaluation of Mental Disorders) for the ﬁve most 
common disorders in primary care: depression, anxiety, alcohol, somatoform, 
and eating disorders; 26-item patient questionnaire followed by clinician  
evaluation; takes approximately 10 minutes.36
● PRIME-MD Patient Health Questionnaire, available as patient health ques-
tionnaire for self-rating; takes approximately 3 minutes.36
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
152 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
SYMPTOMS AND BEHAVIOR
Personality Disorders. Patients with personality disorders can also 
display problematic ofﬁce behaviors that escape diagnosis. The DSM-5 
characterizes these disorders as “an enduring pattern of inner experience and 
behavior that deviates markedly from the expectations of the individual’s 
culture, is pervasive and inﬂexible, has an onset in adolescence or early 
adulthood, is stable over time, and leads to distress or impairment.” These 
patients have dysfunctional interpersonal coping styles that disrupt and 
destabilize their relationships, including those with health care providers. A 
recent study reports an overall prevalence of 9%, with prevalence of the three 
subcomponent clusters of 5.7% for odd and eccentric disorders; 1.5% for 
dramatic, emotional, or erratic disorders; and 6% for anxious or fearful 
disorders.12 Personality disorders co-occur at high frequencies with alcohol 
and substance abuse and with the axis I disorders of depression, anxiety 
disorders, bipolar disorder, attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder, autism 
spectrum disorders, anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and schizophrenia.37 
Note that DSM-5 section II continues “the categorical perspective that personality 
disorders are qualitatively distinct clinical syndromes.” Section III presents an 
alternative approach to guide further research, namely a dimensional perspective 
that characterizes personality disorders as “impairments in personality 
functioning and pathological personality traits” that “merge imperceptibly into 
normality and into one another.” For more detailed diagnostic criteria, beyond 
the scope of this book, consult the DSM-5.
Personality Disorders: DSM-5 Section II
Cluster/Personality Type
Characteristic Behavior Patterns
A: Odd or Eccentric Disorders
● Paranoid
● Schizoid
● Schizotypal
Distrust and suspiciousness
Detachment from social relations 
with a restricted emotional range
Eccentricities in behavior and cogni-
tive distortions; acute discomfort 
in close relationships
B: Dramatic, Emotional or Erratic Disorders
● Antisocial
● Borderline
● Histrionic
● Narcissistic
Disregard for, and violation of, the 
rights of others
Instability in interpersonal relation-
ships, self-image and aﬀective  
regulation; impulsivity
Excessive emotionality and attention 
seeking
Persisting grandiosity, need for admi-
ration and lack of empathy
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  5 |
 
Behavior and Mental Status 
153
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Borderline Personality Disorder. Patients with borderline personality 
disorders are especially challenging. These patients show “a pervasive pattern of 
instability of interpersonal relationships, self-image, and affects, and marked 
impulsivity.”12 They make “frantic efforts to avoid real or imagined abandonment” 
and show recurrent suicidal behavior, gestures, or threats, or self-mutilating behav-
ior. Prevalence in primary care practices is 6%, though the diagnosis is often 
missed.38,39 More than 90% of patients with this disorder meet criteria for other 
personality disorders. Many have coexisting mood, anxiety, and substance abuse 
disorders. Presenting symptoms overlap with depression, anxiety, substance abuse, 
and eating disorders, which complicate diagnosis. In clinical settings, over 75% of 
those affected are women, and the disorder shows a strong genetic and familial 
pattern.40 More than half lose their jobs because of interpersonal problems, and 
roughly one-third experience sexual abuse. Patients often report feeling depressed 
and empty, with mood swings that spiral out of control leading to feelings of rage, 
sadness, and anxiety. To clinicians, these patients may appear demanding, disrup-
tive, or manipulative. Recognition of borderline features is essential for patient 
understanding, reduction of patient self-harm, and referral for expert evaluation.
Personality Disorders: DSM-5 Section II (continued )
Cluster/Personality Type
Characteristic Behavior Patterns
C: Anxious or Fearful Disorders
● Avoidant
● Dependent
● Obsessive–compulsive
Social inhibition, feelings of inadequacy 
and hypersensitivity to negative 
evaluation
Submissive and clinging behavior 
related to an excessive need to be 
taken care of
Preoccupation with orderliness, per-
fectionism, and control
Note that in DSM-5, the dimensional model reduces these disorders to six categories: antisocial, 
avoidant, borderline, narcissistic, obsessive–compulsive, and schizotypal, and emphasizes self and 
interpersonal functioning.
Sources: Adapted from Schiﬀer RB. Ch 420, Psychiatric disorders in medical practice, in Cecil Textbook of 
Medicine, 22nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2004, p. 2628; American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press, 2013.
Common or Concerning Symptoms
● Changes in attention, mood, or speech
● Changes in insight, orientation, or memory
● Anxiety, panic, ritualistic behavior, and phobias
● Delirium or dementia
The Health History
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
154 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Overview. As you interact with the patient, you will quickly observe the 
patient’s level of alertness and orientation, and mood, attention, and memory. 
While the history unfolds, you will learn about the patient’s insight and judgment, 
as well as any recurring or unusual thoughts or perceptions. These and other 
components of mood and cognition will alert you to conditions that require 
more detailed follow-up, including a formal mental status examination and 
possible referral.
Many of the terms pertinent to the mental health history and the mental status 
examination are familiar from social conversation. It is important to learn their 
precise meanings in the context of the formal evaluation of mental status, detailed 
in the box below.
See Techniques of Examination for the 
formal mental status examination on 
pp. 158–168.
Terminology: The Mental Status Examination
Level of 
Consciousness
Alertness or State of Awareness of the 
Environment
Attention
The ability to focus or concentrate over time on a 
particular stimulus or activity—an inattentive 
person is easily distractible and may have 
difficulty giving a history or responding to 
questions.
Memory
The process of registering or recording information, 
tested by asking for immediate repetition of 
material, followed by storage or retention of 
information. Recent or short-term memory covers 
minutes, hours, or days; remote or long-term memory 
refers to intervals of years.
Orientation
Awareness of personal identity, place, and time; 
requires both memory and attention
Perceptions
Sensory awareness of objects in the environment  
and their interrelationships (external stimuli);  
also refers to internal stimuli such as dreams or 
hallucinations.
Thought processes
The logic, coherence, and relevance of the patient’s 
thought as it leads to selected goals; how people 
think
Thought content
What the patient thinks about, including level of 
insight and judgment
Insight
Awareness that symptoms or disturbed behaviors  
are normal or abnormal; for example, distinguishing 
between daydreams and hallucinations that  
seem real.
Judgment
Process of comparing and evaluating alternatives 
when deciding on a course of action; reﬂects values 
that may or may not be based on reality and social 
conventions or norms
(continued )
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  5 |
 
Behavior and Mental Status 
155
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Terminology: The Mental Status  
Examination (continued )
Level of 
Consciousness
Alertness or State of Awareness of the 
Environment
Aﬀect
A ﬂuctuating pattern of observable behaviors that 
expresses subjective feelings or emotions through 
tone of voice, facial expression, and demeanor. 
Disturbed aﬀect may be ﬂat, blunted, labile, or 
inappropriate.
Mood
A more pervasive and sustained emotion that colors 
the person’s perception of the world. (Aﬀect is to 
mood as weather is to climate.) Mood may be 
euthymic (in the normal range), elevated, or 
dysphoric (unpleasant, possibly as sad, anxious, or 
irritable), for example.
Language
A complex symbolic system for expressing, receiving, 
and comprehending words; as with consciousness, 
attention, and memory, language is essential for 
assessing other mental functions
Higher cognitive 
functions
Assessed by vocabulary, fund of information, abstract 
thinking, calculations, construction of objects that 
have two or three dimensions
Attention, Mood, Speech, Insight, Orientation, Memory. Assess 
the patient’s level of consciousness; general appearance; mood, including 
depression or mania; and ability to pay attention, remember, understand, and 
speak. Place the patient’s vocabulary and general fund of information in the 
context of his or her cultural and educational background. The patient’s 
account of illness and life circumstances often tells you about insight and 
judgment. If you suspect a problem in orientation and memory, you can ask, 
“Let’s see, your last clinic appointment was when . . . ?” “And the date today?” 
Try to integrate your evaluation of mental status into the history so it will 
seem less like an interrogation.
Anxiety, Panic, Ritualistic Behavior, Phobias. Explore any unusual 
thoughts, preoccupations, beliefs, or perceptions as they come up during the 
interview. For example, excessive worry persisting over a 6-month period 
suggests a possible anxiety disorder, one of the most prevalent psychiatric 
conditions in the United States, with a lifetime prevalence of approximately 
3%.12 Over time, you will recognize some of its mimics: panic disorder, with 
recurrent panic attacks followed by a period of anxiety about further attacks; 
obsessive–compulsive disorder, with intrusive thoughts and ritualistic behaviors; 
posttraumatic stress disorder, characterized by re-experiencing, avoidance, 
persistent negative alterations in cognition and mood, and alterations in arousal 
and reactivity; and social anxiety disorder, with its marked anticipatory anxiety 
in social situations. Supplement your interview with questions in speciﬁc areas 
and pursue a formal mental status examination when indicated.
See Table 17-6, Disorders of Speech,  
p. 784.
Compulsions, obsessions, phobias, and 
anxieties are seen in mood disorders. 
For official diagnostic criteria of anxi-
ety disorders, see Diagnostic and  
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 
(DSM-5).
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
156 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Neurocognitive Disorders: Delirium and Dementia. In the 
DSM-5, delirium and dementia fall under the new category of neurocognitive 
disorders, based on consultation with expert groups. Dementia is classiﬁed as a 
major cognitive disorder; a less severe level of cognitive impairment is now mild 
neurocognitive disorder, which applies to younger individuals with impairment 
from traumatic brain injury or HIV infection. The DSM-5 retains the term 
dementia, however, due to widespread clinical usage. Helpful tables provide 
working deﬁnitions of each cognitive domain, with examples of symptoms 
related to everyday activities and related assessments.
A wide range of patients in clinical practice warrant assessment of mental status: 
patients with brain injury, psychiatric symptoms, or reports from family members 
of vague or changed behavior; patients with subtle behavioral changes, difﬁculty 
taking medications as prescribed, problems attending to household chores or pay-
ing bills, or loss of interest in their usual activities; and patients with change in 
orientation after surgery or during an acute illness. Identify these problems promptly 
because they impact family relationships, work status, and possible disability.
See Table 20-2, Neurocognitive Disor-
ders: Delirium and Dementia, p. 1001. 
See also discussions in Chapter 17, 
The Nervous System, pp. 711–796  
and in Chapter 20, The Older Adult, 
pp. 955–1008.
Important Topics for Health Promotion  
and Counseling
● Screening for depression and suicidality
● Screening for substance use disorders, including alcohol and prescription drugs
Mental health disorders impose a substantial burden of suffering.41 About 1 in 5 
U.S. adults (43.7 million) experience mental illness in a given year, with about 
1 in 25 (9.6 million) experiencing serious mental illness (schizophrenia, major 
depression, or bipolar disorder). Depression and anxiety disorders are a com-
mon cause of hospitalization in the United States, and mental illness is associated 
with increased risks for chronic medical conditions, decreased life expectancy, 
disability, substance abuse, and suicide.
Mood Disorders and Depression. Depressive and bipolar disorders 
affect over 9% of the U.S. population.42,43 About 16 million adult Americans, or 
almost 7%, have major depression, often with coexisting anxiety disorders and 
substance abuse. Depression is nearly twice as common in women as men; the 
prevalence of postpartum depression is 7% to 13%.44 Depression frequently 
accompanies chronic medical illness. High-risk patients may have subtle early 
signs of depression, including low self-esteem, loss of pleasure in daily activities 
(anhedonia), sleep disorders, and difﬁculty concentrating or making decisions. 
See Chapter 3, Interviewing and the 
Health History, pp. 65–108.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Health Promotion and 
Counseling: Evidence and 
Recommendations
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  5 |
 
Behavior and Mental Status 
157
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Look carefully for symptoms of depression in vulnerable patients, especially those 
who are young, female, single, divorced or separated, seriously or chronically ill, 
bereaved, or have other psychiatric disorders, including substance abuse. A 
personal or family history of depression also places patients at risk.
The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) made a grade B recommendation 
in 2009 for depression screening in clinical settings that can provide care supports and 
accurate diagnosis, treatment, and follow-up.28 Performing screening in less support-
ive settings received only a grade C recommendation. Asking two simple questions 
about mood and anhedonia appears to be as effective as using more detailed instru-
ments. A positive test response has a sensitivity of 83% and a speciﬁcity of 92% for 
detecting major depression.45 All positive screening tests warrant full diagnostic inter-
views. Failure to diagnose depression can have fatal consequences—the presence of 
an affective disorder is associated with an 11-fold increased risk for suicide.46
Suicide. Suicide ranks as the 10th leading cause of death in the United States, 
accounting for nearly 40,000 deaths. Annually, there are almost 13 completed 
suicides per 100,000 population.47–49 Suicide is the second leading cause of death 
among 15- to 24-year olds. Suicide rates are highest among those ages 45 to 
54 years, followed by elderly adults ≥age 85 years. Men have suicide rates nearly 
four times higher than women, though women are three times more likely to 
attempt suicide. Men are most likely to use ﬁrearms to commit suicide, while 
women are most likely to use poison. Overall, suicides in non-Hispanic whites 
account for about 90% of all suicides, though American Indian/Alaska Native 
women ages 15 to 24 years have the highest suicide rates of any racial/ethnic 
group. An estimated 25 attempts are made for each death by suicide, with ratios of 
100 to 200 to 1 among young adults. In 2011, nearly 16% of U.S. high school 
students reported that they had seriously considered attempting suicide in the 
previous year. Despite the public health burden of suicide, the USPSTF has 
concluded that the current evidence is insufﬁcient to assess the balance of beneﬁts 
and harms of screening for suicide risk in a primary care setting—a grade I 
recommendation,50 but statistics underscore the importance of investigating 
patient clues and risk factors.
Substance Use Disorders, Including Alcohol and Prescription 
Drugs. The harmful interactions between mental disorders and substance use 
disorders also present a major public health problem. The 2013 National Survey 
on Drug Use and Health showed that 23% of the U.S. population ages 12 years 
or older (60.1 million people) reported binge drinking, and over 6% reported 
heavy drinking.41 Over 24 million Americans (9.4% of the population) reported 
use of an illicit drug during the month before the survey, including nearly 20 
million marijuana users, 1.6 million cocaine users, and 6.5 million users of 
prescription drugs for nonmedical indications. Nearly 22 million persons aged 
12 years or older were classiﬁed as having a substance use disorder based on 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV) criteria.51 Only 
about 2.5 million of these individuals received treatment at a specialty facility 
for an illicit drug or alcohol problem. Rates of drug-induced deaths continue 
to increase and are highest among whites and American Indian/Alaska Natives. 
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reports that prescription drugs 
have replaced illicit drugs as a leading cause of drug-induced deaths.52  
See screening questions on p. 151  
and review screening tools readily 
available for office practice.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
158 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Every patient should be asked about alcohol use, substance abuse, and misuse 
of prescription drugs. The USPSTF has given a grade B recommendation to 
screening adults ages 18 years and older for alcohol misuse, and providing brief 
behavioral counseling for those engaging in risky or hazardous drinking.53 However, 
the USPSTF has issued only a grade I (insufﬁcient evidence) recommendation for 
screening for illicit drug use.54
The Mental Status Examination
● Appearance and behavior
● Speech and language
● Mood
● Thoughts and perceptions
● Cognition, including memory, attention, information and vocabulary, calcula-
tions, abstract thinking, and constructional ability
The assessment of mental status is challenging and complex. Changes in mental 
status warrant careful evaluation for underlying pathologic and pharmacologic 
causes. The patient’s personality, psychodynamics, family and life experiences, and 
cultural background all come into play. Amplify your ﬁndings from the history and 
physical examination as you select all or part of the formal mental status examina-
tion for further testing. The Mental Status Examination is central to assessment in 
psychiatric practice. It is also a critical element in the assessment of the nervous 
system and the ﬁrst segment of the nervous system write-up. Learn to describe the 
patient’s mood, speech, behavior, and cognition and to relate these ﬁndings to your 
examination of the cranial nerves, motor and sensory systems, and reﬂexes.
The Mental Status Examination consists of ﬁve components: appearance and 
behavior; speech and language; mood; thoughts and perceptions; and cognitive 
function. Cognitive function includes orientation, attention, memory, attention, and 
higher cognitive functions such as information and vocabulary, calculations, abstract 
thinking, and constructional ability. Prepare the patient for formal testing and explain 
your rationale.
The format that follows should help structure your observations, but is not 
intended as a step-by-step guide. Be ﬂexible, but thorough. In some situations, 
however, sequence is important. If the patient’s consciousness, attention, com-
prehension of words, and ability to speak are impaired, assess these deﬁcits 
promptly. If the patient cannot give a reliable history, testing most of the other 
mental functions will be difﬁcult and merits an evaluation for acute causes.
Appearance and Behavior
Integrate the observations you have made throughout the history and physical 
examination, including the following.
See Chapter 17, Nervous System,  
pp. 711–796, especially pp. 733–735 
and Recording Your Findings, p. 773.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
See discussion of screening tools in 
Chapter 3, Interviewing and the 
Health History, Alcohol and Prescrip-
tion and Illicit Drugs, pp. 96–97, and 
Chapter 11, Abdomen, Screening for 
Alcohol Abuse, pp. 464–466.
Techniques of Examination
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  5 |
 
Behavior and Mental Status 
159
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Level of Consciousness. Is the patient awake and alert? Does the patient 
understand your questions and respond appropriately and reasonably quickly, 
or tend to lose track of the topic, grow silent, or even fall asleep?
If the patient does not respond to your questions, escalate the stimulus in 
steps:
■ Speak to the patient by name and in a loud voice.
■ Shake the patient gently, like wakening a sleeper.
If there is no response to these stimuli, promptly assess the patient for stupor or 
coma—severe reductions in level of consciousness.
Posture and Motor Behavior. Does the patient sit or lie quietly or prefer 
to walk around? Observe the patient’s posture and ability to relax. Note the pace, 
range, and type of movement. Are movements voluntary and spontaneous? Are 
any limbs immobile? Are posture and motor activity affected by topics under 
discussion, type of activity, or who is in the room?
Dress, Grooming, and Personal Hygiene. How is the patient 
dressed? Is the clothing clean and presentable? Is it appropriate for the patient’s 
age and social group? Note the grooming of the patient’s hair, nails, teeth, skin, 
and, if present, beard. How do the grooming and hygiene compare with peers of 
comparable age, lifestyle, and socioeconomic group? Compare one side of the 
body with the other.
Facial Expression. Observe the face both at rest and during conversation. 
Watch for changes in expression. Are they appropriate for the topics being 
discussed? Or is the face relatively immobile throughout?
Manner, Affect, and Relationship to People and Things. Assess 
the patient’s affect, or external expression of the inner emotional state. Is it 
appropriate to the topics being discussed? Or is the affect labile, blunted, or 
ﬂat? Does it seem exaggerated at certain points? If so, how? Observe the 
patient’s openness, approachability, and reactions to others and the 
surroundings. Does the patient hear or see things not present, or converse with 
someone who is not there?
See the table on Level of Conscious-
ness (Arousal), Chapter 17, The  
Nervous System, p. 769.
Lethargic patients are drowsy, but 
open their eyes and look at you, 
respond to questions, and then fall 
asleep.
Obtunded patients open their eyes 
and look at you, but respond slowly 
and are somewhat confused.
Look for tense posture, restlessness, 
and anxious fidgeting; the crying, 
pacing, and hand-wringing of agi-
tated depression; the hopeless 
slumped posture and slowed move-
ments of depression; the agitated  
and expansive movements of a  
manic episode.
Grooming and personal hygiene 
may deteriorate in depression, 
schizophrenia, and dementia. Exces-
sive fastidiousness may be seen in 
obsessive–compulsive disorder. One-
sided neglect may result from a 
lesion in the opposite parietal cor-
tex, usually the nondominant side. 
Watch for the anger, hostility, suspi-
ciousness, or evasiveness of patients 
with paranoia; the elation and 
euphoria of mania; the flat affect 
and remoteness of schizophrenia; 
the apathy (dulled affect with 
detachment and indifference) of 
dementia; and anxiety or depression. 
Hallucinations occur in schizophrenia, 
alcohol withdrawal, and systemic 
toxicity.
Note expressions of anxiety, depres-
sion, apathy, anger, elation, or facial 
immobility in parkinsonism.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
160 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Speech and Language
Throughout the interview, note the following characteristics of the patient’s 
speech.
Quantity. Is the patient talkative or unusually silent? Are comments 
spontaneous, or limited to direct questions?
Rate. Is speech fast or slow?
Volume. Is speech loud or soft?
Articulation of Words. Are the words clear and distinct? Does the speech 
have a nasal quality?
Fluency. Fluency reﬂects the rate, ﬂow, and melody of speech and the content 
and use of words. Watch for abnormalities of spontaneous speech such as:
■ Hesitancies and gaps in the ﬂow and rhythm of words
■ Disturbed inﬂections, such as a monotone
■ Circumlocutions, in which phrases or sentences are substituted for a word 
the person cannot think of, such as “what you write with” for “pen”
■ Paraphasias, in which words are malformed (“I write with a den”), wrong 
(“I write with a bar”), or invented (“I write with a dar”).
If the patient’s speech lacks meaning or ﬂuency, proceed with further testing as 
outlined in the following box. A person who can write a correct sentence does 
not have aphasia.
Note the slow speech of depression; the 
accelerated louder speech of mania.
Dysarthria refers to defective articula-
tion. Aphasia is a disorder of language. 
Dysphonia results from impaired vol-
ume, quality, or pitch of the voice. See 
Table 17-6, Disorders of Speech, p. 784.
These abnormalities suggest aphasia 
from cerebrovascular infarction. 
Aphasia may be receptive (impaired 
comprehension with fluent speech) or 
expressive (with preserved compre-
hension and slow nonfluent speech).
Testing for Aphasia
Word Comprehension
Ask the patient to follow a one-stage command, 
such as “Point to your nose.” Try a two-stage com-
mand: “Point to your mouth, then your knee.”
Repetition
Ask the patient to repeat a phrase of one-syllable 
words (the most diﬃcult repetition task): “No ifs, 
ands, or buts.”
Naming
Ask the patient to name the parts of a watch.
Reading Comprehension
Ask the patient to read a paragraph aloud.
Writing
Ask the patient to write a sentence.
These questions help identify the type 
of aphasia. Check for deficits in vision, 
hearing, intelligence, and education 
which may affect responses. Two com-
mon kinds of aphasia—expressive 
(Broca aphasia) and receptive (Wernicke 
aphasia)—are compared in Table 17-6, 
Disorders of Speech, p. 784.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  5 |
 
Behavior and Mental Status 
161
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Mood
Ask the patient to describe his or her mood, including usual mood level and 
ﬂuctuations related to life events. “How did you feel about that?” for example, 
or, more generally, “How is your overall mood?” The reports from family and 
friends may be of value.
Has the mood been intense and unchanging, or labile? How long has it lasted? 
Is it appropriate to the patient’s situation? If depression, have there been episodes 
of an elevated mood, suggesting a bipolar disorder?
If you suspect depression, assess its severity and any risk of suicide. Ask . . . 
■ Do you feel discouraged or depressed?
■ How low do you feel?
■ What do you see for yourself in the future?
■ Do you ever feel that life isn’t worth living? Or that you want to be dead?
■ Have you ever thought of killing yourself?
■ How did (do) you think you would do it? Do you have a plan?
■ What do you think would happen after you were dead?
It is your responsibility to ask directly about suicidal thoughts. This may be the 
only way to uncover suicidal ideation and plans that launch immediate interven-
tion and treatment.
Thought and Perceptions
Thought Processes. Assess the logic, relevance, organization, and coherence 
of the patient’s thought processes throughout the interview. Does speech progress 
logically toward a goal? Listen for patterns of speech that suggest disorders of 
thought processes, as outlined in the box below.
Moods range from sadness and melan-
choly; contentment, joy, euphoria, and 
elation; anger and rage; anxiety and 
worry; to detachment and indifference.
For official diagnostic criteria of 
depressive and bipolar disorders, see 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders (DSM-5).
Variations and Abnormalities in Thought 
Processes
Circumstantiality
The mildest thought disorder, consisting of speech 
with unnecessary detail, indirection, and delay in 
reaching the point. Some topics may have a mean-
ingful connection. Many people without mental 
disorders have circumstantial speech.
Derailment (loosening 
of associations)
“Tangential” speech with shifting topics that are 
loosely connected or unrelated. The patient is 
unaware of the lack of association.
(continued )
Circumstantiality occurs in people 
with obsessions.
Derailment is seen in schizophrenia, 
manic episodes, and other psychotic 
disorders.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
162 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Variations and Abnormalities in Thought 
Processes (continued )
Flight of Ideas
An almost continuous ﬂow of accelerated speech 
with abrupt changes from one topic to the next. 
Changes are based on understandable associa-
tions, plays on words, or distracting stimuli, but 
ideas are not well connected.
Neologisms
Invented or distorted words, or words with new and 
highly idiosyncratic meanings.
Incoherence
Speech that is incomprehensible and illogical, with 
lack of meaningful connections, abrupt changes in 
topic, or disordered grammar or word use. Flight 
of ideas, when severe, may produce incoherence.
Blocking
Sudden interruption of speech in midsentence or 
before the idea is completed, attributed to “losing 
the thought.” Blocking occurs in normal people.
Confabulation
Fabrication of facts or events in response to ques-
tions, to ﬁll in the gaps from impaired memory.
Perseveration
Persistent repetition of words or ideas.
Echolalia
Repetition of the words and phrases of others.
Clanging
Speech with choice of words based on sound, rather 
than meaning, as in rhyming and punning. For 
example, “Look at my eyes and nose, wise eyes 
and rosy nose. Two to one, the ayes have it!”
Flight of ideas is most frequently 
noted in manic episodes.
Neologisms are observed in 
schizophrenia, psychotic disorders, 
and aphasia.
Incoherence is seen in severe 
psychotic disturbances (usually 
schizophrenia).
Blocking may be striking in 
schizophrenia.
Confabulation is seen in Korsakoff 
syndrome from alcoholism.
Perseveration occurs in schizophrenia 
and other psychotic disorders.
Echolalia occurs in manic episodes 
and schizophrenia.
Clanging occurs in schizophrenia and 
manic episodes.
Thought Content. To assess thought content, follow the patient’s leads 
and cues rather than asking direct questions. For example, “You mentioned that 
a neighbor caused your entire illness. Can you tell me more about that?” Or, in 
another situation, “What do you think about at times like these?” For more 
focused inquiries, be tactful and accepting. “When people are upset like this, 
sometimes they can’t keep certain thoughts out of their minds,” or “ . . . things 
seem unreal. Have you experienced anything like this?” In these ways, explore 
any of the patterns in the following box.
Abnormalities of Thought Content
Compulsions
Repetitive behaviors that the person feels driven to 
perform in response to an obsession, aimed at 
preventing or reducing anxiety or a dreaded event or 
situation; these behaviors are excessive and 
unrealistically connected to the provoking stimulus12
(continued )
Compulsions, obsessions, phobias, 
and anxieties often occur in anxiety 
disorders. See Diagnostic and  
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 
(DSM-5).
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  5 |
 
Behavior and Mental Status 
163
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Abnormalities of Thought Content (continued )
Obsessions
Recurrent persistent thoughts, images, or urges experienced 
as intrusive and unwanted that the person tries to ignore, 
suppress, or neutralize with other thoughts or actions (for 
example, performing a compulsive behavior)
Phobias
Persistent irrational fears, accompanied by a 
compelling desire to avoid the provoking stimulus
Anxieties
Apprehensive anticipation of future danger or 
misfortune accompanied by feelings of worry, 
distress, and/or somatic symptoms of tension
Feelings of Unreality
A sense that the environment is strange, unreal, or remote
Feelings of 
Depersonalization
A sense that one’s self or identity is diﬀerent, changed, 
unreal; lost; or detached from one’s mind or body
Delusions
False ﬁxed personal beliefs that are not amenable  
to change in light of conﬂicting evidence; types of 
delusions include:
● Persecutory
● Grandiose
● Jealous
● Erotomanic—the belief than another person is in 
love with the individual
● Somatic—involves bodily functions or sensations
● Unspeciﬁed—includes delusions of reference without 
a prominent persecutory or grandiose component, or 
the belief that external events, objects, or people have 
a particular and unusual personal signiﬁcance (for 
example, commands from the radio or television)
Perceptions. Pursue false perceptions. For example, “When you heard the 
voice speaking to you, what did it say? How did it make you feel?” Or, “After 
you’ve been drinking a lot, do you ever see things that aren’t really there?” Or, 
“Sometimes after major surgery like yours, people hear peculiar or frightening 
things. Has anything like this happened to you?” In these ways, ﬁnd out about 
the following abnormal perceptions.
Delusions and feelings of unreality or 
depersonalization are often associated 
with psychotic disorders. For official 
diagnostic criteria of psychotic disor-
ders, see Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5).
Abnormalities of Perception
Illusions
Misinterpretations of real external stimuli, such as mistaking 
rustling leaves for the sound of voices.12
Hallucina-
tions
Perception-like experiences that seem real but, unlike illusions, 
lack actual external stimulation. The person may or may not 
recognize the experiences as false. Hallucinations may be 
auditory, visual, olfactory, gustatory, tactile, or somatic. 
False perceptions associated with dreaming, falling asleep, 
and awakening are not classiﬁed as hallucinations.
Illusions may occur in grief reactions, 
delirium, acute and posttraumatic 
stress disorders, and schizophrenia.
Hallucinations may occur in delirium, 
dementia (less commonly), posttrau-
matic stress disorder, schizophrenia, 
and alcoholism.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Delusions may also occur in delir-
ium, severe mood disorders, and 
dementia.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
164 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Insight. Some of your ﬁrst questions to the patient often yield important 
information about insight: “What brings you to the hospital?” “What seems to 
be the trouble?” “What do you think is wrong?” Note whether the patient is 
aware that a particular mood, thought, or perception is abnormal or part of an 
illness.
Judgment. Assess judgment by noting the patient’s responses to family 
situations, jobs, use of money, and interpersonal conﬂicts. “How do you plan 
to get help after leaving the hospital?” “How are you going to manage if you 
lose your job?” “If your husband starts to abuse you again, what will you do?” 
“Who will take care of your ﬁnancial affairs while you are in the nursing 
home?”
Note whether decisions and actions are based on reality or impulse, wish fulﬁll-
ment, or disordered thought content. What insights and values seem to underlie 
the patient’s decisions and behavior? Allowing for cultural variations, how do 
these compare with a comparable mature adult? Because judgment reﬂects matu-
rity, it may be variable and unpredictable during adolescence.
Cognitive Functions
Orientation. You can usually assess orientation during the interview. For 
example, you can ask quite naturally for clariﬁcation about speciﬁc dates and 
times, the patient’s address and telephone number, the names of family members, 
or the route to the hospital. At times, direct questions will be needed: “Can you 
tell me the time now . . . and what day it is?” Assess orientation to:
■ Person—the patient’s name, and names of relatives and professional 
personnel
■ Time—the time of day, day of the week, month, season, date and year, dura-
tion of hospitalization
■ Place—the patient’s residence, the names of the hospital, city, and state
Attention. The following tests of attention are commonly used.
Digit Span. Explain that you would like to test the patient’s ability to con-
centrate, perhaps adding that this can be difﬁcult if the patient is in pain or ill. 
Recite a series of digits, starting with two at a time and speaking each number 
clearly at a rate of about one per second. Ask the patient to repeat the numbers 
back to you. If this repetition is accurate, try a series of three numbers, then four, 
and so on as long as the patient responds correctly. Jot down the numbers as you 
say them to ensure your own accuracy. If the patient makes a mistake, try once 
more with another series of the same length. Stop after a second failure in a 
single series.
When choosing digits, use street numbers, zip codes, telephone numbers, and 
other numerical sequences that are familiar to you, but avoid consecutive 
Patients with psychotic disorders 
often lack insight into their illness. 
Denial of impairment may accompany 
some neurologic disorders. 
Judgment may be poor in delirium, 
dementia, intellectual disability, and 
psychotic states. Anxiety, mood disor-
ders, intelligence, education, income, 
and cultural values also influence 
judgment.
Disorientation is common when 
memory or attention is impaired,  
as in delirium.
Causes of poor performance include 
delirium, dementia, intellectual dis-
ability, and performance anxiety.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  5 |
 
Behavior and Mental Status 
165
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
numbers, easily recognized dates, and sequences that are familiar to the 
patient.
Now, starting again with a series of two, ask the patient to repeat the numbers to 
you backward.
Normally, a person should be able to repeat correctly at least ﬁve digits forward 
and four backward.
Serial 7s. Instruct the patient, “Starting from a hundred, subtract 7, and 
keep subtracting 7 . . . . ” Note the effort required and the speed and accuracy of 
the responses. Writing down the answers helps you keep up with the arithmetic. 
Normally, a person can complete serial 7s in 1½ minutes, with fewer than four 
errors. If the patient cannot do serial 7s, try 3s or counting backward.
Spelling Backward. This can substitute for serial 7s. Say a ﬁve-letter 
word, spell it, for example, W-O-R-L-D, and ask the patient to spell it backward.
Remote Memory. Inquire about birthdays, anniversaries, social security 
number, names of schools attended, jobs held, or past historical events such as 
wars relevant to the patient’s past.
Recent Memory. This can involve the events of the day. Ask questions with 
answers you can check against other sources to see if the patient is confabulating, 
or making up facts to compensate for a defective memory. These might include 
the day’s weather or appointment time, current medications, or laboratory tests 
taken during the day.
New Learning Ability. Give the patient three or four words such as “83, 
Water Street, and blue,” or “table, ﬂower, green, and hamburger.” Ask the patient to 
repeat them so that you know that the information has been heard and registered. 
This step, like digit span, tests registration and immediate recall. Then proceed to 
other parts of the examination. After 3 to 5 minutes, ask the patient to repeat the 
words. Note the accuracy of the response, awareness of whether it is correct, and any 
tendency to confabulate. Normally, a person should be able to remember the words.
Higher Cognitive Functions
Information and Vocabulary. If observed clinically in the context of 
cultural and educational background, information and vocabulary provide a 
rough estimate of the patient’s baseline abilities. Begin assessing fund of 
knowledge and vocabulary during the interview. Ask about work, hobbies, 
reading, favorite television programs, or current events. Start with simple 
questions, then move to more difﬁcult questions. Note the person’s grasp of 
information, complexity of the ideas, and choice of vocabulary.
Poor performance may result from 
delirium, the late stage of dementia, 
intellectual disability, anxiety, or 
depression. Also consider educational 
level.
Remote memory may be impaired in 
the late stage of dementia.
Recent memory is impaired in demen-
tia and delirium. Amnestic disorders 
impair memory or new learning ability 
and reduce social or occupational 
functioning, but lack the global fea-
tures of delirium or dementia. Anxiety, 
depression, and intellectual disability 
may also impair recent memory.
Information and vocabulary are rela-
tively unaffected by psychiatric disor-
ders except in severe cases. Testing 
helps distinguish adults with life-long 
intellectual impairment (whose infor-
mation and vocabulary are limited) 
from those with mild or moderate 
dementia (whose information and 
vocabulary are fairly well preserved). 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
166 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
More directly, you can ask about speciﬁc facts such as:
■ The name of the president, vice president, or governor
■ The names of the last four or ﬁve presidents
■ The names of ﬁve large cities in the country
Calculating Ability. Test the patient’s ability to do arithmetical calculations, 
starting with simple addition (“What is 4 + 3? . . . 8 + 7?”) and multiplication 
(“What is 5 × 6? . . . 9 × 7?”). Proceed to more difﬁcult tasks using two-digit 
numbers (“15 + 12” or “25 × 6”) or longer, written examples.
Alternatively, pose practical functionally important questions, like: “If something 
costs 78 cents and you give the clerk one dollar, how much should you get back?”
Abstract Thinking. Test the capacity to think abstractly in two ways.
Proverbs. Ask the patient what the following proverbs mean:
A stitch in time saves nine.
Don’t count your chickens before they’re hatched.
The proof of the pudding is in the eating.
A rolling stone gathers no moss.
The squeaky wheel gets the grease.
Note the relevance of the answers and their degree of concreteness or abstract-
ness. For example, “You should sew a rip before it gets bigger” is concrete, 
whereas “Prompt attention to a problem prevents trouble” is abstract. Average 
patients should give abstract or semiabstract responses.
Similarities. Ask the patient to tell you how the following are alike:
An orange and an apple
A church and a theater
A cat and a mouse
A piano and a violin
A child and a dwarf
Wood and coal
Note the accuracy and relevance of the answers and their degree of concreteness 
or abstractness. For example, “A cat and a mouse are both animals” is abstract, 
“They both have tails” is concrete, and “A cat chases a mouse” is not relevant.
Constructional Ability. The task here is to copy ﬁgures of increasing 
complexity onto a piece of blank unlined paper. Show each ﬁgure one at a time 
and ask the patient to copy it as well as possible (Fig. 5-3).
Poor performance suggests dementia 
or aphasia, but should be measured 
against the patient’s fund of knowl-
edge and education.
Concrete responses are common in 
people with intellectual disability, 
delirium, or dementia, but may also 
reflect limited education. Patients 
with schizophrenia may respond 
concretely or with personal and 
bizarre interpretations.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
With intact vision and motor ability, 
poor constructional ability suggests 
dementia or parietal lobe damage. 
Intellectual disability can also impair 
performance.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  5 |
 
Behavior and Mental Status 
167
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
F I G U R E  5 - 3 .  Ask the patient to copy these ﬁgures.
F I G U R E  5 - 4 .  Poor, fair, and good 
shapes.
These three diamonds are rated poor, 
fair, and good (but not excellent).55
F I G U R E  5 - 5 .  Patient-drawn clock rated as excellent.
These three clocks are poor, fair, and 
good.55
F I G U R E  5 - 6 .  Poor, fair, and good 
clocks.
Special Techniques
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE). This brief test has been 
widely used to screen for cognitive dysfunction or dementia, and follow their 
course over time. Although several versions are available on the internet, 
copyright permission for use and reproduction is required. For more detailed 
information regarding the MMSE, contact the publisher, Psychological 
Assessment Resources, Inc., 16204 North Florida Avenue, Lutz, Florida 33549, 
or online: http://www4.parinc.com/. Below are some sample questions.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
In another approach, ask the patient to draw a clock face complete with numbers 
and hands (Fig. 5-5).
MMSE Sample Items
Orientation to Time
“What is the date?”
Registration
“Listen carefully. I am going to say three words. You say them back after I 
stop. Ready? Here they are . . .
APPLE (pause), PENNY (pause), TABLE (pause). Now repeat those words 
back to me.” (Repeat up to ﬁve times, but score only the ﬁrst trial.)
Naming
“What is this?” (Point to a pencil or pen.)
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
168 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
These findings suggest depression.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Recording Behavior and Mental Status
“Mental Status: The patient is alert, well-groomed, and cheerful. Speech is ﬂuent 
and words are clear. Thought processes are coherent, insight is good. The 
patient is oriented to person, place, and time. Serial 7s accurate; recent and 
remote memory intact. Calculations intact.”
OR
“Mental Status: The patient appears sad and fatigued; clothes are wrinkled. 
Speech is slow and words are mumbled. Thought processes are coherent, but 
insight into current life reverses is limited. The patient is oriented to person, 
place, and time. Digit span, serial 7s, and calculations accurate, but responses 
delayed. Clock drawing is good.”
Recording Your Findings
Reading
“Please read this and do what it says.” (Show examinee the words on the 
stimulus form.)
CLOSE YOUR EYES
Reproduced by special permission of the Publisher, Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc., 
16204 North Florida Avenue, Lutz, Florida 33549, from the Mini Mental State Examination, by 
Marshal Folstein and Susan Folstein, Copyright 1975, 1998, 2001 by Mini Mental LLC, Inc. 
Published 2001 by Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc. Further reproduction is 
prohibited without permission of PAR, Inc. The MMSE can be purchased from PAR, Inc. by 
calling (813) 968-3003.
MMSE Sample Items (continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  5 |
 
Behavior and Mental Status 
169
Table 5-1 Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders
TYPES OF SOMATIC SYMPTOM AND RELATED DISORDERS
Type of Disorder
Diagnostic Features
Somatic symptom disorder
Somatic symptoms are either very distressing or result in signiﬁcant disruption of 
functioning, as well as excessive and disproportionate thoughts, feelings, and 
behaviors related to those symptoms. Symptoms should be speciﬁc if with 
predominant pain.
Illness anxiety disorder
Preoccupation with having or acquiring a serious illness where somatic 
symptoms, if present, are only mild in intensity.
Conversion disorder
Syndrome of symptoms of deﬁcits mimicking neurologic or medical illness in 
which psychological factors are judged to be of etiologic importance.
Psychological factors affecting other 
medical conditions
Presence of one or more clinically signiﬁcant psychological or behavioral factors 
that adversely affect a medical condition by increasing the risk for suffering, 
death, or disability
Factitious disorder
Falsiﬁcation of physical or psychological signs or symptoms, or induction of 
injury or disease, associated with identiﬁed deception. The individual presents 
himself or herself as ill, impaired, or injured even in the absence of external 
rewards.
Other Related Disorders or Behaviors
Body dysmorphic disorder
Preoccupation with one or more perceived defects or ﬂaws in physical appearance 
that are not observable or appear only slight to others.
Dissociative disorder
Disruption of and/or discontinuity in the normal integration of consciousness, 
memory, identity, emotion, perception, body representation, motor control, and 
behavior.
Note to readers: Regarding tables in past editions on mood, anxiety, and psychotic disorders, per current DSM-5 copyright, readers 
are referred to the DSM-5 for further diagnostic information.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
170 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
References
 1. Olfson M, Kroenke K, Wang S, et al. Trends in ofﬁce-based mental 
health care provided by psychiatrists and primary care physicians. 
J Clin Psychiatry. 2014;75:247.
 2. Rief W, Hessel A, Braehler E. Somatization symptoms and hypo-
chondriacal features in the general population. Psychosomatic Med-
icine. 2001;63:595.
 3. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. 
Results from the 2012 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Men-
tal Health Findings. Rockville, MD: NSDUH Series H-47, HHS Pub-
lication No. (SMA) 13–4805; 2013. Available at http://store.
samhsa.gov/product/Results-from-the-2012-National-Survey-on-
Drug-Use-and-Health-NSDUH-H-47-Mental-Health-Findings/
SMA13–4805. Accessed Jan 30, 2015.
 4. Hepner KA, Rowe M, Rost K, et al. The effect of adherence to prac-
tice guidelines on depression outcomes. Ann Int Med. 2007;147:320.
 5. Gonzalez HM, Vega WA, Williams DR, et al. Depression care in the 
United States: too little for too few. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2010;67:37.
 6. Williams DR, González HM, Neighbors H. Prevalence and distri-
bution of major depressive disorder in African Americans, Carib-
bean blacks, and non-Hispanic whites: results from the National 
Survey of American Life. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2007;64:305.
 7. Kroenke K. Unburdening the difﬁcult clinical encounter. Arch 
Intern Med. 2009;169:333.
 8. Strine TW, Mokdad AH, Balluz LS, et al. Depression and anxiety in 
the United States: ﬁndings from the 2006 Behavioral Risk Factor 
Surveillance System. Psychiatr Serv. 2008;59:1283.
 9. Kessler RC, Chiu WT, Demler O, et al. Prevalence, severity, and 
comorbidity of twelve-month DSM-IV disorders in the National 
Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R). Arch Gen Psych. 2005; 
62:617.
 10. Kroenke K. Patients presenting with somatic complaints: epidemi-
ology, psychiatric comorbidity, and management. Int J Methods 
Psychiatr Res. 2003;12:34.
 11. Kroenke K. A practical and evidence-based approach to common 
symptoms: a narrative review. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161:579.
 12. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
of Mental Disorders. 5th ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric 
Press, 2013.
 13. Dwamena FC, Lyles JS, Frankel RM, et al. In their own words: 
qualitative study of high-utilising primary care patients with med-
ically unexplained symptoms. BMC Fam Pract. 2009;10:67.
 14. Kroenke K. The interface between physical and psychological 
symptoms. Primary Care Companion. J Clin Psychiatry. 2003; 
5(Suppl 7):11.
 15. Aaron LA, Buchwald D. A review of the evidence for overlap 
among unexplained clinical conditions. Ann Intern Med. 2001; 
134:868.
 16. Smith RC, Lyles JS, Gardiner JC, et al. Primary care clinicians treat 
patients with medically unexplained symptoms: a randomized 
controlled trial. J Gen Int Med. 2006;21:671.
 17. Jackson JL, Kroenke K. Managing somatization—medically unex-
plained should not mean medically ignored. J Gen Int Med. 2006; 
21:797.
 18. Hinchey SA, Jackson JL. A cohort study assessing difﬁcult patient 
encounters in a walk-in primary care clinic, predictors and out-
comes. J Gen Intern Med. 2011;26:588.
 19. An PG, Rabatin JS, Manwell LB, et al. Burden of difﬁcult encoun-
ters in primary care: data from the Minimizing Error, Maximizing 
Outcomes study. Arch Intern Med. 2009;169:410.
 20. Lorenzetti CR, Jacques CH, Donovan C, et al. Managing difﬁcult 
encounters: understanding physician, patient, and situational fac-
tors. Am Fam Physician. 2013;87:419.
 21. Arciniegas DB, Beresford TP. Managing difﬁcult interactions with 
patients in neurology practices: a practical approach. Neurology. 
2010;75(18 Suppl 1):S39.
 22. Staab JP, Datto CJ, Weinreig RM, et al. Detection and diagnosis of 
psychiatric disorders in primary medical care settings. Med Clin N 
Am. 2001;85:579.
 23. Ansseau M, Dierick M, Buntinkxz F, et al. High prevalence of men-
tal disorders in primary care. J Affect Disord. 2004;78:49.
 24. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, deGruy FV, et al. A symptom checklist for 
screen for somatoform disorders in primary care. Psychosomatics. 
1998;39:263.
 25. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB, et al. Validation and utility of 
a self-report version of PRIME-MD—the PHQ Primary Care Study. 
JAMA. 1999;282:1737.
 26. Kroenke K, Sharpe M, Sykes R. Revising the classiﬁcation of 
somatoform disorders: key questions and preliminary recommen-
dations. Psychosomatics. 2007;48:277.
 27. Primary Health Care Screeners. Updated December 2013. Free. 
Available at http://www.phqscreeners.com/overview.aspx. 
Accessed February 1, 2015.
 28. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for depression: rec-
ommendations and rationale. December 2009. Available at http://
www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Document/Recom-
mendationStatementFinal/depression-in-adults-screening. 
Accessed February 1, 2015.
 29. Whooley MA, Avins AL, Miranda J, et al. Case-ﬁnding instruments 
for depression. Two questions are as good as many. J Gen Intern 
Med. 1997;12:439.
 30. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB, et al. An ultra-brief screening 
scale for anxiety and depression: the PHQ-4. Psychosomatics. 
2009;50:613.
 31. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB, et al. A brief measure for 
assessing generalized anxiety disorder: the GAD 7. Arch Int Med. 
2006;166:1092.
 32. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB, et al. Anxiety disorders in 
primary care: prevalence, impairment, comorbidity, and detection. 
Ann Int Med. 2007;146:317.
 33. Lowe B, Grafe K, Zipfel S, et al. Detecting panic disorder in medical 
and psychosomatic outpatients—comparative validation of the 
Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale, the Patient Health Ques-
tionnaire, a screening question, and physicians diagnosis. J Psycho-
som Res. 2003;55:515.
 34. Conradt M, Cavanagh M, Franklin J, et al. Dimensionality of the 
Whiteley Index: assessment of hypochondriasis in an Australian 
sample of primary care patients. J Psychosom Res. 2006;60:137.
 35. Pilowsky U. Dimensions of hypochondriasis. Br J Psychiatry. 
1967;113:89.
 36. Spitzer RL, Williams JB, Kroenke K, et al. Utility of a new proce-
dure for diagnosing mental disorders in primary care. The PRIME-
MD 1000 study. JAMA. 1994;272:1749.
 37. Compton WM, Thomas YF, Stinson FS, et al. Prevalence, correlates, 
disability, and comorbidity of DSM-IV drug abuse and dependence 
in the United States—results from the national epidemiologic 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  5 |
 
Behavior and Mental Status 
171
REFERENCES
survey on alcohol and related conditions. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 
2007;64:566–576.
 38. Gross R, Olfson M, Gameroff M, et al. Borderline personality dis-
order in primary care. Arch Int Med. 2002;162:50.
 39. Grant BF, Chou SP, Goldstein RB, et al. Prevalence, correlates, dis-
ability, and comorbidity of DSM-IV borderline personality disor-
der: results from the Wave 2 National Epidemiologic Survey on 
Alcohol and Related Conditions. J Clin Psychiatry. 2008;69:533.
 40. Gunderson JG. Borderline personality disorder. N Engl J Med. 
2011;364:2037.
 41. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Cen-
ter for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality. The NSDUH Report: 
Substance Use and Mental Health Estimates from the 2013 National 
Survey on Drug Use and Health: Overview of Findings. Rockville, MD: 
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration; 
2014. Available at http://store.samhsa.gov/shin/content//
NSDUH14–0904/NSDUH14–0904.pdf.
 42. National Institutes of Mental Health. Any Mental Illness (AMI) 
Among Adults. 2014. Available at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/
health/statistics/prevalence/any-mental-illness-ami-among-adults.
shtml. Accessed February 1, 2015.
 43. National Institutes of Mental Health. Any Mood Disorder Among 
Adults. 2014. Available at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/statis-
tics/prevalence/any-mood-disorder-among-adults.shtml
 44. Gavin NI, Gaynes BN, Lohr KN, et al. Perinatal depression: a sys-
tematic review of prevalence and incidence. Obstet Gynecol. 2005; 
106(5 Pt 1):1071.
 45. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The Patient Health Question-
naire-2: validity of a two-item depression screener. Med Care. 
2003;41:1284.
 46. Li Z, Page A, Martin G, et al. Attributable risk of psychiatric and 
socio-economic factors for suicide from individual-level, population-
based studies: a systematic review. Soc Sci Med. 2011;72:608.
 47. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for depression in 
adults: U.S. preventive services task force recommendation state-
ment. Ann Intern Med. 2009;151(11):784–792.
 48. American Institute of Suicidology. Suicide in the USA—Based on 
2011 Data. Washington, DC, 2014. Available at http://www.suici-
dology.org/Portals/14/docs/Resources/FactSheets/2011/Suicide-
USA2014.pdf. Accessed February 1, 2015.
 49. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Suicide Facts at a 
Glance. Atlanta, GA, 2014. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/Violen-
cePrevention/pdf/Suicide-DataSheet-a.pdf. Accessed February 1, 
2015.
 50. LeFevre ML. Screening for suicide risk in adolescents, adults, and 
older adults in primary care: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force 
recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2014;160:719.
 51. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual 
of mental disorders. 4th ed. Text Revision. Washington, DC, 2000.
 52. Mack KA. Drug-induced deaths—United States, 1999–2010. 
MMWR Surveill Summ. 2013;62(Suppl 3):161.
 53. Moyer VA. Screening and behavioral counseling interventions in 
primary care to reduce alcohol misuse: U.S. preventive services 
task force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2013; 
159:210.
 54. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Drug Use, Illicit: Screening. 
Rockville, MD: 2008. Available at http://www.uspreventiveservices-
taskforce.org/uspstf/uspsdrug.htm. Accessed February 1, 2015.
 55. Strub RL, Black FW. The Mental Status Examination in Neurology. 
2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: FA Davis, 1985.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  6 |
 
The Skin, Hair, and Nails 
173
In this edition, you will ﬁnd a helpful new approach to examining the skin, hair, 
and nails and many new tables and photographs. This approach features careful 
history taking; thorough inspection and palpation of benign and suspicious 
lesions to better detect the three major skin cancers—basal cell carcinoma (BCC), 
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), and melanoma; focused techniques for assessing 
changes in the hair and nails; accurate use of terminology to describe your ﬁnd-
ings; and visual familiarity with important common benign and malignant skin 
conditions. Updated information on skin cancer prevention and screening is 
found in the section on Health Promotion and Counseling.
C H A P T E R 6
The Skin, Hair, and Nails
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate  
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 6: Skin)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com
Turn to Chapter 20, The Older Adult, 
pp. 955–1008, to review skin changes 
with aging. 
Anatomy and Physiology
The skin keeps the body in homeostasis despite daily assaults from the environ-
ment. It retains body ﬂuids while protecting underlying tissues from microor-
ganisms, harmful substances, and radiation. It modulates body temperature and 
synthesizes vitamin D. Hair, nails, and sebaceous and sweat glands are consid-
ered appendages of the skin. The skin and its appendages undergo many 
changes during aging. 
Skin
The skin is the heaviest single organ of the body, accounting for approximately 
16% of body weight and covering an area of roughly 1.2 to 2.3/m2. It contains 
three layers: the epidermis, the dermis, and the subcutaneous tissues.
The most superﬁcial layer, the epidermis, is thin avascular keratinized epithelium 
consisting of two layers: an outer horny stratum corneum of dead keratinized 
cells; and an inner cellular layer, the stratum basale and the stratum spinosum, also 
known as the malpighian layer, where both melanin and keratin are formed. 
Migration from the inner to the outer layer takes approximately 1 month.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
174 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The epidermis depends on the underlying vascularized dermis for nutrition. The 
dermis is a dense layer of interconnecting collagen and elastic ﬁbers containing 
sebaceous glands, sweat glands, hair follicles, and most of the terminals of the 
cutaneous nerves (Fig. 6-1). Inferiorly, the dermis merges with subcutaneous fatty 
tissue, or adipose tissue.
Normal skin color depends on the amount and type of melanin, but is also inﬂu-
enced by underlying vascular structures, changing hemodynamics, and changes 
in carotene and bilirubin. The amount of melanin, a brownish pigment, is genet-
ically determined and increased by exposure to sunlight. Hemoglobin in the red 
blood cells transports oxygen in the form of oxyhemoglobin, a bright red pigment 
in the arteries and capillaries that causes reddening of the skin. After passing 
through the capillary bed and releasing oxygen to the tissues, the darker bluer 
pigment of deoxyhemoglobin circulates in the veins. The scattering of light through 
the turbid superﬁcial layers of the skin or blood vessels also makes the veins look 
bluer and less red than circulating venous blood.
Carotene, a yellow pigment, is found in the subcutaneous fat and heavily keratin-
ized areas such as the palms and soles. Bilirubin, a yellow-brown pigment, arises 
from the breakdown of heme in the red blood cells.
Hair
Adults have two types of hair: vellus hair, which is short, ﬁne, inconspicuous, and 
relatively unpigmented; and terminal hair, which is coarser, thicker, more 
conspicuous, and usually pigmented. Scalp hair and eyebrows are examples of 
terminal hair.
Hair shaft
Horny layer
Cellular layer
Sebaceous
gland
Muscle that
erects hair shaft
Sweat gland
Hair follicle
Vein
Nerve
Artery
Duct of
sweat gland
Epidermis
Dermis
Subcutaneous
(adipose) tissue
Deep fascia
Skeletal muscle
Afferent nerve 
endings
Vascular and lymphatic
capillary beds in
superficial dermis
F I G U R E  6 - 1 .  Anatomy of the skin.
Pallor indicates anemia. 
Cyanosis, a blue color, can indicate 
decreased oxygen in the blood or 
decreased blood flow in response  
to a cold environment.
Jaundice, or yellowing of the skin, 
results from increased bilirubin.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  6 |
 
The Skin, Hair, and Nails 
175
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Nails
Nails protect the distal ends of the ﬁngers and toes. The ﬁrm rectangular and 
usually curving nail plate gets its pink color from the vascular nail bed to which 
the plate is ﬁrmly attached (Figs. 6-2 and 6-3). Note the whitish moon, or lunula, 
and the free edge of the nail plate. Roughly one-fourth of the nail plate, the nail 
root, is covered by the proximal nail fold. The cuticle extends from the fold and, 
functioning as a seal, protects the space between the fold and the plate from 
external moisture. Lateral nail folds cover the sides of the nail plate. Note that the 
angle between the proximal nail fold and nail plate is normally less than 180°.
Fingernails grow approximately 0.1 mm daily; toenails grow more slowly.
Sebaceous Glands and Sweat Glands
Sebaceous glands produce a fatty substance secreted onto the skin surface through the 
hair follicles. These glands are present on all skin surfaces except the palms and soles.
Sweat glands are of two types: eccrine and apocrine. The eccrine glands are widely 
distributed, open directly onto the skin surface, and by their sweat production 
help to control body temperature. In contrast, the apocrine glands are found 
chieﬂy in the axillary and genital regions and usually open into hair follicles. 
Bacterial decomposition of apocrine sweat is responsible for adult body odor.
Lateral 
nail fold
Lunula
Proximal
nail fold
Nail plate
Cuticle
Free edge
F I G U R E  6 - 2 .  Anatomy of the 
ﬁngernail.
Nail root
Proximal nail fold
Nail plate
Cross section
of nail plate
Nail bed Distal phalanx
F I G U R E  6 - 3 .  Cross-section of 
ﬁngernail.
Common or Concerning Symptoms
● Growths
● Rashes
● Hair loss or nail changes
Growths. Start by asking if the patient is concerned about any new growths 
or rashes: “Have you noticed any changes in your skin? … your hair? … your 
nails?” “Have you had any rashes? … sores? … lumps? … itching?” If the patient 
reports a new growth, it is important to pursue the patient’s personal and family 
history of skin cancer. Note the type, location, and date of any past skin cancer 
and ask about regular self-skin examination and use of sunscreen. Also ask “Has 
anyone in your family had a skin cancer removed? If so, who? Do you know what 
type of skin cancer—basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, or 
melanoma?” Document the response even if the patient does not know which 
type and counsel the patient about skin cancer prevention.
Rashes. For complaints of rash, ask about itching, the most important 
symptom when assessing rashes. Does itching precede the rash or follow the 
rash? For itchy rashes, ask about seasonal allergies with itching and watery eyes, 
asthma, and atopic dermatitis, often accompanied by rash on the inside of the 
elbows and knees in childhood. Can the patient sleep all night or does itching 
wake up the patient? For rashes, it is important to ﬁnd out what type of 
moisturizer or over-the-counter products have been applied.
See discussion of prevention in Health 
Promotion and Counseling section, 
pp. 176–180.
Causes of generalized itching, without 
apparent rash, include dry skin; preg-
nancy; uremia; jaundice; lymphomas 
and leukemia; drug reactions; and, 
less commonly, polycythemia vera and 
thyroid disease.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
The Health History
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
176 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Also, ask about dry skin, which can cause itching and rash, especially in children 
with atopic dermatitis and older adults, due to loss of the natural moisture bar-
rier in the epidermis.
Hair Loss or Nail Changes. Patients often report hair loss or nail changes 
spontaneously. For hair loss, ask if there is hair thinning or hair shedding and, if 
so, where. If shedding, does the hair come out at the roots or break along the hair 
shafts? Ask about hair care practices like frequency of shampooing and use of 
dyes, chemical relaxers, or heating appliances. See Table 6-11, pp. 209–210, for 
normal patterns of hair loss in men and women and counsel affected patients 
appropriately. Be familiar with common nail changes such as onychomycosis, 
habit tic deformity, and melanonychia, shown in Table 6-12, pp. 211–212.
Encourage use of moisturizers to 
replace the lost moisture barrier. 
Some recommended brands even 
include sunscreen.1,2
The most common causes of diffuse 
hair thinning are male and female 
pattern baldness. 
Hair shedding at the roots is common in 
telogen affluvium and alopecia areata. 
Hair breaks along the shaft suggest 
damage from hair care or tinea capitis.
Important Topics for Health Promotion  
and Counseling
● Skin cancer prevention
● Skin cancer screening
Skin Cancer Prevention. Clinicians play a vital role in educating patients 
about skin cancer prevention. Skin cancers are the most common cancers in the 
United States, affecting an estimated one in ﬁve Americans during their lifetime.3 They 
are caused by a combination of genetic predisposition and ultraviolet radiation 
exposure. Fair-skinned individuals are at highest risk. The most common skin cancer 
is basal cell carcinoma (BCC), followed by squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), and melanoma.
Melanoma. Although it is the least common skin cancer, melanoma is the 
most lethal due to its high rate of metastasis and high mortality at advanced 
stages, causing over 70% of skin cancer deaths.4 The incidence of melanoma has 
more than doubled in the past three decades, the most rapid increase of any 
cancer.5 Melanoma is now the ﬁfth most frequently diagnosed cancer in men and 
the seventh most frequently diagnosed in women. In the United States in 2014, 
the estimated lifetime risk was 1 in 48 for whites (2%), 1 in 200 for Hispanics, 
and 1 in 1,000 for African Americans.6
Ask patients about the melanoma risk factors listed below, and use of the Mela-
noma Risk Assessment Tool developed by the National Cancer Institute, available 
at http://www.cancer.gov/melanomarisktool/. This tool assesses an individual’s 
5-year risk of developing melanoma based on geographic location, gender, race, 
age, history of blistering sunburns, complexion, number and size of moles, 
freckling, and sun damage. It is applicable up to age 70 years, but is not intended 
for patients with a family history of melanoma.
For discussion and examples of types 
of skin cancers, turn to the tables on 
pp. 197–203.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Health Promotion and 
Counseling: Evidence and 
Recommendations
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  6 |
 
The Skin, Hair, and Nails 
177
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Avoiding Ultraviolet Radiation and Tanning Beds. Increasing life-
time sun exposure correlates directly with increasing risk of skin cancer. Inter-
mittent sun exposure appears to be more harmful than chronic exposure.9 The 
best defense against skin cancers is to avoid ultraviolet radiation exposure by 
limiting time in the sun, avoiding midday sun, using sunscreen, and wearing 
sun-protective clothing with long sleeves and hats with wide brims. Advise 
patients to avoid indoor tanning, especially children, teens, and young adults. 
Use of indoor tanning beds, especially before age 35 years, increases risk of 
melanoma by as much as 75%.
In 2009, the International Agency for Research on Cancer classiﬁed ultraviolet-
emitting tanning devices as “carcinogenic to humans.”10 Options for tanning 
include self-tanning products or sprays in conjunction with sunscreen. Targeted 
patient messages in primary care practices have been shown to amplify these 
sun-protective behaviors.11,12 The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USP-
STF) has made a grade B recommendation supporting behavioral counseling 
through minimizing ultraviolet radiation exposure in fair-skinned children, 
adolescents, and young adults aged 10 to 24 years and cites insufﬁcient evi-
dence, grade I, for counseling adults older than 24 years, but noted no harms 
associated with counseling.13
Regular Use of Sunscreen Prevents Skin Cancer. There are many 
myths about sunscreen. A landmark study in 2011 demonstrated that the regu-
lar use of sunscreen decreases the incidence of melanoma.14 This well-designed 
study showed that when clinicians strongly encouraged use of sunscreen, 
patients were more likely to use it regularly and melanoma incidence declined.
Advise patients to use at least sun protective factor (SPF) 30 and broad-spectrum 
protection (Fig. 6-4). For water exposure, patients should use water-resistant 
sunscreens. New U.S. Food and Drug Administration labeling guidelines in 2011 
make it easy to see these features on all bottles of sunscreen. Free information 
about protection and proper use of sunscreen are available from the AAD and the 
Skin Cancer Foundation.15,16
Risk Factors for Melanoma
● Personal or family history of previous melanoma4,7–9
● ≥50 common moles
● Atypical or large moles, especially if dysplastic
● Red or light hair
● Solar lentigines (acquired brown macules on sun-exposed areas)
● Freckles (inherited brown macules)
● Ultraviolet radiation from heavy sun exposure, sunlamps, or tanning booths
● Light eye or skin color, especially skin that freckles or burns easily
● Severe blistering sunburns in childhood
● Immunosuppression from human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) or from  
chemotherapy
● Personal history of nonmelanoma skin cancer
Signs of chronic sun damage include 
numerous solar lentigines on the 
shoulders and upper back, many 
melanocytic nevi, solar elastosis  
(yellow, thickened skin with bumps, 
wrinkles, or furrowing), cutis rhomboi-
dalis nuchae (leathery thickened skin 
on the posterior neck), and actinic 
purpura. See Table 6-9, Signs of Sun 
Damage, on p. 206. 
Sun
Screen
SPF 30
Broad Spectrum
Water Resistant
Water Resistant
Broad Spectrum
SPF 30 or Higher
F I G U R E  6 - 4 .  Advise use of broad 
spectrum sunscreen with SPF 30.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
178 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Skin Cancer Screening. Although the USPSTF found insufﬁcient 
evidence (grade I) to recommend routine skin cancer screening by primary care 
physicians, it does advise clinicians to “remain alert for skin lesions with 
malignant features” during routine physical examinations and reference the 
ABCDE criteria.17,18 The American Cancer Society (ACS) and the AAD 
recommend full-body examinations for patients over age 50 years or at high risk, 
because melanoma can appear in any location.15,19 High-risk patients are those 
with a personal or family history of multiple or dysplastic nevi or previous 
melanoma. Patients who have a clinical skin examination within the 3 years 
prior to a melanoma diagnosis have thinner melanomas than those who did 
not have a clinical skin examination.20 Both new and changing nevi should be 
closely examined, as at least half of melanomas arise de novo from isolated 
melanocytes rather than pre-existing nevi. Also consider “opportunistic 
screening” as part of the complete physical examination for patients with 
signiﬁcant sun exposure and patients over age 50 years without prior skin 
examination or who live alone.
Since the USPSTF review, an important German study of over 350,000 patients 
reported that full-body primary care screening with dermatology referrals for 
concerning lesions reduced melanoma mortality by more than 47%.21 Survival 
from melanoma strongly correlates with tumor thickness. Two further studies 
demonstrate that patients receiving skin examinations are more likely to have 
thinner melanomas.20,22
Detecting melanoma requires practice and knowledge of how benign nevi 
change over time, often going from ﬂat to raised or acquiring additional brown 
pigment. Studies have shown that even limited clinician training makes a dif-
ference in detection: patients of primary care providers who spent 1.5 hours 
completing an online tutorial improved diagnostic accuracy. Similar studies 
show such training results in thinner melanomas than patients of providers 
without such training.23–26
Screening for Melanoma: The ABCDEs. Clinicians should apply the 
ABCE-EFG method when screening moles for melanoma (this does not apply 
for non-melanocytic lesions like seborrheic keratoses). The sensitivity of this 
tool for detecting melanoma ranges from 43% to 97%, and speciﬁcity ranges 
from 36% to 100%; diagnostic accuracy depends on how many criteria are used 
to deﬁne abnormality.27 If two or more of these features are present, biopsy 
should be considered. The most sensitive is E, for evolution or change. Pay close 
attention to nevi that have changed rapidly based on objective evidence.
Turn to Tables 6-4 through 6-6 on  
pp. 197–203 showing rough, pink,  
and brown nevi and their mimics.
The ABCDE Rule
The ABCDE method has been used for many years to teach clinicians and 
patients about features suspicious for melanoma. If two or more of these are 
present, risk of melanoma increases and biopsy should be considered. Some 
have suggested adding EFG to help detect aggressive nodular melanomas.
(continued )
Review the ABCDE-EFG rule and pho-
tographs in Table 6-6, pp. 200–203, 
which provide additional helpful 
identifiers and comparisons of benign 
brown lesions with melanoma.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  6 |
 
The Skin, Hair, and Nails 
179
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
The ABCDE Rule (continued )
Melanoma
Benign Nevus
Asymmetry
Of one side of mole 
compared to the 
other
Border irregularity
Especially if ragged, 
notched, or blurred
Color variations
More than two colors, 
especially blue-black, 
white (loss of pigment 
due to regression), or 
red (inﬂammatory 
reaction to abnormal 
cells)
Diameter >6 mm
Approximately the 
size of a pencil eraser
(continued )
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
With the exception of a homogenous 
blue color in a blue nevus, blue or 
black color within a larger pigmented 
lesion is especially concerning for 
melanoma.
Early melanomas may be <6 mm, and 
many benign lesions are >6 mm.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
180 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Techniques of Examination
The ABCDE Rule (continued )
Melanoma
Benign Nevus
Evolving
Or changing rapidly in 
size, symptoms, or 
morphology
● Elevated
● Firm to palpation
● Growing progressively over several weeks
Patient Screening: The Self Skin Examination. The AAD and the 
ACS recommend regular self-skin examination based on expert opinion.15,28
Instruct patients with risk factors for skin cancer and melanoma, especially 
those with a history of high sun exposure, prior or family history of melanoma, 
and ≥50 moles or >5 to 10 atypical moles, to perform regular self-skin exami-
nations. Patients who examine their skin regularly are more likely to have 
thinner melanomas, if detected.24,29 Teach patients about the appearance of 
different skin cancers, making use of the excellent resources available on the 
internet.15
See Patient Instructions for Self Skin 
Examination, pp. 187–188.
Approximately half of melanomas are 
initially detected by patients or their 
partners.
See Tables 6-1 and 6-2 for examples 
and descriptions of primary skin 
lesions including flat, raised, fluid-
filled, pustules, furuncles, nodules, 
cysts, wheals, and burrows (pp. 191–
195); Table 6-3 for a safari of benign 
lesions (p. 196); and Tables 6-4 to 6-6 
for rough, pink, and brown lesions 
and their mimics (pp. 197–203).
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Evolution, or change, is the most sen-
sitive of these criteria. A reliable his-
tory of change may prompt biopsy of 
a benign-appearing lesion.
Full-Body and Integrated Skin Examinations
Perform a full-body skin examination in the context of the overall physical exami-
nation. Some patients at risk for melanoma, especially men over age 50 years, 
may not request this examination, so the general physical examination is an 
important opportunity to look for melanomas and other skin cancers, especially 
in areas patients ﬁnd hard to see such as the back and posterior legs.
Inspect and palpate all skin lesions, focusing on key features that help dis-
tinguish if lesions are benign or suspicious for malignancy. Are they raised, 
flat, or fluid-filled? Are they rough or smooth? What about color? Is the lesion 
pink or brown? Measure the size. Is the size changing? Learn to describe each 
lesion accurately, using the terminology speciﬁed below. Changing moles, a 
history of skin cancer, and other risk factors all warrant a full-body skin 
examination.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  6 |
 
The Skin, Hair, and Nails 
181
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Even during routine examinations, you can pursue an integrated skin examination 
as you examine sun-exposed areas that are already easily accessible.
■ When examining the head and neck, remember to inspect closely for skin 
cancers as well as common benign lesions such as acne, which can become 
scarring.
■ Look at the arms and hands for sun damage, actinic keratoses, and SCCs, as 
well as normal ﬁndings. Educate the patient about such ﬁndings as solar 
lentigines and seborrheic keratoses.
■ When listening to the lungs, remove the shirt or open the gown and fully 
inspect the back for normal moles versus possible melanomas. Think about 
this approach throughout the physical examination. Note any vascular or 
purpuric lesions, petechiae, or eccymoses.
Integrating the skin examination into the physical examination and routinely 
recording your ﬁndings as part of the general write-up saves time and contrib-
utes to earlier detection of skin cancers, when they are easier to treat. Begin 
implementing this approach early in your training on each patient you examine, 
whether outpatient or inpatient. Instead of documenting what is not present on 
the skin, document what is present. This is the best way to learn to distinguish 
normal skin lesions from abnormal lesions and potential skin cancers. Systemic 
illnesses also have many associated skin ﬁndings.
Preparing for the Examination
Lighting, Equipment, and Dermoscopy. Make sure there is 
adequate lighting. Good overhead ambient lighting or natural light from 
windows is usually adequate. You may wish to add a strong light source if the 
room is dark.
You will also need a small ruler or tape measure; these can often be obtained 
from packets containing disposable marking pens. In addition, a small mag-
nifying glass allows you to examine lesions more closely. These tools help you 
document important features of skin lesions, such as size, shape, color, and 
texture.
Dermoscopy is an increasingly useful ofﬁce practice for deciding whether a 
melanocytic lesion is benign or malignant. This handheld device provides 
cross-polarized or unpolarized light to visualize patterns of pigmentation or 
vascular structures. With adequate clinician training, use of dermoscopy 
improves the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of differentiating melanomas from 
benign lesions.24,30
See Tables 6-7, Acne Vulgaris: Primary 
and Secondary Lesions, p. 204.
See Table 6-9, Signs of Sun Damage,  
p. 206.
See Risk Factors for Melanoma  
on p. 177.
See Table 6-10, Systemic Illnesses and 
Associated Skin Findings, pp. 207–208.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
See Table 6-8, Vascular and Purpuric 
Lesions of the Skin, p. 205.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
182 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The Patient Gown. Ask the 
patient to change into a gown with 
the opening in the back and clothes 
removed except for underwear (Fig. 
6-5). This is the ﬁrst requirement for 
the skin examination. Ask if the 
patient would like to have a chaperone 
present, especially when examination 
of the genital areas is anticipated.
Handwashing. Before beginning the examination, cleanse your hands 
thoroughly. It is important for you to palpate lesions for texture, ﬁrmness, and 
scaliness. Because frequent handwashing increases the risk of irritant contact 
dermatitis, dermatologists recommend using hand sanitizers, which are less 
drying than soap and water. Explain that cleansing your hands ensures 
hygiene and an optimal examination. It is best to restrict use of gloves to 
touching wounds rather than throughout the examination so that the patient 
feels accepted. The power of professional and caring human touch can be 
therapeutic, especially for patients with stigmatizing diseases like psoriasis 
and HIV.
The Skin Examination
Important Terms for Describing Skin Lesions. It is important to 
use speciﬁc terminology to describe skin lesions and rashes. Good descriptions 
include each of the following elements: number, size, color, shape, texture, 
primary lesion, location, and conﬁguration.
For example, for seborrheic keratosis, examine and record: “Multiple 5 mm to 
2 cm tan to brown oval stuck-on ﬂat-topped verrucous plaques on the back and 
abdomen, following skin tension lines.” Note the description of each element: 
number, multiple; size, 5 mm–2 cm; color, tan to brown; shape, oval; texture, ﬂat-
topped verrucous; location, on the back and abdomen; and conﬁguration, follow-
ing skin tension lines.
F I G U R E  6 - 5 .  The patient gown 
should open in the back.
Describing Skin Findings
● Primary lesion: Primary lesions are ﬂat or raised.
● Flat: You cannot palpate the lesion with your eyes closed.
● Macule: Lesion is ﬂat and <1 cm.
● Patch: Lesion is ﬂat and >1 cm.
● Raised: You can palpate the lesion with eyes closed.
● Papule: Lesion is raised, <1 cm, and not ﬂuid ﬁlled.
● Plaque: Lesion is raised, >1 cm, but not ﬂuid ﬁlled.
See Table 6-1, Describing Primary Skin 
Lesions: Flat, Raised, and Fluid-filled, 
pp. 191–193; Table 6-2, Additional  
Primary Lesions: Pustules, Furuncles, 
Nodules, Cysts, Wheals, Burrows,  
pp. 194–195; and Table 6-3, Dermatol-
ogy Safari: Benign Skin Lesions,  
p. 196.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  6 |
 
The Skin, Hair, and Nails 
183
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Describing Skin Findings (continued )
● Vesicle: Lesion is raised, <1 cm, and ﬁlled with ﬂuid.
● Bulla: Lesion is raised, >1 cm, and ﬂuid ﬁlled.
● Other primary lesions include erosions, ulcers, nodules, ecchymoses,  
petechiae, and palpable purpura.
● Number: Lesions can be solitary or multiple. If multiple, record how many. Also 
consider estimating the total number of the type of lesion you are describing.
● Size: Measure with a ruler in millimeters or centimeters. For oval lesions, 
measure in the long axis, then perpendicular to the axis.
● Shape: Some good words to learn are “circular,” “oval,” “annular” (ring-like, 
with central clearing), “nummular” (coin-like, no central clearing), and  
“polygonal.”
● Color: Use your imagination and be creative. Refer to a color wheel, if needed. 
There are many shades of tan and brown, but start with tan, light brown, and 
dark brown if you are having trouble.
● Use “skin-colored” to describe a lesion that is the same shade as the 
patient’s skin.
● For red lesions or rashes, blanch the lesion by pressing it ﬁrmly with your 
ﬁnger or a glass slide to see if the redness temporarily lightens then reﬁlls.
● Texture: Palpate the lesion to see if it is smooth, ﬂeshy, verrucous or warty, or 
scaly (ﬁne, keratotic, or greasy scale).
● Location: Be as speciﬁc as possible. For single lesions, measure their distance 
from other landmarks (e.g., 1 cm lateral to left oral commissure).
● Conﬁguration: Although not always necessary, describing patterns is often 
very helpful.
For more information and additional illustrations of each of these elements, 
LearnDerm is a free and very helpful website.31
Examples are herpes zoster with unilateral 
and dermatomal vesicles; herpes simplex, 
with grouped vesicles or pustules on an 
erythematous base; tinea pedis with 
annular lesions; and poison ivy allergic 
contact dermatitis with linear lesions.
Blanching lesions are erythematous 
and suggest inflammation. Non-
blanching lesions such as petechiae, 
purpura, and vascular structures 
(cherry angiomas, vascular malforma-
tions) are not erythematous, but rather 
bright red, purple, or violaceous. See 
Table 6-8, Vascular and Purpuric 
Lesions of the Skin, p. 205.
Scaling can be greasy, like sebor-
rheic dermatitis or seborrheic kerato-
ses, dry and fine like tinea pedis,  
or hard and keratotic like actinic 
keratoses or SCC. 
Techniques of Examination—Patient Seated. Choose one of two 
patient positions for performing the full-body skin examination. The patient can 
be seated or can lie supine, then prone. Plan to examine the skin in the same order 
every time, so you are less likely to skip part of the examination.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
184 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
With the patient seated on the examining table, stand in front of the patient and 
adjust the table to a comfortable height. Start by examining the hair and scalp 
(Fig. 6-6). Separate the hair to examine the scalp from one side to the other. You 
may need to use your ﬁngers or a cotton-tipped applicator (“Q-tip”) to separate 
the hair to see the scalp (Fig. 6-7). Note the distribution, texture, and quantity 
of hair. Remember to inspect the ears.
Now inspect the head and neck, including the forehead; eyes including eyelids, 
conjunctivae, sclerae, eyelashes, and eyebrows; nose, cheeks, lips, oral cavity, 
and chin; and anterior neck (Figs. 6-8 to 6-10).
Alopecia, or hair loss, can be diffuse, 
patchy, or total. Male and female pat-
tern hair loss are normal with aging. 
Focal patches may be lost suddenly in 
alopecia areata. Refer scarring alope-
cia to a dermatologist. 
Sparse hair is seen in hypothyroidism; 
fine, silky hair in hyperthyroidism. See 
Table 6-11, Hair Loss, pp. 209–210.
F I G U R E  6 - 6 .  Part the hair on 
the scalp.
F I G U R E  6 - 7 .  Use ﬁngers or 
an applicator to better visualize 
the scalp.
Look for signs of BCC on the face. See 
Table 6-5, Pink Lesions: Basal Cell  
Carcinoma and Its Mimics, pp. 198–199.
F I G U R E  6 - 8 .  Inspect 
the forehead.
F I G U R E  6 - 9 .  Inspect 
the face, eyes, and ears.
F I G U R E  6 - 1 0 .  Inspect 
the anterior neck.
Move the gown to see each area. Ask permission ﬁrst 
by saying, “I’d like to separate the gown to look at 
your back now. Is that okay?” (Fig. 6-11). Do this for 
every part of the body.
F I G U R E  6 - 1 1 .  Inspect 
the back.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  6 |
 
The Skin, Hair, and Nails 
185
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Now inspect the shoulders, arms, and hands (Fig. 6-12). Inspect and palpate the 
ﬁngernails (Fig. 6-13). Note their color, shape, and any lesions. Longitudinal 
bands of pigment are normal in people with darker skin.
See Table 6-12, Findings In or Near the 
Nails, pp. 211–212.
F I G U R E  6 - 1 2 .  Inspect the arms.
F I G U R E  6 - 1 3 .  Inspect and palpate 
the ﬁngernails.
F I G U R E  6 - 1 4 .  Inspect the chest.
F I G U R E  6 - 1 5 .  Inspect the abdomen.
Now inspect the chest and abdomen (Fig. 6-14), preparing the patient by saying, 
“Let’s look at your upper chest and then your stomach area.” The patient will 
generally help by lowering or raising the gown to expose these areas and cover-
ing up when you are ﬁnished (Fig. 6-15).
Now let the patient know that you will be inspecting the thighs and lower legs 
(Fig. 6-16). You and the patient can work together to expose the skin in these 
areas, moving down to the feet and toes (Fig. 6-17). Inspect and palpate the 
toenails, and inspect the soles and between the toes (Figs. 6-18 and 6-19).
F I G U R E  6 - 1 6 .  Inspect the thighs.
F I G U R E  6 - 1 7 .  Inspect the lower legs.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
186 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Now ask the patient to stand so that you inspect the lower back and posterior legs 
(Figs. 6-20 and 6-21). If needed, ask the patient to uncover the buttocks 
(Fig. 6-22). Examination of the breasts and genitalia may be saved for last. These 
examinations are described in other chapters. Remember to consider patient 
comfort, modesty, and use of a chaperone during these examinations.
F I G U R E  6 - 1 8 .  Inspect the soles of 
the feet.
F I G U R E  6 - 1 9 .  Inspect between the 
toes.
Techniques of Examination—Patient Supine and Prone. Some 
clinicians prefer this positioning for more thorough examinations, although 
patients may feel it is more “clinical.” Practice and feedback from patients will 
give you a sense of patient preferences.
Start with the patient supine, lying ﬂat on the examination table. As with the 
seated position, start by inspecting the scalp, face, and anterior neck (Fig. 6-23). 
Next, move to the shoulders, arms, and hands (Fig. 6-24); then to the chest and 
F I G U R E  6 - 2 0 .  Inspect 
the back.
F I G U R E  6 - 2 1 .  Inspect 
the posterior legs.
F I G U R E  6 - 2 2 .  Inspect 
the buttocks.
See Chapter 10, Breasts and Axillae, 
pp. 419–447; Chapter 13, Male Genita-
lia, pp. 541–563; and Chapter 14, 
Female Genitalia, pp. 565–606.
F I G U R E  6 - 2 3 .  Inspect the scalp.
F I G U R E  6 - 2 4 .  Inspect the hands.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  6 |
 
The Skin, Hair, and Nails 
187
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
F I G U R E  6 - 2 5 .  Inspect the chest.
F I G U R E  6 - 2 6 .  Inspect the anterior 
thighs.
abdomen (Fig. 6-25); anterior thighs (Fig. 6-26); and lower legs, feet, and, if appro-
priate, the genitalia. As noted previously, ask permission when moving the gown 
to expose different areas, and let the patient know which areas you will be exam-
ining next so the patient feels more involved in the examination.
Now ask the patient to turn over to the prone position, lying face down. Look at 
the posterior scalp, posterior neck, back, posterior thighs, legs, soles of the feet, and 
buttocks (if appropriate).
Special Techniques
Patient Instructions for the Self Skin-Examination. The AAD 
recommends regular self-examination of the skin using the techniques illustrated. 
The patient will need a full-length mirror, a hand-held mirror, and a well-lit room 
that provides privacy. Teach the patient the ABCDE-EFG method for assessing 
moles. Help them to identify melanomas by looking at photographs of benign and 
malignant nevi on easy-to-access websites, handouts, or tables in this chapter.
Review the ABCDE-EFG criteria  
on pp. 178–180.
Patient Instructions for Skin  
Self-Examination
Examine your body front and back in 
the mirror, then look at your right 
and left sides with arms raised.
Bend elbows and look carefully at 
forearms, upper underarms, and 
palms.
(continued )
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
188 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Examining the Patient with Hair 
Loss. Based on the patient’s history, start 
by examining the hair to determine the over-
all pattern of hair loss or hair thinning.32 
Inspect the scalp for erythema, scaling, pus-
tules, tenderness, bogginess, and scarring. 
Look at the width of the hair part in various 
sections of the scalp. To examine the hair for 
shedding from the roots, perform a hair pull 
test by gently grasping 50 to 60 hairs with 
your thumb and index and middle ﬁngers, 
pulling ﬁrmly away from the scalp (Fig. 
6-27). If all the hairs have telogen bulbs, the 
most likely diagnosis is telogen efﬂuvium. To 
examine the hair for fragility, perform the tug 
test by holding a group of hairs in one hand, 
pulling along the hair shafts with the other 
(Fig. 6-28); if any hairs break, it is abnormal. 
Patient Instructions for Skin  
Self-Examination (continued )
Look at the backs of your legs and 
feet, the spaces between your toes, 
and the soles.
Examine the back of your neck and 
scalp with a hand mirror. Part hair for 
a closer look.
Finally, check your back and buttocks 
with a hand mirror.
Source: Adapted from American Academy of Dermatology. How to perform a self-exam. Available at 
https://www.aad.org/spot-skin-cancer/understanding-skin-cancer/how-do-i-check-my-skin/how-to-
perform-a-self-exam. Accessed February 12, 2015.
F I G U R E  6 - 2 7 .  Hair pull test.
F I G U R E  6 - 2 8 .  Tug test.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  6 |
 
The Skin, Hair, and Nails 
189
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
Most (97%) hair loss is nonscarring, but any scarring, namely shiny spots with-
out any hair follicles on close examination with a magnifying glass, should 
prompt referral to dermatology for scalp biopsy.
Evaluating the Bedbound Patient. People conﬁned to bed, especially 
when they are emaciated, elderly, or neurologically impaired, are particularly 
susceptible to skin damage and ulceration. Pressure sores result from sustained 
compression that obliterates arteriolar and capillary blood ﬂow to the skin, and 
from shear forces created by body movements. When a person slides down in 
bed from a partially sitting position, for example, or is dragged rather than lifted 
up after being supine, rough movement can distort the soft tissues of the buttocks 
and close off the arteries and arterioles. Friction and moisture further increase 
the risk of abrasions and sores.
Assess every susceptible patient by carefully inspecting the skin that overlies the 
sacrum, buttocks, greater trochanters, knees, and heels. Roll the patient onto one 
side to see the low back and gluteal area best.
Possible internal causes of diffuse 
nonscarring hair shedding in young 
women are iron-deficiency anemia  
and hyper- or hypothyroidism.
See Table 6-13, Pressure Ulcers, p. 213.
Local redness of the skin warns of 
impending necrosis, although some 
deep pressure sores develop without 
antecedent redness. Inspect closely 
for skin breaks and ulcers.
For more details about this terminology, 
turn to Techniques of Examination,  
pp. 182–183.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Recording Your Findings
Note that initially you may use sentences to describe your ﬁndings; later you will 
use phrases. The examples below contain phrases appropriate for most write-ups.
As stated on p. 182, use speciﬁc terms to describe skin lesions and rashes, 
including:
■ Number—solitary or multiple; estimate of total number
■ Size—measured in millimeters or centimeters
■ Color—including erythematous if blanching; if nonblanching, vascular-like 
cherry angiomas and vascular malformations, petechiae, or purpura
■ Shape—circular, oval, annular, nummular, or polygonal
■ Texture—smooth, ﬂeshy, verrucous or warty, keratotic; greasy if scaling
■ Primary lesion—ﬂat, a macule or patch; raised, a papule or plaque; or ﬂuid 
ﬁlled, a vesicle or bulla (may also be erosions, ulcers, nodules, ecchymoses, 
petechiae, and palpable purpura)
■ Location—including measured distance from other landmarks
■ Conﬁguration—grouped, annular, linear
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
190 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
Recording the Skin, Hair, and Nails  
Physical Examination
“Skin warm and dry. Nails without clubbing or cyanosis. Approximately 20 
brown, round macules on upper back, chest, and arms, are all symmetric in  
pigmentation, none suspicious. No rash, petechiae, or ecchymoses.”
OR
“Marked facial pallor, and circumoral cyanosis. Palms cold and moist. Cyano-
sis in nail beds of ﬁngers and toes. Numerous palpable purpura on lower legs 
bilaterally.”
OR
“Scattered stuck-on verrucous plaques on back and abdomen. Over 30 small 
round brown macules with symmetric pigmentation on back, chest, and arms. 
Single 1.2 × 1.6 cm asymmetric dark brown and black plaque with erythematous, 
uneven border, on left upper arm.”
OR
“Facial plethora. Skin icteric. Many telangiectatic mats on chest and abdomen. 
Single 5 mm pearly papule with rolled border on left zygomatic cheek. Nails 
with clubbing but no cyanosis.”
There are normal nevi and perfusion 
without any rashes or suspicious 
lesions.
These findings suggest central cyano-
sis and vasculitis.
These findings suggest normal sebor-
rheic keratoses and benign nevi, but 
also a possible malignant melanoma.
These findings suggest probable end-
stage liver disease and incidental BCC.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  6 |
 
The Skin, Hair, and Nails 
191
Table 6-1 Describing Primary Skin Lesions: Flat, 
Raised, and Fluid-Filled
Describe skin lesions accurately, including number, size, color, texture, shape, primary lesion, location, and conﬁguration. This 
table identiﬁes common primary skin lesions and includes classic descriptions of each lesion with the diagnosis in italics.
Flat Spots
If you run your ﬁnger over the lesion but do not feel the lesion, the lesion is ﬂat. If a ﬂat spot is small (<1 cm), it is a 
macule. If a ﬂat spot is larger (>1 cm), it is a patch.
Macules (ﬂat, small)
Multiple 3–8-mm erythematous 
conﬂuent round macules on chest, 
back, and arms; morbilliform drug 
eruption
Multiple 2–5-mm hypopigmented, hyperpigmented, or tan round to oval macules on 
upper neck and back, upper chest, and arms with slight inducible scale on scraping 
(tinea versicolor)
Multiple scattered 2–4-mm round 
and oval brown macules, 
symmetrically pigmented, on back 
and chest with reticular pattern on 
dermoscopy; benign melanocytic nevi
Solitary 6-mm dark brown round symmetric 
macule on upper back; benign melanocytic 
nevus
Solitary dark brown, blue-gray, and red 
7-mm macule with irregular borders 
and ﬁngerlike projections of pigment, 
on right forearm; malignant melanoma
Patches (ﬂat, large)
Bilaterally symmetric erythematous 
patches on central cheeks and 
eyebrows, some with overlying 
greasy scale; seborrheic dermatitis
Large conﬂuent completely depigmented 
patches on dorsal hands and distal forearms; 
vitiligo
Bilateral erythematous, geographic 
patches with peripheral scaling, on 
inner thighs bilaterally, sparing the 
scrotum; tinea cruris
(continued)
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
192 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
192 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 6-1  Describing Primary Skin Lesions: Flat, 
Raised, and Fluid-Filled (Continued )
Raised Spots 
If you run your ﬁnger over the lesion and it is palpable above the skin, it is raised. If a raised spot is small (<1 cm), it is a 
papule. If a raised spot is larger (>1 cm), it is a plaque.
Papules (raised, small)
Solitary 7-mm oval pink pearly papule with 
overlying telangiectasias on right nasojugal fold; 
basal cell carcinoma
Multiple 2–4-mm soft, ﬂeshy skin-colored to 
light brown papules on lateral neck and axillae 
in skin folds; skin tags
Multiple 3–5-mm pink ﬁrm smooth domed  
papules with central umbillications, in mons  
pubis, and on penile shaft; molluscum contagiosum
Scattered erythematous round drop-like, ﬂat-
topped well-circumscribed scaling papules and 
plaques on trunk; guttate psoriasis
Plaques (raised, large)
Scattered erythematous to bright 
pink well-circumscribed ﬂat-topped 
plaques on extensor knees and 
elbows, with overlying silvery scale; 
plaque psoriasis
Bilateral erythematous, licheniﬁed (thickened 
from rubbing) poorly circumscribed plaques 
on ﬂexor wrists, antecubital fossae, and popli-
teal fossae; atopic dermatitis
Single, oval, ﬂat-topped superﬁcial 
erythematous to skin-colored plaque on 
right abdomen; herald patch of pityriasis 
rosea
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  6 |
 
The Skin, Hair, and Nails 
193
Multiple round to oval scaling 
violaceous plaques on abdomen and 
back; pityriasis rosea
Multiple round coin-like eczematous 
plaques on arms, legs, and abdomen, with 
overlying dried transudate crust; nummular 
dermatitis 
Fluid-ﬁlled Lesions
If the lesion is raised, ﬁlled with ﬂuid, and small (<1 cm), it is a vesicle. If a ﬂuid-ﬁlled spot is larger (>1 cm), it is a bulla.
Vesicles (ﬂuid-ﬁlled, small)
Multiple 2–4-mm vesicles and 
pustules on erythematous base, 
grouped together on left neck; herpes 
simplex virus
Grouped 2–5-mm vesicles on erythematous 
base on left upper abdomen and trunk in a 
dermatomal distribution that does not cross 
the midline; herpes zoster or “shingles” 
Scattered 2–5-mm erythematous papules 
and vesicles with transudate crust, some 
with linear arrays, on forearms, neck, and 
abdomen; rhus dermatitis or allergic 
contact dermatitis from poison ivy
Bullae (ﬂuid-ﬁlled, large)
Solitary 8-cm dusky oval patch with 
smaller inner violaceous patch and 
central 3.5-cm tense bulla, on right 
posterior lower back; bullous ﬁxed drug 
eruption
Several tense bullae on lower legs; insect bites
Many vesicles and tense bullae up to  
4 cm, some having unroofed and left large 
(4-cm) erosions, on lower legs bilaterally 
up to the line of the top of combat boots; 
an inherited skin fragility disorder
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
194 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
194 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 6-2  Additional Primary Lesions: Pustules, Furuncles, 
Nodules, Cysts, Wheals, Burrows
Pustule: Small palpable collection of neutrophils or keratin that appears white
∼15–20 pustules and acneiform papules on buccal  
and parotid cheeks bilaterally; acne vulgaris
∼30 2–5-mm erythematous papules and 
pustules on frontal, temporal, and parietal 
scalp; bacterial folliculitis
Furuncle: Inﬂamed hair follicle; multiple furuncles together form a carbuncle
Two large (2-cm) furuncles on forehead, 
without ﬂuctuance; furunculosis (Note: 
ﬂuctuant deep infections are abscesses)
Nodule: Larger and deeper than a papule
Solitary blue-brown 1.2-cm ﬁrm nodule with positive 
dimple sign and hyperpigmented rim on left lateral 
thigh; dermatoﬁbroma
Solitary 4-cm pink and brown scar-like 
nodule on central chest at site of previous 
trauma; keloid
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 3.1 Motivational Interviewing: A Clinical Example
 
C H A P T E R  6 |
 
The Skin, Hair, and Nails 
195
Subcutaneous mass/cyst: Whether mobile or ﬁxed, cysts are encapsulated collections of ﬂuid or semisolid
Solitary 2-cm tethered subcutane-
ous cyst with overlying punctum 
releasing caseous whitish yellow 
substance with foul odor; epider-
mal inclusion cyst
Three 6–8-mm mobile subcutaneous cysts on vertex 
scalp, that on excision reveal pearly white balls; pilar 
cysts
Solitary 9-cm mobile rubbery 
subcutaneous mass on left 
temple; lipoma
Wheal: Area of localized dermal 
edema that evanesces (comes and 
goes) within a period of 1–2 days; 
this is the essential primary lesion 
of urticaria
Burrow: Small linear or serpiginous pathways in the 
epidermis created by the scabies mite
Many variably sized (1–10-cm) 
wheals on lateral neck, shoulders, 
abdomen, arms, and legs; urticaria
Multiple small (3–6-mm) erythematous papules on 
abdomen, buttocks, scrotum, and shaft and head of 
penis, with four burrows noted on interdigital web 
spaces; scabies
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
196 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
196 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 6-3 Dermatology Safari: Benign Lesions
Practice makes perfect . . . Look for these common lesions during your clinical rotations. Perform a skin examination on as many 
patients as you can. If you are unsure about identifying the lesion, ask your instructors or attending physicians for help.
Cherry angiomas
Seborrheic keratosis
Solar lentigines
Benign melanocytic nevi
Dermatoﬁbroma
Keloids
Epidermal inclusion cyst
Pilar cyst
Lipoma
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 3.1 Motivational Interviewing: A Clinical Example
 
C H A P T E R  6 |
 
The Skin, Hair, and Nails 
197
Table 6-4  Rough Lesions: Actinic Keratoses, Squamous 
Cell Carcinoma, and Their Mimics
Patients commonly report feeling rough lesions. Many are benign, like seborrheic keratoses or warts, but squamous cell carcinoma 
(SCC) and its precursor actinic keratosis can also feel rough or keratotic. SCC most commonly arises on sun-damaged skin of the 
head, neck, and dorsal arms and hands and can metastasize if left untreated. It consists of more mature cells usually resembling 
the spinous layer of the epidermis and accounts for ∼16% of skin cancers. If left untreated, actinic keratoses progress to SCC at a 
rate of about 1 in 1,000 per year. Counsel affected patients about sun avoidance and use of sunscreen and offer treatment to 
prevent progression to SCC.
Actinic Keratosis and  
Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Mimics
Actinic keratosis
Superﬁcial xerosis or seborrheic dermatitis
■  Actinic keratosis after ﬁeld therapy with 5-ﬂuorouracil  
(left photo)
■  Often easier to feel than to see
■  Superﬁcial keratotic papules “come and go” on sun-damaged skin
■  May occur in same distribution on forehead, central face
■  Scale is less keratotic and will improve with moisturizers,  
mild topical steroids
Cutaneous horn/keratotic scale
Warts
■  The protypic keratotic scale of actinic keratoses and SCC is 
formed by keratin and can result in a cutaneous horn
■  Cutaneous horns should generally be biopsied to rule out SCC
■  Usually skin-colored to pink, texture more verrucous than 
keratotic
■  May be ﬁliform
■  Often have hemorrhagic punctae that can be seen with a 
magnifying glass or dermatoscope
Squamous cell carcinoma
Seborrheic keratosis
■  Keratoacanthomas are SCCs that arise rapidly and have a 
crateriform center
■  Often have a smooth but ﬁrm border
■  SCCs can become quite large if left untreated (Note: highest 
sites of metastasis are the scalp, lips, and ears)
■  Often have a verrucous texture
■  Appear like a “stuck-on” or ﬂattened ball of wax
■  May crumble or bleed if picked
■  Speciﬁc features on dermoscopy such as milia-like cysts or 
comedone-like openings are reassuring, if present
■  May be erythematous if inﬂamed
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
198 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
198 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 6-5  Pink Lesions: Basal Cell Carcinoma  
and Its Mimics
Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most common cancer in the world. Fortunately, it rarely spreads to other parts of the body. 
Nonetheless, it can invade and destroy local tissues, causing signiﬁcant morbidity to the eye, nose, or brain. BCC consists of 
immature cells similar to those in the basal layer of the epidermis, and account for roughly 80% of all skin cancers. BCCs should 
be biopsied for conﬁrmation before treatment. Review the BCC features below and how they contrast with mimics that are benign.
Basal Cell Carcinomas
Mimics
Superﬁcial basal cell carcinoma 
Actinic keratosis and squamous  
cell carcinoma in situ
■ Pink patch that does not heal
■ May have focal scaling
■  Actinic keratosis or squamous cell carcinoma in situ usually 
has keratotic scaling
Nodular basal cell carcinoma
Sebaceous hyperplasia
■  Pink papule, often with translucent or pearly appearance 
and overlying telangiectasias
■ May have focal pigmentation
■  Dermoscopy shows arborizing vessels, focal pigment 
globules, and other speciﬁc patterns
■  Yellowish globular papules, often with central dell, on 
forehead and cheeks
■  Dermoscopy shows telangiectasias that go around sebaceous 
glands rather than over them as in BCC
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 3.1 Motivational Interviewing: A Clinical Example
 
C H A P T E R  6 |
 
The Skin, Hair, and Nails 
199
Basal Cell Carcinomas
Mimics
Nodular basal cell carcinoma (continued)
Fibrous papule
■  1 cm pearly pink plaque with central depression and  
overlying arborizing telangiectasias on nasal ala
■  Skin-colored to pink papule on the nose, without 
telangiectasias
■ May become excoriated
Ulcerated basal cell carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma
■ Non-healing ulcer, resulting in “rolled border”
■ May also be ulcerated
■ Firmer at edges than BCC
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
200 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
200 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 6-6  Brown Lesions:  
Melanoma and Its Mimics
Most patients have brown spots on their body surface if you look thoroughly. Although these are usually freckles, benign nevi, 
solar lentigines, or seborrheic keratoses, you and the patient must look closely for any that stand out as a possible melanoma. The 
best way to detect a melanoma is to do numerous skin examinations so that you recognize brown lesions that are benign. With 
enough practice, when you see a melanoma, it will stick out as the “ugly duckling.” Review the ABCDE rule and photographs on 
pp. 178–180, which provide additional helpful identiﬁers and comparisons.
Melanomas
Mimics
Amelanotic melanoma
Skin tags or intradermal nevi
■ Usually in very fair-skinned people
■  Evolution or rapid change is the most important feature, 
because variegation or dark pigment is missing in this type
■ Soft and ﬂeshy
■ Often around neck, axillae, or back
■ Sessile nevi may have a hint of brown pigmentation
Melanoma in situ
Solar lentigo
■ On sun-exposed or sun-protected skin
■ Look for ABCDE features
■ On sun-exposed skin
■ Light brown and uniform in color but may be asymmetric
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 3.1 Motivational Interviewing: A Clinical Example
 
C H A P T E R  6 |
 
The Skin, Hair, and Nails 
201
(continued)
Melanomas
Mimics
Melanoma
Dysplastic nevus
■ May arise de novo or in existing nevi and exhibits ABCDEs
■  Patients with many dysplastic nevi have increased risk of 
melanoma
■  May have macular base and papular central “fried egg” 
component
■ Compare to the patient’s other nevi and monitor changes
Melanoma
Inﬂamed seborrheic keratosis
■ May have variegated color (browns, red)
■ Has melanocytic features on dermoscopy
■  Can sometimes mimic a melanoma if it has an 
erythematous base
■ Dermoscopy helps the trained eye distinguish these
Melanoma
Seborrheic keratosis
■  May be uniform in color but asymmetric; key feature is  
rapid change or Evolution
■ Stuck-on and verrucous, may be darkly pigmented
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
202 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
202 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 6-6  Brown Lesions:  
Melanoma and Its Mimics (Continued )
Melanomas
Mimics
Acral melanoma
Acral nevus
■ Rapid change or evolution helps detect acral melanoma
■  Consider biopsies if >7 mm, rapidly growing, or concerning 
features on dermoscopy
■  Likely benign if <7 mm and has a reassurance pattern on 
dermoscopy, such as the parallel furrow or lattice patterns
Melanoma with blue-black areas
Blue nevus
■  Blue-black areas are concerning for melanoma, especially if 
they are asymmetric
■  Blue nevi have a homogenous blue-gray appearance, 
clinically and on dermoscopy
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 3.1 Motivational Interviewing: A Clinical Example
 
C H A P T E R  6 |
 
The Skin, Hair, and Nails 
203
Finding the Ugly Duckling: As you evaluate changing brown lesions in the context of the patient’s other nevi and lentigines, 
the “ugly duckling” is the nevus that looks different from the patient’s other nevi. A patient may make many atypical nevi with 
surrounding macular components and central papular components, but they all look the same. Find the patient’s signature nevus, 
then search for the ugly duckling that looks different from the patient’s typical “signature” nevi.
Most dermatologists now rely on a dermatoscope to evaluate pigmented lesions, which allows them to detect melanomas when 
they are thinner. With training, dermoscopy can help distinguish nevi with reassuring patterns from possible early melanomas. 
Even without dermoscopy, however, a keen eye actively inspecting the skin for “ugly ducklings” is likely to detect melanomas 
when they arise.
This patient has multiple atypical nevi, but the one on his right back just lateral to midline stands out as the “ugly duckling” 
because it has three colors; the white area showed melanoma in situ on biopsy.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
204 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
204 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 6-7 Acne Vulgaris—Primary and Secondary Lesions
Acne vulgaris is the most common cutaneous disorder in the United States, affecting more than 85% of adolescents.33 Acne is a 
disorder of the pilosebaceous unit that involves proliferation of the keratinocytes at the opening of the follicle; increased 
production of sebum, stimulated by androgens, which combines with keratinocytes to plug the follicular opening; growth of 
Propionibacterium acnes, an anaerobic diphtheroid normally found on the skin; and inﬂammation from bacterial activity and 
release of free fatty acids and enzymes from activated neutrophils. Cosmetics, humidity, heavy sweating, and stress are 
contributing factors. Most recommendations for treatment of acne are divided along its morphologic subdivisions: comedonal 
(mild), inﬂammatory (moderate), and nodulocystic (severe).
Lesions appear in areas with the greatest number of sebaceous glands, namely the face, neck, chest, upper back, and upper 
arms. They may be primary, secondary, or mixed.
Primary Lesions
Secondary Lesions
Mild Acne: Open and closed comedones,  
occasional papules
Moderate Acne: Comedones, papules,  
pustules
Severe Cystic Acne
Acne with Pitting and Scars
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 3.1 Motivational Interviewing: A Clinical Example
 
C H A P T E R  6 |
 
The Skin, Hair, and Nails 
205
Table 6-8  Vascular and Purpuric Lesions  
of the Skin
Vascular Lesions
Spider Angiomaa
Spider Veina
Cherry Angioma
Color and Size
Fiery red; from very small to  
2 cm
Bluish; size variable, from 
very small to several inches
Bright or ruby red; may become 
purplish with age; 1–3 mm
Shape
Central body, sometimes 
raised, surrounded by 
erythema and radiating legs
Variable; may resemble a 
spider or be linear, irregular, 
cascading
Round, ﬂat, or sometimes 
raised; may be surrounded 
by a pale halo
Pulsatility and Effect  
of Pressure
Often seen in center of the spider 
when pressure with a glass slide 
is applied; pressure on the body 
causes blanching of the spider
Absent; pressure over the 
center does not cause 
blanching, but diffuse 
pressure blanches the veins
Absent; may show partial 
blanching, especially if 
pressure applied with edge of 
a pinpoint
Distribution
Face, neck, arms, and upper trunk; 
almost never below the waist
Most often on the legs, near 
veins; also on the anterior chest
Trunk; also extremities
Signiﬁcance
Single spider angiomas are 
normal and are common on the 
face and chest; also seen in 
pregnancy and liver disease
Often accompanies increased 
pressure in the superﬁcial 
veins, as in varicose veins
None; increases in size and 
numbers with aging
Purpuric Lesions
Petechia/Purpura
Ecchymosis
Color and Size
Deep red or reddish purple, fading away over 
time; petechia, 1–3 mm; purpura are larger
Purple or purplish blue, fading to green, 
yellow, and brown with time; ariable size, 
larger than petechiae, >3 mm
Shape
Rounded, sometimes irregular; ﬂat
Rounded, oval, or irregular; may have a central 
subcutaneous ﬂat nodule (a hematoma)
Pulsatility and Effect  
of Pressure
Absent; no effect from pressure
Absent; no effect from pressure
Distribution
Variable
Variable
Signiﬁcance
Blood outside the vessels; may suggest a 
bleeding disorder or, if petechiae, emboli to 
skin; palpable purpura in vasculitis
Blood outside the vessels; often secondary to 
bruising or trauma; also seen in bleeding 
disorders
aThese are telangiectasias, or dilated small vessels that look red or bluish.
Sources of photos: Spider Angioma—Marks R. Skin Disease in Old Age. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1987; Petechia/Purpura—Kelley WN. Textbook of Internal 
Medicine. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1989.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
206 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
206 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 6-9 Signs of Sun Damage
Sun damage is one of the most important clues that a patient is at risk of skin cancer. Study carefully the following indicators of 
sun damage accrued throughout life. These indicators should prompt close inspection for pink lesions that are possible basal cell 
carcinomas; rough or keratotic lesions that may be actinic keratoses or squamous cell carcinomas; or asymmetric, multicolored, or 
changing lesions that could be melanoma. Counsel affected patients about proper sun protection, not only for themselves but for 
their families.
Solar lentigo: Bilaterally symmetric brown macules located 
on sun-exposed skin, including the face, shoulders, and arms 
and hands
Solar elastosis: Yellowish white macules or papules in 
sun-exposed skin, especially on the forehead
Actinic purpura: Ecchymoses limited to the dorsal forearms 
and hands but not extending above the “shirt sleeve” line on 
the upper arm
Poikiloderma: Red patches in sun-damaged areas, espe-
cially the V of the neck, and lateral neck (usually sparing the 
shadow inferior to the chin) with ﬁne telangiectasias, and 
both hyper- and hypopigmentation
Wrinkles: Increased sun damage and tanning leads to deeper 
wrinkles at an earlier age
Cutis rhomboidalis nuchae: Deep wrinkles on the pos-
terior neck that “criss-cross”
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 3.1 Motivational Interviewing: A Clinical Example
 
C H A P T E R  6 |
 
The Skin, Hair, and Nails 
207
Table 6-10  Systemic Diseases  
and Associated Skin Findings
Systemic Disease
Associated Findings or Diagnoses
Addison disease
Hyperpigmentation of oral mucosa as well as sun-exposed skin, sites of trauma, and 
creases of palms and soles
Acquired immune deﬁciency 
syndrome
Human papillomavirus, herpes simplex virus, varicella zoster virus, cytomegalovirus, 
molluscum contagiosum, bacterial abscesses, mycobacterium (tuberculosis, leprae, 
avium) infections, candidiasis, deep fungal infections (cryptococcus, histoplasmosis), 
oral hairy leukoplakia, Kaposi sarcoma, oral and anal squamous cell carcinoma, 
acquired ichthyosis, severe psoriasis, severe seborrheic dermatitis, eosinophilic 
folliculitis
Chagas disease (American 
trypanosomiasis)
Unilateral conjunctivitis and lid edema associated with preauricular lymphadenopathy
Chronic renal disease
Pallor, xerosis, uremic frost, pruritus, “half and half” nails, calciphylaxis.
CREST syndrome
Calcinosis, Raynaud phenomenon, sclerodactyly, matted telangiectasias of face and 
hands (palms)
Crohn disease
Erythema nodosum, pyoderma gangrenosum, enterocutaneous ﬁstulas, aphthous ulcers
Cushing disease
Striae, atrophy, purpura, ecchymoses, telangiectasias, acne, moon facies, buffalo hump, 
hypertrichosis
Dermatomyositis
Violaceous erythema as macules, patches or papules in periocular region (heliotrope), 
on interphalangeal joints (Gottron sign), and on upper back and shoulders (shawl 
sign); poikiloderma in sun-exposed areas; periungual telangiectasia, ragged cuticles 
(Samitz sign)
Diabetes
Pruritus, diabetic dermopathy, acanthosis nigricans, candidiasis, neuropathic ulcers, 
necrobiosis lipoidica, eruptive xanthomas
Disseminated intravascular 
coagulation
Purpura, petechiae, hemorrhagic bullae, induration, necrosis
Dyslipidemias
Xanthomas (tendon, eruptive, and tuberous), xanthelasma (may also occur in healthy people)
Gonococcemia
Purple to grey macules, papules or hemorrhagic pustules distributed over acral and 
periarticular surfaces
Hemochromatosis
Skin bronzing and hyperpigmentation
Hypothyroidism
Dry, rough, and pale skin; coarse and brittle hair; myxedema; alopecia (lateral third of 
the eyebrows to diffuse); skin cool to touch; thin and brittle nails
Hyperthyroidism
Warm, moist, soft, and velvety skin; thin and ﬁne hair; alopecia; vitiligo; pretibial 
myxedema (in Graves disease); hyperpigmentation (local or generalized)
Infective endocarditis
Janeway lesions, Osler nodes, splinter hemorrhages, petechiae
(continued)
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
208 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
208 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 6-10  Systemic Diseases  
and Associated Skin Findings (Continued )
Systemic Disease
Associated Findings or Diagnoses
Kawasaki disease
Mucosal erythema (lips, tongue, and pharynx), strawberry tongue, cherry red lips, 
polymorphous rash (primarily on trunk), erythema of palms and soles with later 
desquamation of ﬁngertips
Liver disease
Jaundice, spider angiomas and other telangiectasias, palmar erythema, Terry nails, 
pruritus, purpura, caput medusae
Leukemia/lymphoma
Pallor, exfoliative erythroderma, nodules, petechiae, ecchymoses, pruritus, vasculitis, 
pyoderma gangrenosum, bullous diseases
Leukocytoclastic vasculitis (post-
capillary venules)
Palpable purpura, purpuric wheals, hemorrhagic bullae in dependent areas
Lymphogranuloma venereum
Lymphadenopathy above and below Poupart ligament (groove sign)
Medium vessels vasculitides (e.g., 
polyarteritis nodosa, granulomatosis 
with polyangiitis, eosinophilic 
granulomatosis with polyangiitis, 
microscopic polyangiitis)
Livedo racemosa, purpuric nodules, ulcers
Meningococcemia
Angular or stellate purpuric patches and plaques with gunmetal gray center. Progresses 
to ecchymoses, bullae, necrosis
Neuroﬁbromatoses 1 (von 
Recklinghausen syndrome)
Neuroﬁbromas, café-au-lait spots, freckling in the axillae (Crowe sign), plexiform 
neuroﬁbroma
Pancreatitis (hemorrhagic)
Bruising and induration over the costovertebral angle (Grey Turner sign), Cullen sign, 
panniculitis
Pancreatic carcinoma
Panniculitis, migratory thrombophlebitis (Trousseau sign)
Porphyria cutanea tarda
Photosensitivity with bullae and skin fragility on dorsal hands and forearms; bullae 
rupture and heal with scarring and milia; hypertrichosis of the face; bronzing of skin 
when associated with hemochromatosis
Pyoderma gangrenosum
Painful pustule quickly progressing to ragged ulcer with sharply marginated violaceous 
border and undermined edges
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Pink or reddish papules progressing to purpuric papules; starts on wrists and ankles 
and spreads to palms and soles and then to trunk and face
Sarcoidosis
Red-brown plaques, often annular, typically involving the head and neck and especially 
the nose and ears; may show apple jelly color with dermoscopy
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Malar erythema (mid cheeks, spans bridge of nose), relative sparing of nasolabial folds, 
periungual erythema, interphalangeal erythema
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 3.1 Motivational Interviewing: A Clinical Example
 
C H A P T E R  6 |
 
The Skin, Hair, and Nails 
209
Table 6-11 Hair Loss
When taking a complete history of hair loss, include the duration, acuity of onset, cause from decreased hair density or increased 
shedding, the pattern (diffuse or localized), medication history, hair care practices, and associated medical conditions or stressors. 
Decrease in hair density is usually caused by male or female pattern hair loss, but less commonly by scarring alopecias. Hair shedding from 
the roots is often caused by telogen efﬂuvium, alopecia areata, anagen efﬂuvium (insults to the hair shaft from exposure to agents like 
chemotherapy) or less commonly, scarring alopecias. Perform a hair pull test to look for the percentage of telogen hairs. Hair shedding 
from breakage at the hair shaft is often caused by tinea capitis, improper hair care, and less commonly hair shaft disorders or anagen 
efﬂuvium. Perform a tug test to look for hair fragility. See Figures 6-27 and 6-28 on p. 188 for examples of the hair pull test and tug test.
Generalized or Diffuse Hair Loss
Male and female pattern hair loss affects over half of men by their 50 years of age, and over half of women by their 80 years of 
age. In men, look for frontal hairline regression and thinning on the posterior vertex; in women, look for thinning that spreads 
from the crown down without hairline regression. Severity is described by standardized classiﬁcations: Norwood-Hamilton (men) 
and Ludwig (women). The hair pull test is normal or only pulls a few hairs.
Male pattern hair loss (MPHL)
Female pattern hair loss (FPHL)
Telogen Efﬂuvium and Anagen Efﬂuvium
In telogen efﬂuvium, overall, the patient’s scalp and hair distribution appear normal, but a positive hair pull test reveals most hairs 
have telogen bulbs. In anagen efﬂuvium, there is diffuse hair loss from the roots. The hair pull test shows few if any hairs with 
telogen bulbs.
Normal hair part width in telogen 
efﬂuvium
Positive hair pull test in telogen efﬂuvium 
showing all hairs have telogen bulbs
Anagen efﬂuvium
Focal Hair Loss
Alopecia Areata
There is sudden onset of clearly demarcated, usually localized, round or oval patches of hair loss leaving smooth skin without 
hairs, in children and young adults. There is no visible scaling or erythema.
(continued)
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
210 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
210 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 6-11 Hair Loss (Continued )
Tinea Capitis (“Ringworm”)
There are round scaling patches of alopecia, mostly seen in children. There may be “black dots” of broken hairs and comma or 
corkscrew hairs on dermoscopy. Usually caused by Trichophyton tonsurans from humans, and less commonly, Microsporum canis 
from dogs or cats. Boggy plaques are called kerions.
Scarring Alopecia
Scarring on the scalp is characterized by shiny skin, complete loss of hair follicles, and often, discoloration. Presence of any 
scarring should prompt referral to a dermatologist for possible scalp biopsy if the patient desires treatment. Examples of scarring 
alopecia include central centrifugal scarring alopecia and discoid lupus erythematosus, among others.
Central centrifugal scarring alopecia
Discoid lupus scarring alopecia
Hair Shaft Disorders
Patients with abnormal hair from birth, as in this patient with a genetic condition called monilethrix, should be referred to 
dermatology.
Hair shaft disorder with alternating bands
References: For a complete guide to evaluation of hair loss, review Mubki T, Rucnicka L, Olszewska M, et al. Evaluation and diagnosis of the hair loss patient.  
J Am Acad Dermatol 2014;71:415. *See also Hair Loss Help. Hair loss classiﬁcations. Available at http://www.hairlosshelp.com/hair_loss_research/hair_loss_charts.
cfm. Accessed February 13, 2015.
Sources of photo: Alopecia Areata [left]—Hall JC. Sauer’s Manual of Skin Diseases, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2006.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 3.1 Motivational Interviewing: A Clinical Example
 
C H A P T E R  6 |
 
The Skin, Hair, and Nails 
211
Table 6-12 Findings in or Near the Nails
Paronychia
A superﬁcial infection of the proximal and lateral nail folds adjacent to the nail plate. The 
nail folds are often red, swollen, and tender. Represents the most common infection of the 
hand, usually from Staphylococcus aureus or Streptococcus species, and may spread until it 
completely surrounds the nail plate. Creates a felon if it extends into the pulp space of the 
ﬁnger. Arises from local trauma due to nail biting, manicuring, or frequent hand immersion 
in water. Chronic infections may be related to Candida.
Clubbing of the Fingers
Clinically, a bulbous swelling of the soft tissue at the nail base, with loss of the normal 
angle between the nail and the proximal nail fold. The angle increases to 180° or more, 
and the nail bed feels spongy or ﬂoating. The mechanism is still unknown but involves 
vasodilatation with increased blood ﬂow to the distal portion of the digits and changes in 
connective tissue, possibly from hypoxia, changes in innervation, genetics, or a platelet-
derived growth factor from fragments of platelet clumps. Seen in congenital heart disease, 
interstitial lung disease and lung cancer, inﬂammatory bowel diseases, and malignancies.
Habit Tic Deformity
There is depression of the central nail with a “Christmas tree” appearance from small 
horizontal depressions, resulting from repetitive trauma from rubbing the index ﬁnger over 
the thumb or vice versa.  Pressure on the nail matrix causes the nail to grow out 
abnormally. Avoidance of the behavior leads to normal nail growth.
Melanonychia
Melanonychia is caused by increased pigmentation in the nail matrix, leading to a streak as 
the nail grows out. This may be a normal ethnic variation if found in multiple nails. A thin 
uniform streak may be caused by a nevus, but a wide streak, especially if growing or 
irregular, could represent a subungual melanoma.
Onycholysis
A painless separation of the whitened opaque nail plate from the pinker translucent nail 
bed. Fingernails that extend past the ﬁngertip are more likely to result in the traumatic 
shearing forces that produce onycholysis. Starts distally and progresses proximally, 
enlarging the free edge of the nail. Local causes include trauma from excess manicuring, 
psoriasis, fungal infection, and allergic reactions to nail cosmetics. Systemic causes include 
diabetes, anemia, photosensitive drug reactions, hyperthyroidism, peripheral ischemia, 
bronchiectasis, and syphilis.
(continued)
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
212 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
212 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Onychomycosis
The most common cause of nail thickening and subungual debris is onychomycosis, most 
often from the dermatophyte Trichophyton rubrum, but also from other dermatophytes and 
some molds such as Alternaria and Fusarium species. Onychomycosis affects 1 in 5 over 
age 60. The best prevention is to treat and prevent tinea pedis.  Only half of all nail 
dystrophies are caused by onychomycosis, so a positive fungal culture, potassium 
hydroxide exam, or pathologic evaluation of nail clippings is recommended before treating 
with oral antifungals.
Terry Nails
Nail plate turns white with a ground-glass appearance, a distal band of reddish brown, and 
obliteration of the lunula. Commonly affects all ﬁngers, although may appear in only one 
ﬁnger. Seen in liver disease, usually cirrhosis, heart failure, and diabetes. May arise from 
decreased vascularity and increased connective tissue in nail bed.
Transverse Linear Depressions (Beau Lines)
Transverse depressions of the nail plates, usually bilateral, resulting from temporary 
disruption of proximal nail growth from systemic illness. Timing of the illness may  
be estimated by measuring the distance from the line to the nail bed (nails grow 
approximately 1 mm every 6 to 10 days). Seen in severe illness, trauma, and cold  
exposure if Raynaud disease is present.
Pitting
Punctate depressions of the nail plate caused by defective layering of the superﬁcial nail 
plate by the proximal nail matrix. Usually associated with psoriasis but also seen in Reiter 
syndrome, sarcoidosis, alopecia areata, and localized atopic or chemical dermatitis.
Sources of photos: Onycholysis, Terry Nails—Habif TP. Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide to Diagnosis and Therapy, 2nd ed. St. Louis: CV Mosby, 1990.
Table 6-12 Findings in or Near the Nails (Continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  6 |
 
The Skin, Hair, and Nails 
213
Table 6-13 Pressure Ulcers
Pressure (decubitus) ulcers usually develop over bony prominences subject to unrelieved pressure, resulting in ischemic damage to 
underlying tissue. Prevention is important: inspect the skin thoroughly for early warning signs of erythema that still blanches with 
pressure, especially in patients with risk factors. Pressure ulcers form most commonly over the sacrum, ischial tuberosities, greater 
trochanters, and heels. A commonly applied staging system, based on depth of destroyed tissue, is illustrated below. Note that 
necrosis or eschar must be debrided before ulcers can be staged. Ulcers may not progress sequentially through the four stages.
Inspect ulcers for signs of infection (drainage, odor, cellulitis, or necrosis). Fever, chills, and pain suggest underlying osteomyelitis. 
Address the patient’s overall health, including comorbid conditions such as vascular disease, diabetes, immune deﬁciencies, collagen 
vascular disease, malignancy, psychosis, or depression; nutritional status; pain and level of analgesia; risk for recurrence; 
psychosocial factors such as learning ability, social supports, and lifestyle; and evidence of polypharmacy, overmedication, or 
abuse of alcohol, tobacco, or illicit drugs.34,35
Risk Factors for Pressure Ulcers
■  Decreased mobility, especially if accompanied by increased 
pressure or movement causing friction or shear stress
■  Decreased sensation, from brain or spinal cord lesions or 
peripheral nerve disease
Stage I
Presence of a reddened area that fails to blanch with pressure, 
and changes in temperature (warmth or coolness), 
consistency (ﬁrm or boggy), sensation (pain or itching), or 
color (red, blue, or purple on darker skin; red on lighter skin)
■  Decreased blood ﬂow from hypotension or microvascular 
disease such as diabetes or atherosclerosis
■  Fecal or urinary incontinence
■  Presence of fracture
■  Poor nutritional status or low albumin
Stage II
The skin forms a blister or sore. Partial-thickness skin loss or 
ulceration involving the epidermis, dermis, or both
Stage III
A crater appears in the skin, with full-thickness skin loss  
and damage to or necrosis of subcutaneous tissue that may 
extend to, but not through, underlying muscle
Stage IV
The pressure ulcer deepens. There is full-thickness skin loss, 
with destruction, tissue necrosis, or damage to underlying 
muscle, bone, and sometimes tendons and joints
Source: Used with permission of National Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel, Washington, DC.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
214 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
References
 1. Eichenfeld LF, Tom WL, Berger TG, et al. Guidelines of care for the 
management of atopic dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014;71:116.
 2. National Eczema Association. Available at http://nationaleczema.
org/eczema-products/moisturizers/. Accessed October 27, 2014.
 3. Stern RS. Prevalence of a history of skin cancer in 2007: results of 
an incidence-based model. Arch Dermatol. 2010;146:279.
 4. Siegel R, Desantis C, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2015. CA Cancer J 
Clin. 2015;65:5.
 5. Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al. SEER Cancer Statistics 
Review, 1975–2011. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute; 2014.
 6. American Cancer Society. Key statistics about Melanoma Skin Can-
cer. Available at http://www.cancer.org/cancer/skincancer-mela-
noma/detailedguide/melanoma-skin-cancer-key-statistics. 
Accessed February 2, 2015.
 7. Naeyaert JM, Brochez L. Clinical practice. Dysplastic nevi. N Engl 
J Med. 2003;349:2233.
 8. American Academy of Dermatology. Skin cancer. Available at https://
www.aad.org/dermatology-a-to-z/diseases-and-treatments/q—t/
skin-cancer. Accessed February 11, 2015.
 9. National Cancer Institute. Genetics of Skin Cancer (PDQ®). Mela-
noma. Available at http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/genetics/ 
skin/HealthProfessional/page4. Accessed February 14, 2015.
 10. El Ghissassi F, Baan R, Straif K, et al. A review of human carcino-
gens—part D: radiation. Lancet Oncol. 2009;10:751.
 11. Glanz K, Schoenfeld ER, Steffen A. A randomized trial of tailored 
skin cancer prevention messages for adults: Project SCAPE. Am J 
Public Health. 2010;100:735.
 12. Lin JS, Eder M, Weinmann S. Behavioral counseling to prevent skin 
cancer: a systematic review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task 
Force. Ann Intern Med. 2011;154:190. See also http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK53508/. Accessed February 15, 2015. 
 13. Moyer VA. Behavioral counseling to prevent skin cancer: U.S. Pre-
ventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern 
Med. 2012;157:59. See also http://www.uspreventiveservicestask-
force.org/Page/Topic/recommendation-summary/skin-cancer-
counseling?ds=1&s=. Accessed February 15, 2015.
 14. Green AC, Williams GM, Logan V, et al. Reduced melanoma after 
regular sunscreen use: randomized trial follow-up. J Clin Oncol, 
2011;29:257.
 15. American Academy of Dermatology. How do I prevent skin cancer. 
Available at https://www.aad.org/spot-skin-cancer/understanding-
skin-cancer/how-do-i-prevent-skin-cancer. Accessed February 11, 
2015. 
 16. Skin Cancer Foundation. Sun protection. Available at http://www.skin-
cancer.org/prevention/sun-protection. Accessed February 15, 2015.
 17. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for skin cancer. 
Recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2009;150:188. See 
also http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Topic/
recommendation-summary/skin-cancer-screening?ds=1&s=. 
Accessed February 15, 2015.
 18. Wolff T, Tai E, Miller T. Screening for skin cancer: an update of the 
evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern 
Med. 2009;150:194. See also http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK34051/. Accessed February 15, 2015.
 19. Siegel R, Desantis C, Jemal A. Colorectal cancer statistics, 2014. CA 
Cancer J Clin. 2014;64:104.
 20. Aitken JF, Elwood M, Baade PD, et al. Clinical whole-body skin 
examination reduces the incidence of thick melanomas. Int J Can-
cer. 2010;126:450.
 21. Katalinic A, Waldmann A, Weinstock MA, et al. Does skin cancer 
screening save lives? An observational study comparing trends in 
melanoma mortality in regions with and without screening. Can-
cer. 2012;118:5395.
 22. Swetter SM, Pollitt RA, Johnson TM, et al. Behavioral determinants 
of successful early melanoma detection. Cancer. 2012;118:3725.
 23. Grange F, Barbe L, Mas F, et al. The role of general practitioners in 
diagnosis of cutaneous melanoma: a population-based study in 
France. Br J Dermatol. 2012;167:1351.
 24. Mayer JE, Swetter SM, Fu T, et al. Screening, early detection, edu-
cation, and trends for melanoma: current status (2007–2013) and 
future directions, Parts I and II. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014;71: 
599; 611.
 25. Eide MJ, Asgari NM, Fletcher SW, et al. Effects on skills and prac-
tice from a web-based skin cancer course for primary care provid-
ers. J Am Board Fam Med. 2013;26:648.
 26. Skinsight INFORMED Skin Cancer Education Series. Melanoma 
and Skin Cancer Early Detection. http://www.skinsight.com/info/
for_professionals/skin-cancer-detection-informed/skin-cancer-
education. Accessed February 15, 2015.
 27. Abbasi NR, Shaw HM, Rigel DS, et al. Early diagnosis of cutaneous 
melanoma revisiting the ABCD criteria. JAMA. 2004;292:2771.
 28. American Cancer Society. Skin exams. Available at http://www. 
cancer.org/cancer/skincancer-melanoma/moreinformation/ 
skincancerpreventionandearlydetection/skin-cancer-prevention-
and-early-detection-skin-exams. Accessed February 11, 2015.
 29. McPherson M, Elwood M, English DR, et al. Presentation and 
detection of invasive melanoma in a high-risk population. J Am 
Acad Dermatol. 2006;54:783.
 30. Zalaudek I, Kittler H, Marghoob AA, et al. Time required for a 
complete skin examination with and without dermoscopy: a pro-
spective, randomized multicenter study. Arch Dermatol. 2008; 
144:509.
 31. Learn Derm. http://www.visualdx.com/learnderm/. Accessed 
February 15, 2015.
 32. Mubki T, Rucnicka L, Olszewska M, et al. Evaluate and diagnosis 
of the hair loss patient. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014;71:415.
 33. Thiboutot D, Gollnick H, Bettoli V, et al. New insights into the 
management of acne: an update from the Global Alliance 
to Improve Outcomes in Acne group. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2009; 
60(5 Suppl):S1.
 34. Smith TE, Totten A, Hickam DH, et al. Pressure ulcer treatment 
strategies: a systemic comparative effectiveness review. Ann Intern 
Med. 2013;159:39. 
 35. VanGilder C, MacFarlane G, Meyer S, et al. Body mass index, 
weight, and pressure ulcer prevalence: an analysis of the 2006–
2007 International Pressure Ulcer Prevalence Surveys. J Nurs Care 
Qual. 2009;24:127.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
215
Many critical structures like the sensory organs, cranial nerves (CNs), and major 
blood vessels originate in the head and neck. To help students integrate this 
complex anatomy and physiology with the skills of physical examination, this 
chapter follows a special format. The Health History and the Health Promotion 
and Counseling sections cover the “HEENT” components—Head, Eyes, Ear, 
Nose, and Throat—as a unit since head and neck symptoms, as well as preven-
tion strategies, are often interconnected. However, Anatomy and Physiology and 
Techniques of Examination are grouped together in ﬁve combined sections due 
to the close linkage between anatomic structures and function and techniques of 
examination, especially for the examination of the eyes (Fig. 7-1).
C H A P T E R 7
The Head and Neck
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate  
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 7: Head, Eyes, and Ears; Vol. 8: Nose, Mouth, 
and Neck)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com
F I G U R E  7 - 1 .  Test the complex 
anatomy and physiology of vision.
Common or Concerning Symptoms
● Headache
● Change in vision: blurred vision, loss of vision, ﬂoaters, ﬂashing lights
● Eye pain, redness, or tearing
● Double vision (diplopia)
● Hearing loss, earache, ringing in the ears (tinnitus)
● Dizziness and vertigo
● Nosebleed (epistaxis)
● Sore throat, hoarseness
● Swollen glands
● Goiter
Many symptoms of the head and neck represent common benign processes, but 
sometimes these symptoms reﬂect a serious underlying condition. Careful 
attention to the interview and physical examination, with a focus on features and 
The Health History
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
216 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
ﬁndings that do not ﬁt a typical benign pattern, can often distinguish a common 
condition of the head and neck from a serious underlying disease.
The Head
Headache is one of the most common symptoms in clinical practice, with a life-
time prevalence of 30% in the general population.1,2 Among types of headaches, 
tension headache predominates, affecting half of all individuals during their 
lifetime.3 Headaches are generally classiﬁed as primary (without an identiﬁed 
underlying disease) or secondary (with an identiﬁed underlying disease). How-
ever, every headache warrants careful evaluation for life-threatening secondary 
causes such as meningitis, subarachnoid hemorrhage, or mass lesion. Elicit a 
full description of every headache and its seven attributes (see p. 79). Is it uni-
lateral or bilateral? Severe with sudden onset, like a thunderclap? Steady or 
throbbing? Continuous or intermittent? Is there an aura? Is the headache “typi-
cal” or is there something different?
Look for important signs (“red ﬂags”) that warn of headaches needing prompt 
investigation.
See Tables 7-1 and 7-2 on Primary 
Headaches and Secondary Headaches 
and Cranial Neuralgias on pp. 267–269.
Primary headaches include migraine, 
tension, cluster, and chronic daily 
headaches; secondary headaches arise 
from underlying structural, systemic, 
or infectious causes such as meningi-
tis or subarachnoid hemorrhage and 
may be life-threatening.4–6 
The International Classification of 
Headache Disorders, now in its second 
iteration, continues to evolve.5,7–9 
Thunderclap headaches reaching 
maximal intensity over several min-
utes occur in 70% of patients with 
subarachnoid hemorrhage, and are 
often preceded by a sentinel leak 
headache from a vascular leak into  
the subarachnoid space.10
Headache Warning Signs
● Progressively frequent or severe over a 3-month period
● Sudden onset like a “thunderclap” or “the worst headache of my life”
● New onset after age 50 years
● Aggravated or relieved by change in position
● Precipitated by Valsalva maneuver or exertion
● Associated symptoms of fever, night sweats, or weight loss
● Presence of cancer, HIV infection, or pregnancy
● Recent head trauma
● Change in pattern from past headaches
● Lack of a similar headache in the past
● Associated papilledema, neck stiﬀness, or focal neurologic deﬁcits
The three most important attributes of headache are its severity, its chronologic 
pattern, and its associated symptoms. Is the headache severe and of sudden onset? 
Does it intensify over several hours? Is it episodic? Or is it chronic or recurring? 
Is there a recent change in its pattern? Does the headache recur at the same time 
every day? What other symptoms, especially weakness or numbness in an arm 
or leg?
After your usual open-ended assessment, ask the patient to point to the area of 
pain or discomfort.
If headache is severe and of sudden 
onset, consider subarachnoid hemor-
rhage or meningitis.10
Migraine and tension headaches are 
episodic and tend to peak over several 
hours. New and persisting, progres-
sively severe headaches raise concerns 
of tumor, abscess, or mass lesion. 
Unilateral headache occurs in 
migraine and cluster headaches.4,11 
Tension headaches often arise in the 
temporal areas; cluster headaches 
may be retro-orbital.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
217
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Ask about associated symptoms such as nausea and vomiting.
Is there a prodrome of unusual feelings such as euphoria, craving for food, 
fatigue, or dizziness? Does the patient report an aura with neurologic symptoms, 
such as change in vision, numbness, or weakness?
Note that, due to increased risk of ischemic stroke and cardiovascular disease, the 
World Health Association advises women with migraines over age 35 years and 
women with migraines with aura avoid use of estrogen–progestin contracep-
tives.12–15
Ask if coughing, sneezing, or changing the position of the head affects the head-
ache. If head position affects the headache, ask if leaning forward or lying down 
increases the headache, or if lying down increases the headache.
Is there any overuse of analgesics, ergotamines, or triptans?
Ask about family history.
The Eyes
Begin with open-ended questions such as “How is your vision?” and “Have you 
had any trouble with your eyes?” If the patient reports a change in vision, pursue 
the related details.
■ Is vision worse during close work or at distances?
■ Is there blurred vision? If yes, is the onset sudden or gradual? If sudden and 
unilateral, is the visual loss painless or painful?
Nausea and vomiting are common with 
migraine, but also occur with brain 
tumors and subarachnoid hemorrhage.
Approximately 60% to 70% of 
patients with migraine have a symp-
tom prodrome prior to onset. About a 
third experience a visual aura, such as 
spark photopsias (flashes of light), 
fortifications (zig-zag arcs of light), 
and scotomas (areas of visual loss 
with surrounding normal vision).
Valsalva maneuvers and leaning for-
ward may increase pain from acute 
sinusitis. Valsalva and lying down may 
increase pain from mass lesions due 
to changing intracranial pressure.
Medication for overuse headache may 
cause headache if present ≥15 days a 
month for three months and reverts 
to <15 days a month when the medi-
cation is discontinued.16
Genetic inheritance is present in 30% 
to 50% of patients with migraine.11,17
Difficulty with close work suggests 
hyperopia (farsightedness) or presby-
opia (aging vision), or, if with distances, 
myopia (nearsightedness).
If sudden visual loss is unilateral and 
painless, consider vitreous hemor-
rhage from diabetes or trauma, macu-
lar degeneration, retinal detachment, 
retinal vein occlusion, or central retinal 
artery occlusion.
If painful, causes are usually in the 
cornea and anterior chamber such  
as corneal ulcer, uveitis, traumatic 
hyphema, and acute angle closure 
glaucoma.18–20 Optic neuritis from mul-
tiple sclerosis may also be painful.21 
Immediate referral is warranted.22,23
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
218 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
■ Is the visual loss bilateral (sudden bilateral visual loss is rare)? If so, is it 
painful?
■ Is the onset of bilateral visual loss gradual?
■ Location of visual loss may also be helpful. Is there blurring of the entire ﬁeld 
of vision or only parts of it?
■ If the visual ﬁeld defect is partial, is it central, peripheral, or on only one 
side?
■ Are there specks in the vision or areas where the patient cannot see (scoto-
mas)? If so, do they move around in the visual ﬁeld with shifts in gaze or are 
they ﬁxed?
■ Are there lights ﬂashing across the ﬁeld of vision? Vitreous ﬂoaters may ac-
company this symptom.
■ Does the patient wear glasses?
Ask about pain in or around the eyes, redness, and excessive tearing or watering.
Check for double vision, or diplopia. If present, ﬁnd out if the images are side by 
side (horizontal diplopia) or on top of each other (vertical diplopia). Does dip-
lopia persist with one eye closed? Which eye is affected?
One kind of horizontal diplopia is physiologic. Hold one ﬁnger upright approx-
imately 6 inches in front of your face, a second at arm’s length. When you focus 
on either ﬁnger, the image of the other is double. A patient who notices this 
phenomenon can be reassured.
If bilateral and painless, consider  
vascular etiologies such as giant-cell  
arteritis or nonphysiologic causes. If 
bilateral and painful, consider chemi-
cal or radiation exposures.
Gradual vision loss usually arises from 
cataracts or macular degeneration.
Slow central loss occurs in nuclear cata-
ract (p. 276) and macular degeneration24 
(p. 242), peripheral loss in advanced 
open-angle glaucoma (p. 270), and  
one-sided loss with hemianopsia and 
quadrantic defects (p. 273).
Moving specks or strands suggest vit-
reous floaters; fixed defects, or scoto-
mas, suggest lesions in the retina or 
visual pathways.
Flashing lights with new vitreous 
floaters suggest detachment of the 
vitreous body from the retina. Prompt 
consultation is indicated.25
A red painless eye is seen in subcon-
junctival hemorrhage, a red eye with a 
gritty sensation in viral conjunctivitis.  
A red painful eye is seen in hyphema, 
episcleritis, acute angle closure glau-
coma, herpes keratitis, foreign body, 
fungal keratitis, and sarcoid uveitis.26,27  
See Table 7-3, Red Eyes, p. 270.
Diplopia is seen in lesions in the 
brainstem or cerebellum, and with 
weakness or paralysis of one or more 
extraocular muscles, as in horizontal 
diplopia from palsy of CN III or VI, or 
vertical diplopia from palsy of CN III 
or IV. Diplopia in one eye, with the 
other closed, suggests a problem in 
the cornea or lens.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
219
THE HEALTH HISTORY
The Ears
Opening questions are “How is your hearing?” and “Have you had any trouble 
with your ears?” If the patient has noticed a hearing loss, does it involve one or 
both ears? Did it start suddenly or gradually? What are the associated symptoms, 
if any?
Distinguish conductive loss, which results from problems in the external or mid-
dle ear, from sensorineural loss, resulting from problems in the inner ear, the 
cochlear nerve, or its central connections in the brain. Two questions may be 
helpful: Does the patient have special difﬁculty understanding people as they 
talk? What happens in a noisy environment?
Pursue symptoms associated with hearing loss, such as earache or vertigo to help 
sort out likely causes. Ask about medications that might affect hearing and about 
sustained exposure to loud noise.
Complaints of earache, or pain in the ear, are especially common. Ask about asso-
ciated fever, sore throat, cough, and concurrent upper respiratory infection; if 
present, these heighten the likelihood of ear infection.
Ask about discharge from the ear, especially if associated with earache or trauma. 
Wax or debris in the ear is usually normal.
Tinnitus is a perceived sound that has no external stimulus—commonly, a musical ring-
ing or a rushing or roaring noise in one or both ears. Tinnitus may accompany hearing 
loss and often remains unexplained. Occasionally, popping sounds originate in the 
temporomandibular joint, or sounds from the vessels in the neck may be audible.
Vertigo is the sensation of true rotational movement of the patient or the sur-
roundings.32 These sensations point primarily to a problem in the labyrinths of 
the inner ear, peripheral lesions of CN VIII, or lesions in its central pathways or 
nuclei in the brain.
Complaints of dizziness and light-headedness are challenging because they are 
often nonspeciﬁc and suggest a diverse set of conditions ranging from vertigo to 
presyncope, weakness, unsteadiness, and disequilibrium. Clarify by asking what 
the patient means by dizziness. Then ask, “Do you feel as if the room is spinning 
or tilting (vertigo)? Do your symptoms get worse when you move your head?” 
Then, “Do you feel as if you are going to fall or pass out (presyncope)? . . . Or do 
you feel you are unsteady or losing your balance (disequilibrium)?”
Hearing loss may also be congenital, 
from single gene mutations.28,29
People with sensorineural loss have 
trouble understanding speech, often 
complaining that others mumble; 
noisy environments make hearing 
worse. In conductive loss, noisy envi-
ronments may help. 
Medications that affect hearing 
include aminoglycosides, aspirin, 
NSAIDs, quinine, and furosemide.
Pain occurs in the external canal in 
otitis externa (inflammation of the 
external ear canal) and, deeper within 
the ear in otitis media (infection of the 
middle ear).30 Pain in the ear may also 
be referred from other structures in 
the mouth, throat, or neck.
Acute otitis externa and acute or chronic 
otitis media with perforation usually 
present with yellow-green discharge.
Tinnitus is a common symptom, 
increasing in frequency with age. 
When associated with hearing loss 
and vertigo, suspect Ménière disease.31
See Table 7-4, Dizziness and Vertigo, 
p. 271.
See Table 7-4, Dizziness and Vertigo, 
p. 271, for distinguishing symptoms 
and time course.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
220 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
If there is true vertigo, distinguish peripheral from central neurologic causes (see 
Chapter 17, see p. 722). Establish the time course of symptoms. Check for nau-
sea, vomiting, double vision, and gait disturbance. Review the patient’s medica-
tions. Proceed with a careful neurologic examination focusing on presence of 
nystagmus and focal neurologic signs.
The Nose and Sinuses
Rhinorrhea refers to drainage from the nose and is often associated with nasal 
congestion, a sense of stufﬁness or obstruction. These symptoms are frequently 
accompanied by sneezing, watery eyes, and throat discomfort, and itching in the 
eyes, nose, and throat.33
Do symptoms occur when colds are prevalent and last less than seven days? Do 
they occur during the same season each year when pollens are in the air? Are 
symptoms triggered by speciﬁc animal or environmental exposures? Are there 
indoor environmental triggers such as dust or animals?
What remedies has the patient used? For how long? And how well do they work?
Is nasal or sinus congestion preceded by a viral upper respiratory tract infection 
(URI)? Is there purulent nasal discharge, loss of smell, tooth pain, or facial pain 
made worse by bending forward, ear pressure, cough, or fever?
Ask about drugs that may induce nasal stufﬁness.
Inquire about all medications or drugs, particularly oral contraceptives, reser-
pine, alcohol, and cocaine.
Is the nasal congestion only on one side?
Epistaxis is bleeding from the nasal passages. Bleeding can also originate in the 
paranasal sinuses or nasopharynx. Note that bleeding from posterior nasal struc-
tures may pass into the throat instead of out through the nostrils. Ask the patient 
to pinpoint the source of the bleeding. Is it from the nose, or has the patient 
actually coughed up blood (hemoptysis) or vomited blood (hematemesis)? These 
conditions have very different causes.
Vertigo represents vestibular disease, 
usually from peripheral causes in the 
inner ear such as benign positional 
vertigo, labyrinthitis, vestibular neuri-
tis, and Ménière disease. Ataxia, diplo-
pia, and dysarthria signal central 
neurologic causes in the cerebellum 
or brainstem such as cerebral vascular 
disease or posterior fossa tumor; also 
consider migraine.32 Feeling light-
headed, weak in the legs, or about to 
faint points to presyncope from arrhyth-
mia, orthostatic hypotension, or vaso-
vagal stimulation. 
Causes include viral infections, allergic 
rhinitis (“hay fever”), and vasomotor 
rhinitis. Itching favors an allergic 
cause.
Seasonal onset or environmental  
triggers suggest allergic rhinitis.
Drug-induced rhinitis occurs in exces-
sive use of topical decongestants, or 
use of cocaine.
Acute bacterial sinusitis, now termed  
rhinosinusitis, is unlikely until viral URI 
symptoms persist more than 7 days; 
both purulent drainage and facial pain 
should be present for diagnosis (sensi-
tivity and specificity are above 50%).34–36
Consider a deviated nasal septum, 
nasal polyp, foreign body, Wegener 
granuloma, or carcinoma.
Local causes of epistaxis include 
trauma (especially nose-picking), 
inflammation, drying and crusting of 
the nasal mucosa, tumors, and foreign 
bodies.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
221
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Is epistaxis a recurrent problem? Has there been easy bruising or bleeding else-
where in the body?
The Mouth, Throat, and Neck
Sore throat or pharyngitis is a frequent complaint, usually associated with an acute 
URI. However, sometimes a sore throat is the only symptom.
Centor’s clinical prediction rules for streptococcal and Fusobacterium necropho-
rum pharyngitis have been used in the past to help guide diagnosis and treat-
ment of bacterial infection: fever history, tonsillar exudates, swollen tender 
anterior cervical adenopathy, and absence of cough. However, the sensitivity 
and speciﬁcity of these rules are less than 90%, calling their validity into ques-
tion due to a high rate of unnecessary antibiotic use. Guidelines now recom-
mend rapid antigen testing or throat culture for diagnosis and treatment.37–39 
A sore tongue may result from local lesions as well as from systemic illness. 
Bleeding from the gums, especially when brushing teeth, is a common symptom. 
Ask about local lesions and any tendency to bleed or bruise elsewhere.
Hoarseness refers to a change in voice quality, often described as husky, rough, 
harsh, or lower pitched than usual. Causes range from diseases of the larynx to 
extralaryngeal lesions that press on the laryngeal nerves.40 Ask the patient about 
environmental allergies, acid reﬂux, smoking, alcohol use, and inhalation of 
fumes or other irritants. Also ask if the patient talks a great deal at work.
Is the problem chronic, lasting more than 2 weeks? Is there prolonged tobacco 
or alcohol use, cough or hemoptysis, weight loss, or unilateral throat pain?
Ask “Have you noticed any swollen glands or lumps in your neck?” because 
patients are often more familiar with lay terms than with “lymph nodes.”
Assess thyroid function and ask about any enlargement of the thyroid gland, 
or goiter. To evaluate thyroid function, ask about temperature intolerance and 
sweating. Opening questions include, “Do you prefer hot or cold weather?” “Do 
you dress more warmly or less warmly than other people?” “What about blan-
kets … do you use more or fewer than others at home?” “Have you noticed any 
changes in the texture of your skin?” “Do you perspire more or less than oth-
ers?” “Any new palpitations or change in weight?” Recall that as people grow 
older, they sweat less, have less tolerance for cold, and tend to prefer warmer 
environments.
Anticoagulants, NSAIDs, vascular mal-
formations, and coagulopathies can 
contribute to epistaxis.
Abnormalities include aphthous ulcers 
(p. 298) and the sore smooth tongue 
of nutritional deficiency (p. 297).
Bleeding gums are usually caused by 
gingivitis (p. 295).
If hoarseness is acute, consider voice 
overuse, acute viral laryngitis, and 
possible neck trauma.
If hoarseness lasts over 2 weeks, refer for 
laryngoscopy and consider causes such 
as hypothyroidism, reflux, vocal cord nod-
ules, head and neck cancers including 
thyroid masses, and neurologic disorders 
like Parkinson disease, amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis, or myasthenia gravis.
Enlarged tender lymph nodes com-
monly accompany pharyngitis.
With goiter, thyroid function may be 
increased, decreased, or normal; see 
Table 7-27, p. 299.
Intolerance to cold, weight gain, dry 
skin, and slowed heart rate point to 
hypothyroidism; intolerance to heat, 
weight loss, moist velvety skin, and 
palpitations point to hyperthyroid-
ism. See Table 7-27, p. 299.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
222 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Vision and hearing, critical senses for experiencing the world around us, are two 
areas of special importance for health promotion and counseling. Oral health, 
often overlooked, also merits clinical attention.
Loss of Vision. An estimated 14 million Americans aged 12 years or older 
are considered visually impaired, deﬁned as having a visual acuity of ≥20/50 in the 
better-seeing eye.41 Vision disorders in healthy young adults are usually refractive 
errors. Older adults have more serious disorders, including cataracts, glaucoma, 
and age-related macular degeneration. The prevalence of visual impairment 
increases dramatically with age, rising from 5% in adults aged 40 to 49 to 26% of 
adults 80 years and older.42 In older adults, visual impairment is associated with 
decreased functional capacity, poor quality of life, increased risk of fall and injuries, 
and loss of independent living. However, vision in ∼80% of visually impaired 
Americans can be corrected.41 Because onset can be gradual, those affected may 
not recognize their visual decline. Although acknowledging that numerous 
treatments can improve visual acuity, in 2009, the U.S. Preventive Services Task 
Force (USPSTF) found insufﬁcient evidence to recommend screening by primary 
care physicians, assigning screening only a grade I recommendation.43 In contrast, 
the American Academy of Ophthalmology strongly recommends a comprehensive 
medical eye examination for all adults every 1 to 2 years, depending on age and 
risk factors, including formal screening for visual acuity and glaucoma.44 Assessing 
vision is a standard component of thorough physical examination. Ask patients 
about any problems with face recognition, reading, or performing regular tasks, 
and test acuity with the Snellen chart or a hand-held card. Refer patients with an 
impairment of ≥20/50 or a one-line difference between the eyes. Examine the lens and 
fundi to detect additional disorders.
Primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) is a leading cause of visual impairment and 
blindness in the United States, affecting over 2.5 million adults, including roughly 
2% of adults older than age 40 years.45,46 Over half are unaware of having the 
disease. In POAG, there is gradual loss of vision in the peripheral visual ﬁelds, 
resulting from loss of retinal ganglion cell axons. Retinal examination reveals pal-
lor and increasing size of the optic cup, which can enlarge to more than half the 
diameter of the optic disc. Risk factors include age ≥65 years, African American 
See Chapter 20, Older Adult,  
pp. 955–1008.
See pp. 232–233 for testing acuity, 
using the Snellen eye chart, and exami-
nation techniques. 
Look for clouding of the lens (cataracts), 
mottling of the macula, variations in 
retinal pigmentation, subretinal hemor-
rhage or exudates (macular degenera-
tion), and change in color and size of 
the optic disc (glaucoma). See tech-
niques for testing acuity and using 
the Snellen eye chart on p. 232.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Important Topics for Health Promotion  
and Counseling
● Loss of vision: cataracts, macular degeneration, glaucoma
● Hearing loss
● Oral health
Health Promotion and 
Counseling: Evidence and 
Recommendations
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
223
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
ethnicity, diabetes, myopia, and ocular hypertension (intraocular pressure [IOP] 
is ≥21 mm Hg). Not all people with POAG have elevated IOP, and those with 
elevated IOP may not develop visual impairment. Further, diagnosis of optic disc 
enlargement is variable, even among experts. Nonetheless, glaucoma can be suc-
cessfully treated with medical and surgical interventions, despite possible adverse 
events like eye irritation and cataracts. In 2013, the USPSTF found insufﬁcient 
evidence for general glaucoma screening by primary care physicians due to the 
complexities of diagnosis and treatment, giving only a grade I recommendation.46 
However, the American Academy of Ophthalmology strongly recommends peri-
odic glaucoma testing, especially for older and at-risk patients.47
Ultraviolet (UV) light can damage the eyes and cause skin cancers on the eyelids, 
including basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and melanoma. In 
addition, there is some evidence that UV light is associated with the development 
of cataracts (the relation between UV light and glaucoma is less clear). Recom-
mended preventive actions include use of sunscreen on the face and eyelids and 
wearing sunglasses during exposure to direct sunlight.48
Hearing Loss. More than a third of adults older than 50 years—and 80% of 
those 80 years and older—have hearing loss.42 However, this impairment, which 
often contributes to emotional isolation and social withdrawal, is frequently 
undetected. Unlike vision prerequisites for driving, there is no mandate for 
widespread hearing testing, and many older adults avoid using hearing aids. The 
USPSTF recommends screening adults 50 years of age and older.42 Hearing loss can 
be accurately detected by a number of measures: a single-item screening test, 
namely asking patients if they have difﬁculty hearing; multi-item questionnaires 
such as the Hearing Handicap Inventory for the Elderly—Screening Version;49 
handheld audiometers; the clinical “whisper test”; or the ﬁnger rub test.42 Aging is 
the most important risk factor for hearing loss and presbycusis is the most common 
age-related cause. In presbycusis, degenerating hair cells in the ear lead to gradually 
progressive hearing loss, particularly for high-frequency sounds. Other risk factors 
include congenital or familial hearing loss, syphilis, rubella, meningitis, diabetes, 
recurring inner ear infections, exposure to ototoxic agents, frequent use of 
headphones, and exposure to hazardous noise levels at work, leisure, or on the 
battleﬁeld. Hearing aids can improve hearing and quality of life, but are more likely 
to be adopted by those who report hearing loss than those diagnosed clinically. 
Consequently, in 2012, the USPSTF concluded that the evidence for screening 
adults ≥age 50 years is insufﬁcient, giving only a grade I recommendation.50
Oral Health. Clinicians should play an active role in promoting oral health: 
up to 19% of children aged 2 to 19 years have untreated cavities, and about 5% 
of adults aged 40 to 59 years and 25% of those older than age 60 years have no 
teeth at all.51,52 Nearly 50% of adults aged 30 years and above have some form or 
periodontal disease, including 8.5% with severe disease.53 Risk factors for 
periodontal disease include low income, male gender, smoking, diabetes, and 
poor oral hygiene. Begin by carefully examining the mouth. Inspect the oral cavity 
for decayed or loose teeth, inﬂammation of the gingiva (gingivitis), and signs of 
periodontal disease such as bleeding, pus, recession of the gums, and bad breath. 
Inspect the mucous membranes, the palate, the oral ﬂoor, and the surfaces of the 
tongue for ulcers and leukoplakia, warning signs for oral cancer and HIV disease.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
224 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
To improve oral health counsel patients to adopt daily hygiene measures. Use of 
ﬂuoride-containing toothpastes reduces tooth decay, and brushing and ﬂossing 
retard periodontal disease by removing bacterial plaques. Urge patients to seek 
dental care at least annually to receive the beneﬁts of more specialized preventive 
care such as scaling, planing of roots, and topical ﬂuorides.
Address diet and tobacco use. As with children, adults should avoid excessive 
intake of foods high in starches and reﬁned sugars such as sucrose, which enhance 
attachment and colonization of cariogenic bacteria. Urge patients to avoid use of 
all tobacco products and to limit alcohol consumption to reduce risk of oral cancer.
Saliva cleanses and lubricates the mouth. Many medications reduce salivary ﬂow, 
increasing risk for tooth decay, mucositis, and gum disease from xerostomia, 
especially for the elderly. If medications cannot be changed, recommend drink-
ing higher amounts of water and chewing sugarless gum. For those wearing 
dentures, recommend removal and cleaning each night to reduce bacterial 
plaque and risk of malodor. Regular massage of the gums relieves soreness and 
pressure from dentures on the underlying soft tissue.
Oral Cancer. Over 40,000 cases of cancer of the oral cavity and orophar-
ynx were diagnosed in 2014, and more than 8,000 deaths were caused by these 
cancers.54 Tobacco and alcohol account for about 75% of oral cavity cancers.55
Sexually transmitted infection with the human papillomavirus (HPV) affecting 
the tonsils, oropharynx, and base of the tongue is an increasingly important 
cause of oropharyngeal cancers, accounting for 80% to 95% of cases.56 Risk for 
HPV infection is associated with age (highest prevalence among those aged 30 to 
34 years and 60 to 64 years), male gender, a higher number of sexual partners, 
sexual behaviors (oral sex), and cigarette smoking.57 The primary screening test 
for these cancers is examination of the oral cavity; a critical preventive strategy 
is HPV vaccination among age-eligible patients. However, in 2014, the USPSTF 
concluded that there was insufﬁcient evidence to routinely screen asymptomatic 
adults (grade I recommendation).50 The American Dental Association recom-
mends that providers be aware of potentially malignant lesions during routine 
oral examinations, particularly among patients who use tobacco or consume 
excessive amounts of alcohol.58
Anatomy and Physiology and 
Techniques of Examination
The Head
Anatomy and Physiology. Regions of the head take their names from the 
underlying bones of the skull, for example, the frontal area. Knowing this 
anatomy helps to locate and describe physical ﬁndings (see Fig. 7-2).
Two paired salivary glands lie near the mandible: the parotid gland, superﬁcial to 
and behind the mandible (both visible and palpable when enlarged), and the 
submandibular gland, located deep to the mandible. Feel for the latter as you press 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
225
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
your tongue against your lower incisors. Its lobular surface can often be felt 
against the tightened muscle. The openings of the parotid and submandibular 
ducts are visible within the oral cavity (see p. 254).
The superﬁcial temporal artery passes upward just in front of the ear, where it is 
readily palpable. In many normal people, especially thin and elderly ones, the 
tortuous course of one of its branches can be traced across the forehead.
Techniques of Examination. Because abnormalities under the hair are 
easily missed, ask if the patient has noticed anything wrong with the scalp or 
hair. Hairpieces and wigs should be removed. Examine the following.
The Hair. Note its quantity, distribution, texture, and any pattern of loss. 
You may see loose ﬂakes of dandruff.
The Scalp. Part the hair in several places and look for scaliness, lumps, 
nevi, or other lesions.
Vertex of head
Parietal bone
Temporal
bone
Superficial 
temporal
artery
Occipital
bone
Mastoid portion
of temporal bone
Mastoid process
Styloid process
Parotid 
gland
Parotid
duct
Submandibular
gland
Submandibular 
duct
Mandible
Maxilla
Zygomatic 
bone
Nasal bone
Orbit
Frontal bone
F I G U R E  7 - 2 .  Anatomy of the head.
Fine hair is seen in hyperthyroidism, 
coarse hair in hypothyroidism. Tiny 
white ovoid granules that adhere to 
hairs may be nits (lice eggs).
Look for redness and scaling that may 
indicate seborrheic dermatitis or psori-
asis; soft lumps that may be pilar cysts 
(wens); and pigmented nevi that raise 
concern of melanoma. See Table 6-6, 
Brown Lesions—Melanoma and Its 
Mimics, pp. 200–203.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
226 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The Skull. Observe the general size and contour of the skull. Note any 
deformities, depressions, lumps, or tenderness. Learn to recognize the irregu-
larities in a normal skull, such as those near the suture lines between the parietal 
and occipital bones.
The Face. Note the patient’s facial expression and contours. Observe for 
asymmetry, involuntary movements, edema, and masses.
The Skin. Observe the skin on the face and head, noting its color, pigmen-
tation, texture, thickness, hair distribution, and any lesions.
The Eyes
Anatomy and Physiology. Identify the 
structures illustrated in Figure 7-3. Note that 
the upper eyelid covers a portion of the iris but 
does not normally overlay the pupil. The 
opening between the eyelids is called the 
palpebral ﬁssure. The white sclera may look 
somewhat buff-colored at its periphery. Do not 
mistake this color for jaundice, which is a 
deeper yellow.
The conjunctiva is a clear mucous membrane 
with two easily visible components. The bulbar 
conjunctiva covers most of the anterior eyeball, 
adhering loosely to the underlying tissue. It 
meets the cornea at the limbus. The palpebral 
conjunctiva lines the eyelids. The two parts of 
the conjunctiva merge in a folded recess that 
permits movement of the eyeball.
Within the eyelids lie ﬁrm strips of connective 
tissue called tarsal plates (Fig. 7-4). Each plate 
contains a parallel row of meibomian glands, 
which open on the lid margin. The levator pal-
pebrae, the muscle that raises the upper eyelid, 
is innervated by the oculomotor nerve, CN III. 
Smooth muscle, innervated by the sympa-
thetic nervous system, also contributes to lid 
elevation.
See Table 7-5, Selected Facies, p. 272.
Acne is common in adolescents.  
Hirsutism (excessive facial hair)  
may appear in some women with 
polycystic ovary syndrome.
Lateral canthus
Upper eyelid
Medial canthus
Pupil
Limbus
Iris
Lower eyelid
Sclera covered
by conjunctiva
F I G U R E  7 - 3 . Anatomy of the eye.
Levator palpebrae
Bulbar
conjunctiva
Palpebral
conjunctiva
Cornea
Sclera
Eyelash
Meibomian
gland
Tarsal
plate
Limbus
F I G U R E  7 - 4 . Sagittal section of the anterior eye.
An enlarged skull may signify hydro-
cephalus or Paget disease of bone.  
Palpable tenderness or bony step-offs 
may be present after head trauma.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
227
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
A ﬁlm of tear ﬂuid protects the conjunctiva and 
cornea from drying, inhibits microbial growth, 
and gives a smooth optical surface to the cor-
nea. This ﬂuid comes from the meibomian 
glands, conjunctival glands, and lacrimal 
gland. The lacrimal gland lies mostly within the 
bony orbit, superior and lateral to the eyeball 
(Fig. 7-5). The tear ﬂuid spreads across the eye 
and drains medially through two tiny holes 
called lacrimal puncta. The tears then pass into 
the lacrimal sac and on into the nose through 
the nasolacrimal duct. You can easily ﬁnd a 
punctum atop the small elevation of the medial 
lower lid medially. The lacrimal sac rests in a 
small depression inside the bony orbit and is 
not visible.
The eyeball is a spherical structure that focuses 
light on the neurosensory elements within the 
retina. The muscles of the iris control pupillary 
size. Muscles of the ciliary body control the 
thickness of the lens, allowing the eye to focus 
on near or distant objects.
A clear liquid called aqueous humor ﬁlls the 
anterior and posterior chambers of the eye. 
Aqueous humor is produced by the ciliary body, 
circulates from the posterior chamber through 
the pupil into the anterior chamber, and drains 
out through the canal of Schlemm. This circula-
tory system helps to control the pressure inside 
the eye (Fig. 7-6).
Lacrimal gland
(within the bony orbit)
Puncta
Canaliculi
Lacrimal sac
(within the bony orbit)
Nasolacrimal
duct
F I G U R E  7 - 5 . Lacrimal gland, sac, and duct.
Canal of Schlemm
Ciliary body
Cornea
Posterior chamber
Lens
Anterior chamber
filled with aqueous
humor
Iris
F I G U R E  7 - 6 . Circulation of aqueous humor.
The posterior portion of the eye that is seen through the ophthalmoscope is often 
called the optic fundus (Fig. 7-7). Structures here include the retina, choroid, 
fovea, macula, optic disc, and retinal vessels. The optic nerve with its retinal ves-
sels enters the eyeball posteriorly, visible with an ophthalmoscope at the optic 
disc. Lateral and slightly inferior to the disc, there is a small depression in the 
retinal surface that marks the point of central vision. Around it is a darkened 
circular area called the fovea. The roughly circular macula surrounds the fovea, 
but has no discernible margins. You do not usually see the normal vitreous body, 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
228 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
When a person is using both eyes, the two 
visual ﬁelds overlap in an area of binocu-
lar vision. Laterally, vision is monocular 
(Fig. 7-9).
a transparent mass of gelatinous material that ﬁlls the eyeball behind the lens and 
helps to maintain the shape of the eye.
Visual Fields. A visual ﬁeld is the 
entire area seen by an eye when it looks at 
a central point. Fields are conventionally 
diagrammed on circles from the patient’s 
point of view. The center of the circle rep-
resents the focus of gaze. The circumfer-
ence is 90° from the line of gaze. Each 
visual ﬁeld, shown by the white areas in 
Figure 7-8, is divided into quadrants. 
Note that the ﬁelds extend farthest on the 
temporal sides. Visual ﬁelds are normally 
limited by the brows above, the cheeks 
below, and the nose medially. A lack of 
retinal receptors at the optic disc produces 
an oval blind spot in the normal ﬁeld of 
each eye, 15° temporal to the line of gaze.
Fovea
Macula
Vein
Artery
Physiologic
cup
Physiologic cup 
in optic disc
Optic 
disc
Optic 
nerve
Central retinal
artery and vein
Retina
Sclera
Extraocular 
muscle
Vitreous body
Choroid
Iris
Pupil
Fovea
F I G U R E  7 - 7 . Cross-section of right eye showing the fundus as seen with an 
ophthalmoscope.
Upper
temporal
Lower
temporal
Lower
nasal
Upper
nasal
Blind spot
90°
Blind spot
Normal visual
field
F I G U R E  7 - 8 . Visual ﬁeld of left and right eyes.
Binocular vision
Monocular vision
F I G U R E  7 - 9 . Binocular ﬁeld created by overlapping monocular ﬁelds.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
229
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Visual Pathways. To see an image, light reﬂected from the target must 
pass through the pupil and be focused on photoreceptors in the retina. The 
image projected there is upside down and reversed right to left (Fig. 7-10). An 
image from the upper nasal visual ﬁeld thus strikes the lower temporal quadrant 
of the retina.
Blind spot
Center of gaze
Object seen
Image on retina
Fovea
Optic nerve
A
A
O
F I G U R E  7 - 1 0 . Light pathway into the eye.
Nerve impulses, stimulated by light, are 
conducted through the retina, optic 
nerve (CN II), and optic tract on each 
side, then on through a curving tract 
called the optic radiation. This ends in 
the visual cortex, a part of the occipital 
lobe.
Pupillary Reactions. Pupillary size 
changes in response to light and to the 
effort of focusing on a near object.
The Light Reaction. A light beam 
shining onto one retina causes pupillary 
constriction in both that eye, termed the 
direct reaction to light, and in the contra-
lateral eye, the consensual reaction to 
light. The initial sensory pathways are 
similar to those described for vision: 
retina, optic nerve (CN II), and optic 
tract, which diverges in the midbrain. 
Impulses back to the constrictor mus-
cles of the iris of each eye are transmit-
ted through the oculomotor nerve, 
CN III (Fig. 7-11).
Optic tract
To visual cortex
Oculomotor nerve
Optic nerve
To iris
(consensual 
reaction)
Light
To iris
(direct reaction)
Key:
Blue––Sensory
Red––Motor
F I G U R E  7 - 1 1 . Pathways of the light reaction.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
230 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The Near Reaction. In the near reaction, 
when a person shifts gaze from a far object to 
a near object, the pupils constrict (Fig. 7-12). 
This response, like the light reaction, is 
mediated by the oculomotor nerve (CN 
III). Coincident with this pupillary con-
striction, but not part of it, are (1) conver-
gence of the eyes, a medial rectus 
movement; and (2) accommodation, an 
increased convexity of the lenses caused 
by contraction of the ciliary muscles. In 
accommodation the change in shape of 
the lenses brings near objects into focus, 
but is not visible to the examiner.
Autonomic Nerve Supply to the Eyes. 
Fibers travelling in the oculomotor nerve (CN III) 
and producing pupillary constriction are part of the 
parasympathetic nervous system. The iris is also 
supplied by sympathetic ﬁbers. When these are 
stimulated, the pupil dilates, and the upper eyelid 
rises a little, as if from fear. The sympathetic path-
way starts in the hypothalamus and passes down 
through the brainstem and cervical cord into the 
neck. From there, it follows the carotid artery or its 
branches into the orbit. A lesion anywhere along this 
pathway may impair sympathetic effects that dilate 
the pupil (Fig. 7-13).
F I G U R E  7 - 1 2 . The pupils constrict when the focus shifts to a 
close object.
Temporal 
Right Eye
 Left Eye
Nasal
Temporal 
Nasal
Optic nerve
Optic chiasm
Optic tract
Optic
radiation
Visual 
cortex
Visual
Fields
F I G U R E  7 - 1 3 . Visual pathways from retina to visual cortex.
Autonomic Stimulation
● Parasympathetics: Pupillary constriction
● Sympathetics: Pupillary dilation and raising of 
upper eyelid (superior tarsal muscle)
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
231
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Extraocular Movements. The coordinated action of six muscles, the 
four rectus and two oblique, control the eye. You can test the function of each 
muscle and its CN innervation by asking the patient to move the eye in the 
direction controlled by that muscle. There are six such cardinal directions, indi-
cated by the lines in Figure 7-14. When a person looks down and to the right, 
for example, the right inferior rectus (CN III) is principally responsible for mov-
ing the right eye, whereas the left superior oblique (CN IV) is principally respon-
sible for moving the left eye. If one of these muscles is paralyzed, the eye will 
deviate from its normal position in that direction of gaze and the eyes will no 
longer appear conjugate, or parallel.
Superior
rectus (III)
Lateral
rectus
(VI)
Inferior
rectus (III)
Superior
rectus (III)
Lateral
rectus
(VI)
Inferior
rectus (III)
Superior 
oblique (IV)
Medial
rectus (III)
Inferior
oblique (III)
F I G U R E  7 - 1 4 . Cardinal directions of gaze.
CN IV (trochlear nerve) damage, due to 
head trauma, congenital causes, or 
central lesions, causes dysfunction of 
the superior oblique muscle, leading 
to diplopia (double vision). 
Techniques of Examination
Important Areas of Examination
● Visual acuity
● Visual ﬁelds
● Conjunctiva and sclera
● Cornea, lens, and pupils
● Extraocular movements
● Fundi, including: Optic disc and cup, retina, and retinal vessels
Visual Acuity. To test the acuity of central vision, use a well-lit Snellen eye 
chart, if possible. Position the patient 20 feet from the chart. Patients who wear 
glasses other than for reading should put them on. Ask the patient to cover one 
eye with a card (to prevent looking through the ﬁngers) and to read the smallest 
line of print possible. Coaxing to attempt the next line may improve perfor-
mance. A patient who cannot read the largest letter should be positioned closer 
to the chart; note the intervening distance. Identify the smallest line of print 
where the patient can identify more than half the letters. Record the visual acuity 
designated at the side of this line, along with use of glasses, if any. Visual acuity 
is expressed as two numbers (e.g., 20/30): the ﬁrst indicates the distance of the 
patient from the chart, and the second, the distance at which a normal eye can 
read the line of letters.59
Vision of 20/200 means that at 20 feet the 
patient can read print that a person with 
normal vision could read at 200 feet. The 
larger the second number, the worse 
the vision. “20/40 corrected” means the 
patient could read the 20/40 line with 
glasses (a correction).
Myopia (nearsightedness) causes 
focusing problems for distance vision.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
232 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Testing near vision with a hand-held card can help identify the need for reading 
glasses or bifocals in patients older than 45 years. You can also use this card to 
test visual acuity at the bedside. Held 14 inches from the patient’s eyes, the card 
simulates a Snellen chart.
If you have no charts, screen visual acuity with any available print. If patients 
cannot read even the largest letters, test their ability to count your upraised ﬁn-
gers and distinguish light (such as your ﬂashlight) from dark.
Visual Fields by Confrontation. Confrontation testing of the visual 
ﬁelds is a valuable screening technique for detection of lesions in the anterior 
and posterior visual pathway. Recent studies recommend combining two tests 
to achieve the best results: the static ﬁnger wiggle test and the kinetic red target 
test.60,61 Sensitivity and speciﬁcity of the two tests, when performed rigor-
ously, compared to automated perimetry, is 78% and 90%; diagnostic accu-
racy improves with higher density and severity of ﬁeld defects, irrespective of 
diagnosis.60 Nevertheless, even relatively dense quadrantic or hemianopic 
visual ﬁeld defects can be missed by confrontation screening tests. A formal-
ized automated perimetry test such as the Humphrey visual ﬁeld performed 
by an ophthalmologist is needed to make a deﬁnitive diagnosis of a visual ﬁeld 
defect.
Static Finger Wiggle Test. 
Position yourself about an 
arm’s length away from the 
patient. Close one eye and 
have the patient cover the 
opposite eye while staring 
at your open eye. So, for 
example, when the patient 
covers the left eye, to test 
the visual field of the 
patient’s right eye you 
should cover your right 
eye to mimic the patent’s 
ﬁeld of view. Place your 
hands about 2 feet apart 
out of the patient’s view, 
roughly lateral to the 
patient’s ears (Fig. 7-15). 
Presbyopia causes focusing problems 
for near vision, found in middle-aged 
and older adults. A presbyopic person 
often sees better when the card is  
farther away.
In the United States, a person is usu-
ally considered legally blind when 
vision in the better eye, corrected by 
glasses, is 20/200 or less. Legal blind-
ness also results from a constricted 
field of vision: 20° or less in the better 
eye.
Refer patients with suspected visual 
field defects for ophthalmology eval-
uation. Causes of anterior pathway 
defects include glaucoma, optic neu-
ropathy, optic neuritis, and glioma. 
Posterior pathway defects include 
stroke and chiasmal tumors.62
F I G U R E  7 - 1 5 . Static ﬁnger wiggle test.
F I G U R E  7 - 1 6 . Visual ﬁeld defects.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
233
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
While in this position, wiggle your ﬁngers and slowly bring your moving ﬁngers 
forward into the patient’s center of view. Ask the patient to tell you as soon as 
he or she sees your ﬁnger movement. Test each clock hour, or at least each 
quadrant. Test each eye individually and record the extent of visits in each area. 
Note any abnormal “ﬁeld cuts” (Figs. 7-16 and 7-17).
Kinetic Red Target Test. Facing the patient, move a 5-mm red-topped pin 
inward from beyond the boundary of each quadrant along a line bisecting the 
horizontal and vertical meridians. Ask the patient when the pin ﬁrst appears to 
be red.
Position and Alignment of the Eyes. Stand in front of the patient and 
survey the eyes for position and alignment. If one or both eyes seem to protrude, 
assess them from above (see p. 264).
Eyebrows. Inspect the eyebrows, noting their fullness, hair distribution, 
and any scaliness of the underlying skin.
Eyelids. Note the position of the lids in relation to the eyeballs. Inspect for 
the following:
■ Width of the palpebral ﬁssures
■ Edema of the lids
■ Color of the lids
■ Lesions
■ Condition and direction of the eyelashes
Covered
RIGHT
LEFT
RIGHT
LEFT
F I G U R E  7 - 1 7 . A left homonymous 
hemianopsia may be established.
Review these patterns in Table 7-6, 
Visual Field Defects, p. 273.
As an example, when the patient’s left 
eye repeatedly does not see your fin-
gers until they have crossed the line 
of gaze, a left homonymous hemianop-
sia is present. It is diagrammed from 
the patient’s viewpoint.
An enlarged blind spot occurs in con-
ditions affecting the optic nerve such 
as glaucoma, optic neuritis, and papill-
edema.23
Abnormalities include esotropia 
(inward deviation) or exotropia (out-
ward deviation) of the eyes and also 
abnormal protrusion in Graves disease 
or ocular tumors.
Scaliness occurs in seborrheic dermatitis, 
lateral sparseness in hypothyroidism.
See Table 7-7, Variations and Abnor-
malities of the Eyelids, p. 274. 
Upslanting palpebral fissures are 
noted in Down syndrome. 
Red inflamed lid margins occur in 
blepharitis, often with crusting. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
234 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
■ Adequacy of eyelid closure. Look for this especially when the eyes are unusu-
ally prominent, when there is facial paralysis, or when the patient is uncon-
scious.
Lacrimal Apparatus. Brieﬂy inspect the regions of the lacrimal gland and 
lacrimal sac for swelling.
Look for excessive tearing or dryness of the eyes. Assessment of dryness may 
require special testing by an ophthalmologist. To test for nasolacrimal duct 
obstruction, see p. 264.
Conjunctiva and Sclera. Ask 
the patient to look up as you depress 
both lower lids with your thumbs, 
exposing the sclera and conjunctiva 
(Figs. 7-18 and 7-19). Inspect the 
sclera and palpebral conjunctiva for 
color. Note the vascular pattern 
against the white scleral background. 
The slight vascularity of the sclera in 
Figures 7-18 and 7-20 is normal and 
present in most people.
Look for any nodules or swelling 
(Fig. 7-21).
If you need a fuller view of the eye, 
rest your thumb and ﬁnger on the 
bones of the cheek and brow, respec-
tively, and spread the lids (Fig. 7-20).
Ask the patient to look to each side 
and down. This technique gives you 
a good view of the sclera and bulbar 
conjunctiva, but not of the palpebral 
conjunctiva of the upper lid. For 
this, you need to evert the lid (see 
pp. 264–265).
Failure of the eyelids to close exposes 
the corneas to serious damage. 
See Table 7-8, Lumps and Swellings in 
and Around the Eyes, p. 275. 
Excessive tearing may be from 
increased production, caused by con-
junctival inflammation or corneal irri-
tation, or impaired drainage, caused 
by ectropion (p. 274) and nasolacrimal 
duct obstruction. Dryness from 
impaired secretion is seen in Sjögren 
syndrome. 
F I G U R E  7 - 1 8 . Inspect the sclera 
and conjunctiva.
F I G U R E  7 - 1 9 . A yellow sclera 
indicates jaundice.
F I G U R E  7 - 2 0 . Obtain a fuller view 
of the eye.
F I G U R E  7 - 2 1 . Local redness is 
from nodular episcleritis.
For comparisons, see Table 7-3, Red 
Eyes, p. 270. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
235
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Cornea and Lens. With oblique lighting, inspect the cornea of each eye 
for opacities. Note any opacities in the lens that may be visible through the pupil.
Iris. At the same time, inspect each iris. The markings should be clearly 
deﬁned. With your light shining directly from the temporal side, look for a cres-
centic shadow on the medial side of the iris (Fig. 7-22). Because the iris is nor-
mally fairly ﬂat and forms a relatively open angle with the cornea, this lighting 
casts no shadow.
See Table 7-9, Opacities of the Cornea 
and Lens, p. 276. 
Light
Light
F I G U R E  7 - 2 2 . Light each eye from the side for inspection.
Occasionally, the iris bows abnormally 
far forward, forming a very narrow 
angle with the cornea. The light then 
casts a crescentic shadow as shown 
here. 
This narrow angle increases the risk 
for acute narrow-angle glaucoma a 
sudden increase in IOP when drainage 
of the aqueous humor is blocked  
(see left upper diagram). 
In open-angle glaucoma, the common 
form of glaucoma, the normal spatial 
relation between iris and cornea is 
preserved and the iris is fully lit. 
Pupils. In a dim light, inspect the size, shape, and symmetry of both pupils. 
Measure the pupils with a card showing black circles of varying sizes, shown 
below, and test the light reaction. Note if the pupils are large (>5 mm), small 
(<3 mm), or unequal (Fig. 7-23).
1
2
3
4
5
6
7 mm
F I G U R E  7 - 2 3 . Pupillary sizes.
Miosis refers to constriction of the 
pupils, mydriasis to dilation. 
Simple anisocoria, or a difference in pupillary diameter of 0.4 mm or greater without 
a known pathologic cause, is visible in approximately 35% of healthy people, and 
rarely exceeds 1 mm.63 Simple anisocoria is considered benign if it is equal in dim 
and bright light, and there is brisk pupillary constriction to light (the light reaction).
The Light Reaction. In dim light, test the pupillary reaction to light. Ask the 
patient to look into the distance, and shine a bright light obliquely into each 
pupil in turn. Both the distant gaze and the oblique lighting help to prevent a 
near reaction. Look for:
■ The direct reaction (pupillary constriction in the same eye)
■ The consensual reaction (pupillary constriction in the opposite eye)
Compare benign anisocoria with Horner 
syndrome, oculomotor nerve paralysis, 
and tonic pupil. See Table 7-10, Pupillary 
Abnormalities, p. 277. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
236 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Always darken the room and use a bright light before deciding that a light reac-
tion is abnormal or absent.
The Near Reaction. If the reaction to light is impaired or questionable, test the 
near reaction in both dim and normal light. Testing one eye at a time makes it 
easier to concentrate on pupillary responses, without the distraction of EOM. 
Hold your ﬁnger or pencil about 10 cm from the patient’s eye. Ask the patient to 
look alternately at it and into the distance directly behind it. Watch for pupillary 
constriction with near effort and convergence of the eyes. The third component 
of the near reaction, accommodation of the lens that brings the near object into 
focus, is not visible.
Compare the normal light reaction and near reaction of benign anisocoria with 
the constriction abnormalities of tonic pupil and oculomotor nerve (CN III) paraly-
sis and the dilatation abnormalities of Horner syndrome and Argyll Robertson 
pupils. 
Extraocular Muscles. Standing about 2 feet directly in front of the 
patient, shine a light into the patient’s eyes and ask the patient to look at it. 
Inspect the light reﬂection in the corneas. They should be visible slightly nasal to the 
center of the pupils (Fig. 7-24).
Testing the near reaction is helpful in 
diagnosing Argyll Robertson and tonic 
(Adie) pupils (see p. 277). 
F I G U R E  7 - 2 4 . Inspect light reﬂection in the corneas.
Asymmetry of the corneal reflections 
indicates a deviation from normal 
ocular alignment. A temporal light 
reflection on one cornea, for example, 
indicates a nasal deviation of that eye. 
A cover–uncover test may reveal a slight or latent muscle imbalance not otherwise 
seen; this is particularly useful in examining children (see p. 278).
Now assess the EOMs, looking for:
■ The normal conjugate movements of the eyes in each direction. Note any devi-
ation from normal, or dysconjugate gaze.
■ Nystagmus, a ﬁne rhythmic oscillation of the eyes. A few beats of nystagmus 
on extreme lateral gaze are normal. If you see this, bring your ﬁnger in to 
within the ﬁeld of binocular vision and look again.
■ Lid lag as the eyes move from up to down.
See Table 7-11, Dysconjugate Gaze,  
p. 278. 
Sustained nystagmus within the bin-
ocular field of gaze is seen in congeni-
tal disorders, labyrinthitis, cerebellar 
disorders, and drug toxicity. See  
Table 17-7, Nystagmus, pp. 785–786. 
In the lid lag of hyperthyroidism, a rim 
of sclera is visible above the iris with 
downward gaze. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
See Table 7-10, Pupillary Abnormali-
ties, p. 277.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
237
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
1
2
3
4
5
6
F I G U R E  7 - 2 5 . Test extraocular movements.
Test the Six EOMs. Ask the patient to follow your ﬁnger or pencil as you sweep 
through the six cardinal directions of gaze. Making a wide H in the air, lead the 
patient’s gaze (Fig. 7-25):
1. to the patient’s extreme right,
2. to the right and upward, and
3. down on the right; then
4. without pausing in the middle, to the extreme left,
5. to the left and upward, and
6. down on the left.
Pause during upward and lateral gaze to detect nystag-
mus. Move your ﬁnger or pencil at a comfortable dis-
tance from the patient. Because middle-aged or older 
adults may have difﬁculty focusing on near objects, 
increase this distance. Some patients move their heads 
to follow your ﬁnger. If necessary, hold the head in the 
proper midline position.
If you suspect lid lag or hyperthyroidism, ask the patient 
to follow your ﬁnger again as you move it slowly from 
up to down in the midline. The upper eyelid should 
overlap the iris slightly throughout this movement as 
shown in Figure 7-27. Figure 7-28 shows proptosis.
In paralysis of the left CN VI, illustrated 
above, the eyes are conjugate in right 
lateral gaze but not in left lateral gaze. 
LOOKING RIGHT
LOOKING LEFT
F I G U R E  7 - 2 6 . CN VI paralysis.
F I G U R E  7 - 2 7 . Normal 
upper lid overlap.
F I G U R E  7 - 2 8 . Visible rim 
of sclera caused by proptosis.
Note the rim of sclera from proptosis, 
an abnormal protrusion of the eye-
balls in hyperthyroidism, leading to a 
characteristic “stare” on frontal gaze. If 
unilateral, consider an orbital tumor or 
retrobulbar hemorrhage from trauma. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
238 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Finally, if the near reaction has not already been tested, test for convergence. Ask 
the patient to follow your ﬁnger or pencil as you move it in toward the bridge of 
the nose. The converging eyes normally follow the object to within 5 cm to 8 cm 
of the nose (Fig. 7-29).
F I G U R E  7 - 2 9 . Test for convergence.
Convergence is poor in hyperthyroidism. 
Ophthalmoscopic Examina-
tion. In general health care, exam-
ine your patients’ eyes without 
dilating their pupils, which can 
obscure important neurologic ﬁnd-
ings. Therefore, your view is limited 
to the posterior structures of the ret-
ina. To see more peripheral struc-
tures, to evaluate the macula well, or 
to investigate unexplained visual loss, 
consider referral to ophthalmologists 
for pupillary dilatation with mydri-
atic drops.
This section describes how to use the 
traditional ophthalmoscope (Fig. 
7-30). Of note, some medical ofﬁces 
now use a PanOptic ophthalmoscope. 
The PanOptic ophthalmoscope allows clinicians to view the retina, even when 
the pupils are undilated. It provides a ﬁve-fold greater view of the fundus than 
the traditional ophthalmoscope, enables a 25° ﬁeld of view, and increases the 
examining distance between the patient and the clinician. Since most clinical 
settings still use the traditional ophthalmoscope, emphasized here.
Using the ophthalmoscope to visualize the fundus is one of the most challenging 
skills of physical examination, and one of the most critical when assessing head-
ache and changes in mental status. With feedback and dedicated practice of 
proper technique, the fundus, optic disc, and retinal vessels will come into focus. 
Remove your glasses unless you have marked nearsightedness or severe astigma-
tism, or your refractive error makes it difﬁcult to see the fundi.
Review the components of the ophthalmoscope pictured above and follow the 
steps for using the ophthalmoscope. With commitment and repetition, your 
examination skills will improve over time.
Contraindications for mydriatic drops 
include (1) head injury and coma, 
since continuing observations of 
pupillary reactions are essential, and 
(2) any suspicion of narrow-angle 
glaucoma. 
Aperture
Indicator of
diopters
Lens disc
F I G U R E  7 - 3 0 . Parts of the 
ophthalmoscope.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
239
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Steps for Using the Ophthalmoscope
● Darken the room. Switch on the ophthalmoscope light and turn the lens disc 
until you see the large round beam of white light.* Shine the light on the back 
of your hand to check the type of light, its desired brightness, and the electri-
cal charge of the ophthalmoscope.
● Turn the lens disc to the 0 diopter. (A diopter is a unit that measures the 
power of a lens to converge or diverge light.) At this diopter, the lens neither 
converges nor diverges light. Keep your ﬁnger on the edge of the lens disc so 
that you can turn the disc to focus the lens when you examine the fundus.
● Hold the ophthalmoscope in your right hand and use your right eye to exam-
ine the patient’s right eye; hold it in your left hand and use your left eye to 
examine the patient’s left eye. This keeps you from bumping the patient’s 
nose and gives you more mobility and closer range for visualizing the fundus. 
With practice, you will become accustomed to using your nondominant eye.
● Hold the ophthalmoscope ﬁrmly braced against the medial aspect of your bony 
orbit, with the handle tilted laterally at about 20° slant from the vertical. Check 
to make sure you can see clearly through the aperture. Instruct the patient to 
look slightly up and over your shoulder at a point directly ahead on the wall.
● Place yourself about 15 inches away from the patient and at an angle 15° lat-
eral to the patient’s line of vision. Shine the light beam on the pupil and look 
for the orange glow in the pupil—the red reﬂex. Note any opacities interrupt-
ing the red reﬂex.
Examiner at 15-degree angle from patient’s line of vision, eliciting red reﬂex.
● Now place the thumb of your other hand across the patient’s eyebrow, which 
steadies your examining hand. Keeping the light beam focused on the red 
reﬂex, move in with the ophthalmoscope on the 15° angle toward the pupil 
until you are very close to it, almost touching the patient’s eyelashes and the 
thumb of your other hand.
● Try to keep both eyes open and relaxed, as if gazing into the distance, to help 
minimize any ﬂuctuating blurriness as your eyes attempt to accommodate.
● You may need to lower the brightness of the light beam to make the examina-
tion more comfortable for the patient, avoid hippus (spasm of the pupil), 
and improve your observations.
*Some clinicians like to use the large round beam for large pupils, and the small round beam for small 
pupils. The other beams are rarely helpful. The slitlike beam is sometimes used to assess elevations or 
concavities in the retina, the green (or red-free) beam to detect small red lesions, and the grid to make 
measurements. Ignore the last three lights and practice with the large or small round white beam.
Absence of a red reflex suggests an 
opacity of the lens (cataract) or, possi-
bly, the vitreous (or even an artificial 
eye). Less commonly, a detached ret-
ina or, in children, a retinoblastoma 
may obscure this reflex. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
240 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Now you are ready to inspect the optic disc and the retina. The optic disc is a 
round, yellow-orange to creamy pink structure with a pink neuroretinal rim and 
central depression that often takes practice to locate. The ophthalmoscope mag-
niﬁes the normal disc and retina about 15 times and the normal iris about 4 
times. The optic disc actually measures about 1.5 mm. Follow the next steps for 
this important segment of the physical examination.
When the lens has been removed sur-
gically, its magnifying effect is lost. 
Retinal structures then look much 
smaller than usual, and you can see a 
much larger expanse of the fundus. 
Steps for Examining the Optic Disc  
and the Retina
The Optic Disc
● First, locate the optic disc. Look for the round yellowish-orange structure 
described above, or follow a blood vessel centrally until it enters the disc. The 
vessel size will help you. The vessel size becomes progressively larger at each 
branch point as you approach the disc.
Artery
Vein
Optic disc
Physiologic cup
The optic disc and fundus.
● Now, bring the optic disc into sharp focus by adjusting the lens of your ophthal-
moscope. If both you and the patient have no refractive errors, the retina 
should be in focus at 0 diopters.
● If structures are blurred, rotate the lens disc until you ﬁnd the sharpest 
focus.
For example, if the patient is myopic (nearsighted), rotate the lens disc 
counterclockwise to the minus diopters; in a hyperopic (farsighted) patient, 
move the disc clockwise to the plus diopters. You can correct your own 
refractive error in the same way.
● Inspect the optic disc. Note the following features:
● The sharpness or clarity of the disc outline. The nasal portion of the disc mar-
gin may be somewhat blurred, a normal ﬁnding.
● The color of the disc, normally yellowish orange to creamy pink. White or 
pigmented crescents may ring the disc, a normal ﬁnding.
● The size of the central physiologic cup, if present. It is usually yellowish white. 
The horizontal diameter is usually less than half the horizontal  
diameter of the disc.
● The comparative symmetry of the eyes and ﬁndings in the fundi.
In a refractive error, light rays from a 
distance do not focus on the retina.  
In myopia, they focus anterior to the 
retina, in hyperopia, posterior to it. 
Retinal structures in a myopic eye 
look larger than normal. 
See Table 7-12, Normal Variations of 
the Optic Disc, p. 279, and Table 7-13, 
Abnormalities of the Optic Disc, p. 280. 
An enlarged cup suggests chronic 
open-angle glaucoma. 
(continued )
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
241
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Steps for Examining the Optic Disc  
and the Retina (continued )
The Importance of Detecting Papilledema
Swelling of the optic disc and anterior bulging of the physiologic cup suggest 
papilledema (Fig. 7-31), which is associated with increased intracranial pressure. 
This pressure is transmitted to the optic nerve, causing stasis of axoplasmic ﬂow, 
intra-axonal edema, and swelling of the optic nerve head. Papilledema signals  
serious disorders of the brain, such as meningitis, subarachnoid hemorrhage, 
trauma, and mass lesions, so searching for this important disorder is a priority dur-
ing all your funduscopic examinations (see technique as described on prior page).
Inspect the fundus for spontaneous venous pulsations (SVPs), rhythmic varia-
tions in the caliber of the retinal veins as they cross the fundus (narrower in 
systole; wider in diastole), present in 90% of normal patients.
The Retina—Arteries, Veins, Fovea, and Macula
● Inspect the retina, including arteries and veins as they extend to the periphery, 
arteriovenous crossings, the fovea, and the macula. Distinguish arteries from 
veins based on the features listed below.
Arteries
Veins
Color
Light red
Dark red
Size
Smaller (2/3 to 3/4 the 
diameter of veins)
Larger
Light reﬂex (reﬂection)
Bright
Inconspicuous or absent
● Follow the vessels peripherally in each direc-
tion, noting their relative sizes and the char-
acter of the arteriovenous crossings. 
Identify any lesions of the surrounding 
retina and note their size, shape, color, and 
distribution. As you search the retina, move 
your head and instrument as a unit, using 
the patient’s pupil as an imaginary fulcrum. 
At ﬁrst, you may lose your view of the retina 
because your light falls out of the pupil, but 
you will improve with practice.
Lesions of the retina can be measured in 
terms of “disc diameters” from the optic 
disc.
F I G U R E  7 - 3 1 . Papilledema.
Loss of SVPs occurs with high intracra-
nial pressures (above 190 mm H2O) 
that change the pressure gradient 
between cerebral spinal fluid pressure 
and intraocular pulse pressure in the 
optic disc. Other causes include glau-
coma and retinal vein occlusion.64,65 
1
4
2
5
3
Sequence of inspection from 
disc to macula (left eye). 
See Tables 7-14 to 7-18 for informa-
tion on retinal arteries and AV cross-
ings, spots and streaks in the fundi, 
normal and hypertensive retinopathy, 
diabetic retinopathy, and light- 
colored spots in the fundi. 
Note the irregular patches, seen in 
diabetic and hypertensive retinopathy, 
between 11 and 12 o’clock, 1 to 2 disc 
diameters from the disc. Each measures 
about ½ by ½ disc diameters. 
FIGURE 7-32. Cotton-wool patches.
(continued )
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
242 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Macular degeneration is an important 
cause of poor central vision in older 
adults. Types include dry atrophic 
(more common but less severe) and 
wet exudative, or neovascular. Cellular 
debris, called drusen, may be hard and 
sharply defined, as seen in Figure 7-33, 
or soft and confluent with altered pig-
mentation (see p. 285). 
F I G U R E  7 - 3 3 . Hard drusen.
(Photo from Tasman W, Jaeger E (eds). The Wills Eye 
Hospital Atlas of Clinical Ophthalmology, 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001.)
Vitreous floaters are dark specks or 
strands seen between the fundus and 
the lens. Cataracts are densities in the 
lens (see p. 276). 
Steps for Examining the Optic Disc  
and the Retina (continued )
● Inspect the fovea and surrounding macula. Direct your light beam laterally or 
ask the patient to look directly into the light. In younger people, the tiny 
bright reﬂection at the center of the fovea helps to orient you; shimmering 
light reﬂections in the macular area are common.
Optic disc
Macula
Fovea
Light
reflection
Structures of the left fundus.
● Inspect the anterior structures. Look for opacities in the vitreous or lens. Rotate 
the lens disc progressively to diopters of around +10 or +12, so you can focus 
on the more anterior structures in the eye.
The Ear
Anatomy and Physiology. The ear has three 
compartments: the external ear, the middle ear, and the 
inner ear.
The External Ear. The external ear comprises the 
auricle and ear canal. The auricle consists chieﬂy of cartilage 
covered by skin and has a ﬁrm elastic consistency. Its prom-
inent curved outer ridge is the helix. Parallel and anterior to 
the helix is another curved prominence, the antihelix. Inferi-
orly is the ﬂeshy projection of the earlobe, or lobule. The ear 
canal opens behind the tragus, a nodular protrusion that 
points backward over the entrance to the canal (Fig. 7-34).
The ear canal curves inward and is approximately 24 mm 
long. Cartilage encases its outer two thirds. In this segment, 
the skin is hairy and contains glands that produce cerumen 
(wax). The inner third of the canal is surrounded by bone 
Helix
Antihelix
Entrance
to ear
canal
Tragus
Lobule
F I G U R E  7 - 3 4 . Anatomy of the external ear.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
243
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
and lined by thin, hairless skin. Pressure on this latter area causes pain—a point 
to remember when you when you examine the ear. At the end of the ear canal 
lies the lateral tympanic membrane, or eardrum, marking the medial limit of the 
external ear. The external ear captures sound waves for transmission into the 
middle and inner ear (Fig. 7-35).
Incus
Ossicles
Malleus
Stapes
Cochlear
nerve (CN VIII)
Semicircular
canals
Cochlea
Eustachian tube
Middle ear cavity
Tympanic
membrane
Bone
Mastoid process
Cartilage
Ear canal
Auricle
F I G U R E  7 - 3 5 . Anatomy of middle and inner ear.
Behind and below the ear canal is the mastoid portion of the temporal bone. 
The lowest portion of this bone, the mastoid process, is palpable behind the 
lobule.
The Middle Ear. In the air-ﬁlled middle ear, the ossicles—the malleus, the 
incus, and the stapes—transform sound vibrations into mechanical waves for the 
inner ear. The proximal end of the eustachian tube connects the middle ear to 
the nasopharynx.
Two of the ossicles are visible through the tym-
panic membrane, and are angled obliquely and 
held inward at its center by the malleus (Fig. 7-36). 
Find the handle and the short process of the mal-
leus, the two chief landmarks. From the umbo, 
where the eardrum meets the tip of the malleus, a 
light reﬂection called the cone of light fans down-
ward and anteriorly. Above the short process lies a 
small portion of the eardrum called the pars ﬂac-
cida. The remainder of the drum is the pars tensa. 
Anterior and posterior malleolar folds, which 
extend obliquely upward from the short process, 
separate the pars ﬂaccida from the pars tensa, but 
Pars flaccida
Incus
Pars tensa
Umbo
Cone of light
Handle of malleus
Short process of malleus
F I G U R E  7 - 3 6 . Right eardrum.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
244 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
are usually invisible unless the eardrum is retracted. A second ossicle, the incus, 
can sometimes be seen through the drum.
The Inner Ear. The inner ear includes the cochlea, the semicircular canals, 
and the distal end of the auditory nerve, also known as the vestibulocochlear nerve, 
or CN VIII. Movements of the stapes vibrate the perilymph in the labyrinth of the 
semicircular canals and the hair cells and endolymph in the ducts of the cochlea, 
producing electrical nerve impulses transmitted by the auditory nerve to the 
brain.
Much of the middle ear and all of the inner ear are inaccessible to direct examina-
tion. Assess their condition by testing auditory function.
Hearing Pathways. The ﬁrst part of the hearing pathway, from the exter-
nal ear through the middle ear, is known as the conductive phase. The second part 
of the pathway, involving the cochlea and cochlear nerve, is the sensorineural 
phase (Fig. 7-37).
Sensorineural
Bone conduction
Air conduction
F I G U R E  7 - 3 7 . Hearing pathways.
Air conduction (AC) describes the normal ﬁrst phase in the hearing pathway. 
An alternative pathway, known as bone conduction (BC), bypasses the external 
and middle ear and is used for testing purposes. A vibrating tuning fork, 
placed on the head, sets the bone of the skull into vibration and stimulates 
the cochlea directly. In those with normal hearing, AC is more sensitive than 
BC (AC > BC).
Equilibrium. The labyrinth of three semicircular canals in the inner ear 
senses the position and movements of the head and helps maintain balance.
Techniques of Examination
The Auricle. Inspect the auricle and surrounding tissue for deformities, 
lumps, or skin lesions.
Hearing disorders of the external and 
middle ear cause conductive hearing 
loss. External ear causes include ceru-
men impaction, infection (otitis 
externa), trauma, squamous cell carci-
noma, and benign bony growths such 
as exostoses or osteomas. Middle ear 
disorders include otitis media, congen-
ital conditions, cholesteatomas and 
otosclerosis, tumors, and perforation of 
the tympanic membrane. 
Disorders of the inner ear cause sen-
sorineural hearing loss from congeni-
tal and hereditary conditions, 
presbycusis, viral infections such as 
rubella and cytomegalovirus, Ménière 
disease, noise exposure, ototoxic drug 
exposure, and acoustic neuroma.44 
See Table 7-19, Lumps on or Near the 
Ear, p. 286. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
245
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
If ear pain, discharge, or inﬂammation is present, move the auricle up and down, 
press the tragus, and press ﬁrmly just behind the ear.
Ear Canal and Drum. To see the 
ear canal and drum, use an otoscope with 
the largest ear speculum that inserts eas-
ily into the canal. Position the patient’s 
head so that you can see comfortably 
through the otoscope. To straighten the 
ear canal, grasp the auricle ﬁrmly but 
gently and pull it upward, backward, and 
slightly away from the head (Fig. 7-38).
Holding the otoscope handle between your thumb and ﬁngers, brace your hand 
against the patient’s face (Fig. 7-39). Your hand and instrument can then follow 
unexpected movements by the patient. (If you are uncomfortable switching 
hands for the left ear, as shown in Figure 7-40, you may reach over that ear to 
pull it up and back with your left hand and hold the otoscope steady with your 
right hand as you gently insert the speculum.)
Insert the speculum gently into the ear canal, directing it somewhat down and 
forward and through the hairs, if any.
Movement of the auricle and tragus 
(the “tug test”) is painful in acute otitis 
externa (inflammation of the ear 
canal), but not in otitis media (inflam-
mation of the middle ear). Tenderness 
behind the ear occurs in otitis media. 
F I G U R E  7 - 3 8 . Straighten the ear 
canal to insert the otoscope.
Nontender nodular swellings covered 
by normal skin deep in the ear canals 
suggest exostoses (Fig. 7-41). These 
are nonmalignant overgrowths which 
may obscure the drum. 
F I G U R E  7 - 3 9 . Brace your hand 
and gently insert the speculum.
F I G U R E  7 - 4 0 . Insert the 
speculum at a slight downward angle.
F I G U R E  7 - 4 1 . Exostosis.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
246 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Inspect the ear canal, noting any discharge, foreign bodies, redness of the skin, or 
swelling. Cerumen, which varies in color and consistency from yellow and ﬂaky 
to brown and sticky or even to dark and hard, may wholly or partly obscure your 
view.
Pars flaccida
Incus
Pars tensa
Umbo
Cone of light
Handle of malleus
Short process of malleus
F I G U R E  7 - 4 2 . Anatomy of the right eardrum.
In acute otitis externa (Fig. 7-43), the 
canal is often swollen, narrowed, moist, 
pale, and tender. It may be reddened. 
F I G U R E  7 - 4 3 . Acute otitis externa.
Identify the handle of the malleus, noting its position, and inspect the short process 
of the malleus.
Gently move the speculum so that you can see as much of the drum as possible, 
including the pars ﬂaccida superiorly and the margins of the pars tensa. Look for 
any perforations. The anterior and inferior margins of the drum may be obscured 
by the curving wall of the ear canal.
Mobility of the eardrum can be evaluated with a pneumatic otoscope (see 
p. 870).
Testing Auditory Acuity—Whispered Voice Test. To begin screening, 
ask the patient “Do you feel you have a hearing loss or difﬁculty hearing?” If the 
patient reports hearing loss, proceed to the whispered voice test.
The whispered voice test is a reliable screening test for hearing loss if the exam-
iner uses a standard method of testing and exhales before whispering. For best 
results, follow the steps on the next page.
In chronic otitis externa, the skin of the 
canal is often thickened, red, and itchy. 
Look for the red bulging drum of acute 
purulent otitis media30 and for the amber 
drum of a serous effusion. See Table 7-20, 
Abnormalities of the Eardrum, pp. 287–
288 and Table 18-7, Abnormalities of the 
Eyes, Ears, and Mouth, p. 916. 
Inspect the eardrum, noting its color and contour (Fig. 7-42). The cone of light—
usually easy to see—helps to orient you. 
An unusually prominent short process 
and a prominent handle that looks more 
horizontal suggest a retracted drum. 
A serous effusion, a thickened drum, 
or purulent otitis media may decrease 
mobility. If there is a perforation, 
there will be no mobility. 
Patients who answer “yes” are twice as 
likely to have a hearing deficit; for 
patients who report normal hearing 
the likelihood of moderate to severe 
hearing impairment is only 0.13.66 
Sensitivity is 90% to 100% and speci-
ficity 70% to 87%.66–69 This test 
detects significant hearing loss of 
greater than 30 decibels. A formal 
hearing test is still the gold standard. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
247
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Testing for Conductive Versus Neurosensory Hearing Loss: Tuning 
Fork Tests. For patients failing the whispered voice test, the Weber and Rinne 
fork tests may help determine if the hearing loss is conductive or sensorineural 
in origin. However, their precision, or test–retest reproducibility, and their accu-
racy compared to air–bone gap reference standards have been questioned.66
To conduct these tests, make sure the 
room is quiet, and use a tuning fork of 
512 Hz. These frequencies fall within 
the range of conversational speech, 
namely 500 to 3,000 Hz and between 
45 and 60 decibels.
Set the fork into light vibration by 
briskly stroking it between the thumb 
and index ﬁnger (
) or by tapping it 
on your forearm just in front of your 
elbow.
■ Test for lateralization (Weber test). 
Place the base of the lightly vibrat-
ing tuning fork ﬁrmly on top of the 
patient’s head or on the midfore-
head (Fig. 7-44).
Whispered Voice Test for Auditory Acuity
● Stand 2 feet behind the seated patient so that the patient cannot read your 
lips.68
● Occlude the nontest ear with a ﬁnger and gently rub the tragus in a circular 
motion to prevent transfer of sound to the nontest ear.
● Exhale a full breath before whispering to ensure a quiet voice.
● Whisper a combination of three numbers and letters, such as 3-U-1. Use a  
diﬀerent number/letter combination for the other ear.
● Interpretation:
● Normal: Patient repeats initial sequence correctly.
● Normal: Patient responds incorrectly, so test a second time with a diﬀerent 
number/letter combination; patient repeats at least three out of the possi-
ble six numbers and letters correctly.
● Abnormal: Four of the six possible numbers and letters are incorrect. Con-
duct further testing by audiometry. (The Weber and Rinne tests are less 
accurate and precise.)66
Note also that tuning fork tests do not 
distinguish normal hearing from bilat-
eral sensorineural loss or from mixed 
conductive–sensorineural loss. Sensitiv-
ity of the Weber test is about 55%; speci-
ficity for sensorineural loss is about 
79%, and for conductive loss, 92%. Sen-
sitivity and specificity of the Rinne test 
are 60% to 90% and 95% to 98%.70
Note that older adults with presby-
cusis have higher frequency hearing 
loss, making them more likely to miss 
consonants, which have higher fre-
quency sounds than vowels. 
F I G U R E  7 - 4 4 . Weber test.
In unilateral conductive hearing loss, 
sound is heard in (lateralized to) the 
impaired ear. Explanations include 
otosclerosis, otitis media, perforation 
of the eardrum, and cerumen. See 
Table 7-21, Patterns of Hearing Loss, 
p. 289. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
248 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Ask where the patient hears the sound: on one side or both sides? Normally, the 
vibration is heard in the midline or equally in both ears. If nothing is heard, try 
again, pressing the fork more ﬁrmly on the head. Restrict this test to patients with 
unilateral hearing loss since patients with normal hearing may lateralize, and 
patients with bilateral conductive or sensorineural deﬁcits will not lateralize.
■ Compare AC and BC (Rinne test). Place the base of a lightly vibrating tuning fork 
on the mastoid bone, behind the ear and level with the canal (Fig. 7-45). When 
the patient can no longer hear the sound, quickly place the fork close to the ear 
canal and ask if the patient hears a vibration (Fig. 7-46). Here, the “U” of the 
fork should face forward, which maximizes sound transmission for the patient. 
Normally, the sound is heard longer through air than through bone (AC > BC).
In unilateral sensorineural hearing 
loss, sound is heard in the good ear. 
F I G U R E  7 - 4 5 . Test bone conduction.
F I G U R E  7 - 4 6 . Test air conduction.
In conductive hearing loss, sound is 
heard through bone as long as or lon-
ger than it is through air (BC = AC or 
BC > AC). In sensorineural hearing loss, 
sound is heard longer through air  
(AC > BC). 
The Nose and Paranasal Sinuses
Anatomy and Physiology. Review 
the terms that describe the external 
anatomy of the nose (Fig. 7-47).
Approximately the upper third of the 
nose is supported by bone, the lower two 
thirds by cartilage. Air enters the nasal 
cavity through the anterior naris on either 
side, then passes into the widened area 
known as the vestibule and on through 
the narrow nasal passage to the naso-
pharynx.
Ala nasi
Vestibule
Anterior
naris
Tip
Bridge
Dorsum
F I G U R E  7 - 4 7 . External anatomy of the nose.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
249
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The medial wall of each nasal cavity is formed by 
the nasal septum, which, like the external nose, is 
supported by both bone and cartilage (Fig. 7-48). 
It is covered by a mucous membrane well supplied 
with blood. The vestibule, unlike the rest of the 
nasal cavity, is lined with hair-bearing skin, not 
mucosa.
Laterally, the anatomy is more complex (Fig. 7-49). 
Curving bony structures, the turbinates, covered by a 
highly vascular mucous membrane, protrude into the 
nasal cavity. Below each turbinate is a groove, or 
meatus, each named according to the turbinate above 
it. The nasolacrimal duct drains into the inferior 
meatus; most of the paranasal sinuses drain into the 
middle meatus. Their openings are not usually visible.
The additional surface area provided by the turbinates 
and their overlying mucosa aids the nasal cavities in 
their principal functions: cleansing, humidiﬁcation, 
and temperature control of inspired air.
The paranasal sinuses are air-ﬁlled cavities within the bones of the skull. Like the 
nasal cavities into which they drain, they are lined with mucous membrane. 
Their locations are diagrammed in Figure 7-50. Only the frontal and maxillary 
sinuses are readily accessible to clinical examination (Fig. 7-51).
Cranial cavity
Sphenoid sinus
Bony portion
of nasal septum
Soft palate
Hard palate
Cartilaginous portion
of nasal septum
Frontal sinus
F I G U R E  7 - 4 8 . Medial wall—left nasal cavity (mucosa removed).
Cranial cavity
Opening to
eustachian
tube
Hard palate
Vestibule
Inferior turbinate
Middle turbinate
Superior turbinate
Frontal sinus
Nasopharynx
Soft
palate
F I G U R E  7 - 4 9 . Lateral wall—nasal cavity.
Frontal
sinus
Orbit
Middle
turbinate
Maxillary
sinus
Inferior
turbinate
Inferior
meatus
Middle
meatus
Ethmoid
sinus
F I G U R E  7 - 5 0 . Cross-section of nasal cavity—anterior view.
Frontal
sinus
Maxillary
sinus
F I G U R E  7 - 5 1 . Frontal and maxillary sinuses.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
250 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Techniques of Examination. Inspect the anterior and inferior surfaces of 
the nose. Gentle pressure on the tip of the nose with your thumb usually widens 
the nostrils. Use a penlight or otoscope light to obtain a partial view of each nasal 
vestibule. If the nasal tip is tender, be gentle and manipulate the nose as little as 
possible.
Note any asymmetry or deformity of the nose.
Test for nasal obstruction, if indicated, by pressing on each ala nasi in turn and 
asking the patient to breathe in.
Inspect the inside of the nares with an otoscope and the largest available ear speculum.* 
Tilt the patient’s head back a bit and insert the speculum gently into the vestibule of 
each nostril, avoiding contact with the sensitive nasal septum (Fig. 7-53). Hold the 
otoscope handle to one side to avoid the patient’s chin and improve your mobility. 
By directing the speculum posteriorly, then upward in small steps, try to see the 
inferior and middle turbinates, the nasal septum, and the narrow nasal passage 
between them, as shown in Figure 7-54. Some asymmetry of the two sides is normal.
Tenderness of the nasal tip or alae 
suggests local infection such as a 
furuncle, particularly if there is a small 
erythematous and swollen area. 
Deviation of the lower septum is com-
mon and may be easily visible, as in 
Figure 7-52. Deviation seldom 
obstructs air flow. 
Vestibule
F I G U R E  7 - 5 2 . Deviation of the 
lower septum.
F I G U R E  7 - 5 3 . Inspect 
inside the nares.
Nasal
passage
Septum
Inferior
turbinate
Middle
turbinate
F I G U R E  7 - 5 4 . Inferior and middle 
turbinates.
Inspect the nasal mucosa, the nasal septum, and any abnormalities. Inspect:
■ The nasal mucosa that covers the septum and turbinates. Note its color and 
any swelling, bleeding, or exudate. If exudate is present, note its character: 
clear, mucopurulent, or purulent. The nasal mucosa is normally somewhat 
redder than the oral mucosa.
■ The nasal septum. Note any deviation, inﬂammation, or perforation of the 
septum. The lower anterior portion of the septum (where the patient’s ﬁnger 
can reach) is a common source of epistaxis (nosebleed).
*A nasal illuminator, equipped with a short wide nasal speculum but lacking an otoscope’s mag-
niﬁcation, may also be used, but structures look much smaller. Otolaryngologists use special 
equipment not widely available in general practice.
In viral rhinitis, the mucosa is red-
dened and swollen; in allergic rhinitis, 
it may be pale, bluish, or red. 
Fresh blood or crusting may be seen. 
Causes of septal perforation include 
trauma, surgery, and intranasal use of 
cocaine or amphetamines, which also 
cause septal ulceration. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
251
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
■ Any abnormalities such as ulcers or polyps.
Inspection of the nasal cavity through the anterior naris is usually limited to the 
vestibule, the anterior portion of the septum, and the lower and middle turbi-
nates. Examination of posterior abnormalities requires a nasopharyngeal mirror 
and technique is beyond the scope of this book.
Place all nasal and ear specula outside your instrument case after use; then 
discard or clean and disinfect them appropriately. Check the policies of your 
institution.
Palpate for sinus tenderness. Press up on the frontal sinuses from under the bony 
brows, avoiding pressure on the eyes (Fig. 7-56). Then press up on the maxillary 
sinuses (Fig. 7-57).
Nasal polyps (Fig. 7-55) are pale 
saclike growths of inflamed tissue 
that can obstruct the air passage or 
sinuses, seen in allergic rhinitis, aspirin 
sensitivity, asthma, chronic sinus 
infections, and cystic fibrosis.36 
F I G U R E  7 - 5 5 . Nasal polyps.
Malignant tumors of the nasal cavity 
occur rarely, associated with exposure 
to tobacco or chronically inhaled  
toxins. 
F I G U R E  7 - 5 6 . Palpate the frontal 
sinuses.
F I G U R E  7 - 5 7 . Palpate the 
maxillary sinuses.
Local tenderness, together with 
symptoms such as facial pain, pres-
sure or fullness, purulent nasal dis-
charge, nasal obstructions, and smell 
disorder, especially when present for 
>7 days, suggest acute bacterial 
rhonosinusitis involving the frontal or 
maxillary sinuses.34–36,71
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
252 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Mouth and Pharynx
Anatomy and Physiology. The 
lips are muscular folds that surround the 
entrance to the mouth. When opened, 
the gums (gingiva) and teeth are visible 
(Fig. 7-58). Note the scalloped shape of 
the gingival margins and the pointed 
interdental papillae.
The gingiva is ﬁrmly attached to the teeth 
and to the maxilla and mandible in which 
they are seated. In lighter-skinned peo-
ple, the gingiva is pale or coral pink and 
lightly stippled. In darker-skinned peo-
ple, it may be diffusely or partly brown, as 
shown below. A midline mucosal fold, 
called a labial frenulum, connects each lip 
with the gingiva. A shallow gingival sulcus 
between the gum’s thin margin and each 
tooth is not readily visible (but is probed and measured by dentists). Adjacent to 
the gingiva is the alveolar mucosa, which merges with the labial mucosa of the lip 
(Fig. 7-59).
Gingival margin
Upper lip
(everted)
Interdental
papillae
F I G U R E  7 - 5 8 . Gingiva and interdental 
papillae.
Gingiva
Alveolar
mucosa
Labial
mucosa
Labial
frenulum
F I G U R E  7 - 5 9 . Alveolar and labial mucosa, labial frenulum.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
253
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The dorsum of the tongue is covered 
with papillae, giving it a rough sur-
face. Some of these papillae look like 
red dots, which contrast with the 
thin white coat that often covers the 
tongue. This patient has an erythem-
atous posterior pharynx (Fig. 7-62).
Each tooth, composed chieﬂy of dentin, lies rooted in a bony socket with only 
its enamel-covered crown exposed. Small blood vessels and nerves enter the 
tooth through its apex and pass into the pulp canal and pulp chamber 
(Fig. 7-60).
Note that there are 32 adult teeth, conventionally numbered 1 to 16 right to left 
on the upper jaw and 17 to 32 left to right on the lower jaw (Fig. 7-61).
Crown
Gingival
margin
Gingiva
Pulp
chamber
Bone
Root
Pulp
canal
Apex
Enamel
Gingival
sulcus
Dentin
F I G U R E  7 - 6 0 . Anatomy of a tooth.
Medial (central)
incisor
Lateral
incisor
Canine 
(cuspid)
2nd premolar 
(bicuspid)
1st molar
(6-year 
molar)
2nd molar
(12-year 
  molar)
3rd molar
(wisdom 
  tooth)
1st premolar 
(bicuspid)
F I G U R E  7 - 6 1 . Adult teeth.
Papillae
F I G U R E  7 - 6 2 . Dorsal papillae of the tongue.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
254 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The undersurface of the tongue has no papillae. 
Note the midline lingual frenulum that connects 
the tongue to the ﬂoor of the mouth and the 
ducts of the submandibular gland (Wharton 
ducts) which pass forward and medially 
(Fig. 7-63). They open on papillae that lie on 
each side of the lingual frenulum. The paired 
sublingual salivary glands lie just under the 
ﬂoor of the mouth mucosa.
Above and behind the tongue rises an arch 
formed by the anterior and posterior pillars, the 
soft palate, and the uvula (Fig. 7-64). A mesh-
work of small blood vessels may web the soft 
palate. The posterior pharynx is visible in the 
recess behind the soft palate and tongue.
In Figure 7-64, note the right tonsil protruding 
from the hollowed tonsillar fossa, or cavity, 
between the anterior and posterior pillars. In 
adults, tonsils are often small or absent, as in 
the empty left tonsillar fossa.
The buccal mucosa lines the cheeks. Each parotid 
duct, sometimes termed Stensen duct, opens 
onto the buccal mucosa near the upper second 
molar. Its location is frequently marked by its 
own small papilla (Fig. 7-65).
Lingual
frenulum
Vein
Duct of
submandibular
gland
F I G U R E  7 - 6 3 . Undersurface of the tongue.
Posterior
pillar
Anterior
pillar
Right
tonsil
Hard palate
Soft palate
Uvula
Posterior
pharynx
Tongue
F I G U R E  7 - 6 4 . Anatomy of the posterior pharynx.
Buccal
mucosa
Opening of
the parotid
duct
Papilla
Upper lip
(retracted)
F I G U R E  7 - 6 5 . Buccal mucosa and parotid duct.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
255
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Techniques of Examination. If the patient wears dentures, offer a paper 
towel and ask the patient to remove them so that you can inspect the underlying 
mucosa. If you detect any suspicious ulcers or nodules, put on a glove and 
palpate any lesions, noting any thickening or inﬁltration of the tissues that might 
suggest malignancy.
Inspect the following:
The Lips. Observe their color and moisture, and note any lumps, ulcers, 
cracking, or scaliness.
The Oral Mucosa. Look into the 
patient’s mouth and, with a good light 
and the help of a tongue blade (Fig. 7-66), 
inspect the oral mucosa for color, ulcers 
(Fig. 7-67), white patches, and nodules.
In this patient (Fig. 7-66), the wavy white 
line on the adjacent buccal mucosa devel-
oped where the upper and lower teeth 
meet, related to irritation from sucking or 
chewing.
The Gums and Teeth. Note the color of the gums, which are normally 
pink. Brown patches may be present, especially but not exclusively in dark-
skinned individuals.
Inspect the gum margins and the interdental papillae for swelling or ulceration.
Inspect the teeth. Are any of them missing, discolored, misshapen, or abnormally 
positioned? To assess tooth, jaw, or facial pain, palpate the teeth for looseness 
and the gums with your gloved thumb and index ﬁnger.
The Roof of the Mouth. Inspect the color and architecture of the hard 
palate.
Bright red edematous mucosa under-
neath a denture suggests denture sto-
matitis (denture sore mouth). There 
may be ulcers or papillary granulation 
tissue. 
Watch for central cyanosis or pallor 
from anemia. See Table 7-22, Abnor-
malities of the Lips, pp. 290–291. 
F I G U R E  7 - 6 6 . Inspect the oral 
mucosa.
F I G U R E  7 - 6 7 . Aphthous ulcer 
on the labial mucosa.
See Table 7-23, Findings in the Phar-
ynx, Palate, and Oral Mucosa, pp. 292–
294. 
Redness of the gingiva suggests gingi-
vitis, a black line might indicate lead 
poisoning. 
The interdental papillae are swollen in 
gingivitis. See Table 7-24, Findings in 
the Gums and Teeth, pp. 295–296. 
Torus palatinus is a startling but 
benign midline lump (see p. 293). 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
256 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The Tongue and the Floor of the 
Mouth. Ask the patient to put out his or 
her tongue (Fig. 7-68). Inspect it for sym-
metry—a test of the hypoglossal nerve (CN 
XII) (Fig. 7-69).
Note the color and texture of the dorsum of 
the tongue.
Inspect entire oral cavity, especially the sides and undersurface of the tongue and 
the ﬂoor of the mouth, areas where cancer often develops. Note any white or 
reddened areas, nodules, or ulcerations.
Wearing gloves, palpate any lesions. Ask the patient to protrude the tongue. With 
your right hand, grasp the tip of the tongue with a square of gauze and gently 
pull it to the patient’s left. Inspect the side of the tongue, and then palpate it with 
your gloved left hand, feeling for any induration (Figs. 7-70 and 7-71). Reverse 
the procedure for the other side.
F I G U R E  7 - 6 8 . Inspect the 
dorsum of the tongue.
F I G U R E  7 - 6 9 . Asymmetric 
protrusion suggests a lesion of CN XII 
(tongue points toward the side of the 
lesion).
Men aged >50 years, smokers, and 
heavy users of chewing tobacco and 
alcohol are at highest risk for cancers of 
the tongue and oral cavity, usually 
squamous cell carcinomas on the side or 
base of the tongue. Any persistent nod-
ule or ulcer, red or white, is suspect, 
especially if indurated. These discolored 
lesions represent erythroplakia and leu-
koplakia and should be biopsied.72,73 
F I G U R E  7 - 7 0 . Grasp the tongue and inspect the lateral margins.
F I G U R E  7 - 7 1 . Carcinoma on 
tongue. (Vokes E, et al. Head and Neck Cancer. N 
Engl J Med 1993;328:184 [arrows added]).
Note the carcinoma on the left side of 
the tongue below. Inspection and pal-
pation remain the standard for detec-
tion of oral cancers.74–76 
See Table 7-25, Findings in or Under 
the Tongue, pp. 297–298. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
257
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The Pharynx. With the patient’s mouth open but the tongue not pro-
truded, ask the patient to say “ah” or yawn. This action helps you see the poste-
rior pharynx well. You can also ask the patient to “open the back of your throat” 
since many adults have learned to inspect their own posterior pharynx while 
looking into a mirror. 
Alternatively, you can press a tongue blade ﬁrmly down on the midpoint of the 
arched tongue—back far enough to visualize the pharynx but not so far that you 
cause gagging. Simultaneously, ask for an “ah” or a yawn. Note the rise of the soft 
palate—a test of CN X (the vagal nerve) (Fig. 7-72).
Inspect the soft palate, anterior and posterior pillars, uvula, tonsils, and pharynx. 
Note their color and symmetry and look for exudate, swelling, ulceration, or 
tonsillar enlargement. If possible, palpate any suspicious area for induration or 
tenderness. Tonsils have crypts, or deep infoldings of squamous epithelium, 
where whitish spots of normal exfoliating epithelium may sometimes be seen.
Discard your tongue blade after use.
The Neck
Anatomy and Physiology. For 
descriptive purposes, divide each side of 
the neck into two triangles bounded by 
the sternocleidomastoid muscle (Fig. 
7-73). Visualize the borders of the two 
triangles as follows:
■ For the anterior triangle: the mandi-
ble above, the sternocleidomastoid 
laterally, and the midline of the neck 
medially.
■ For the posterior triangle: the sterno-
cleidomastoid muscle, the trapezius, 
and the clavicle. Note that a portion 
of the omohyoid muscle crosses the 
lower portion of this triangle and 
can be mistaken for a lymph node or 
mass.
Failure
to rise
Deviated
to left
F I G U R E  7 - 7 2 . CN X paralysis.
In CN X paralysis, the soft palate fails 
to rise and the uvula deviates to the 
opposite side (points “away from the 
lesion”).
Tonsillar exudates with a beefy red 
uvula are common in streptococcal 
pharyngitis, but warrant rapid anti-
gen-detection testing or throat cul-
ture for diagnosis.39,77 
See Table 7-23, Findings in the Pharynx, 
Palate, and Oral Mucosa, pp. 292–294. 
Posterior 
triangle
Omohyoid
muscle
Clavicle
Manubrium of
the sternum
Anterior
triangle
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle
Trapezius 
muscle
F I G U R E  7 - 7 3 . Anterior and posterior triangles of the neck.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
258 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Great Vessels. Deep to the sternocleidomastoids run the great vessels of 
the neck: the carotid artery and the internal jugular vein (Fig. 7-74). The external 
jugular vein passes diagonally over the surface of the sternocleidomastoid and may 
be helpful when trying to identify the jugular venous pressure (see pp. 374–378).
External
jugular vein
Carotid sinus
Carotid artery
Internal jugular vein
Clavicular and sternal heads
of sternocleidomastoid muscle
F I G U R E  7 - 7 4 . Great vessels of the neck.
Thyroid
cartilage
Cricoid
cartilage
Thyroid
lobe
Thyroid
isthmus
Sternal
notch
Manubrium
of sternum
Hyoid bone
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle
Trachea
Clavicle
F I G U R E  7 - 7 5 . Midline structures of the neck.
Midline Structures and Thyroid Gland. Now identify the following 
midline structures: (1) the mobile hyoid bone just below the mandible, (2) the 
thyroid cartilage, readily identiﬁed by the notch on its superior edge, (3) the cri-
coid cartilage, (4) the tracheal rings, and (5) the thyroid gland (Fig. 7-75).
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
259
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The thyroid gland is usually located above the suprasternal notch. The thyroid isth-
mus spans the second, third, and fourth tracheal rings just below the cricoid carti-
lage. The lateral lobes of the thyroid curve posteriorly around the sides of the trachea 
and the esophagus; each is about 4 cm to 5 cm in length. Except in the midline, the 
thyroid gland is covered by thin straplike muscles anchored to the hyoid bone and 
more laterally by the sternocleidomastoids, which are readily visible.
Lymph Nodes. The lymph nodes of the head 
and neck are variably classiﬁed. One classiﬁcation 
is shown in Figure 7-76, together with the direc-
tions of lymphatic drainage. The deep cervical 
chain is largely obscured by the overlying sterno-
cleidomastoid muscle, but at its two extremes, the 
tonsillar node and supraclavicular nodes may be 
palpable. The submandibular nodes lie superﬁcial 
to the submandibular gland, and should be differ-
entiated. Nodes are normally round or ovoid, 
smooth, and smaller than the submandibular 
gland. The gland is larger and has a lobulated, 
slightly irregular surface (see p. 254).
Note that the tonsillar, submandibular, and sub-
mental nodes drain portions of the mouth and 
throat as well as the face.
Lymphatic drainage patterns are helpful when 
assessing possible malignancy or infection: For 
suspected malignant or inﬂammatory lesions, 
look for enlargement of the neighboring regional 
lymph nodes; when a node is enlarged or tender, 
look for a source in its nearby drainage area.
Techniques of Examination. Inspect the neck, noting its symmetry and 
any masses or scars. Look for enlargement of the parotid or submandibular 
glands, and note any visible lymph nodes.
The Lymph Nodes. Palpate the lymph nodes. Using the pads of your index 
and middle ﬁngers, press gently, moving the skin over the underlying tissues in 
each area. The patient should be relaxed, with the neck ﬂexed slightly forward 
and, if needed, turned slightly toward the side being examined. You can usually 
examine both sides at once, noting both the presence of lymph nodes as well as 
asymmetry. For the submental node, however, it is helpful to feel with one hand 
while bracing the top of the head with the other.
Feel in sequence for the following nodes (Fig. 7-77):
 1. Preauricular—in front of the ear
 2. Posterior auricular—superﬁcial to the mastoid process
Submental
Tonsillar
Submandibular
Deep cervical chain
Occipital
Posterior
auricular
Preauricular
Superficial
cervical
Posterior cervical
Supraclavicular
External lymphatic drainage
Internal lymphatic drainage
(from mouth and throat)
F I G U R E  7 - 7 6 . Lymph nodes of the neck.
A scar from past thyroid surgery is  
a clue to unsuspected thyroid or  
parathyroid disease. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
260 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
 3. Occipital—at the base of the skull posteriorly
 4. Tonsillar—at the angle of the mandible
 5. Submandibular—midway between the angle and the tip of the mandible. 
These nodes are usually smaller and smoother than the lobulated subman-
dibular gland against which they lie.
 6. Submental—in the midline a few centi-
meters behind the tip of the mandible.
 7. Superﬁcial cervical—superﬁcial to the 
sternocleidomastoid.
 8. Posterior cervical—along the anterior 
edge of the trapezius.
 9. Deep cervical chain—deep to the ster-
nocleidomastoid and often inaccessible 
to examination. Hook your thumb and 
ﬁngers around either side of the sterno-
cleidomastoid muscle to ﬁnd them.
10. Supraclavicular—deep in the angle 
formed by the clavicle and the sterno-
cleidomastoid.
Note lymph nodes size, shape, delimitation (discrete or matted together), mobil-
ity, consistency, and any tenderness. Small, mobile, discrete, nontender nodes, 
sometimes termed “shotty,” are frequently found in normal people. Describe 
enlarged nodes in two dimensions, maximal length and width, for example, 
1 cm × 2 cm. Also note any overlying skin changes (erythema, induration, drain-
age, or breakdown).
Enlarged or tender nodes, if unex-
plained, call for (1) re-examination of 
the regions they drain and (2) careful 
assessment of lymph nodes in other 
regions to identify regional from gener-
alized lymphadenopathy.
For preauricular and cervical lymph 
nodes, adopt the techniques to follow.
■ Using the pads of the second and third 
ﬁngers, palpate the preauricular nodes 
with a gentle rotary motion (Fig. 7-78). 
Then examine the posterior auricular 
and occipital lymph nodes.
External lymphatic drainage
Internal lymphatic drainage
(e.g., from mouth and throat) 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
F I G U R E  7 - 7 7 . Sequence for 
examining lymph nodes.
Enlargement of a supraclavicular node, 
especially on the left, suggests possi-
ble metastasis from a thoracic or an 
abdominal malignancy. 
A pulsating “tonsillar node” is really the 
carotid artery. A small hard tender “ton-
sillar node” high and deep between the 
mandible and the sternocleidomastoid 
is probably a styloid process. 
F I G U R E  7 - 7 8 . Palpate the 
preauricular nodes.
Tender nodes suggest inflammation; 
hard or fixed nodes (fixed to under-
lying structures and not movable on 
palpation) suggest malignancy. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
261
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
■ Palpate the anterior superﬁcial and deep cervical chains, located anterior and 
superﬁcial to the sternocleidomastoid. Then palpate the posterior cervical 
chain along the trapezius (anterior edge) and along the sternocleidomastoid 
(posterior edge). Flex the patient’s neck slightly forward toward the side 
being examined (Fig. 7-79). Examine the supraclavicular nodes in the angle 
between the clavicle and the sternocleidomastoid (Fig. 7-80). If you feel 
supraclavicular lymph nodes, a thorough work-up is warranted.
F I G U R E  7 - 7 9 . Palpate the 
submandibular nodes.
F I G U R E  7 - 8 0 . Palpate the 
supraclavicular nodes.
Enlarged or tender nodes, if unexplained, call for (1) re-examination of the 
regions they drain and (2) careful assessment of lymph nodes elsewhere so that 
you can distinguish between regional and generalized lymphadenopathy.
Occasionally, you may mistake a band of muscle or an artery for a lymph node. 
Unlike a muscle or an artery, you should be able to roll a node in two direc-
tions: up and down, and side to side. Neither a muscle nor an artery will pass 
this test.
The Trachea and the Thyroid 
Gland. To orient yourself to the 
neck, identify the thyroid and cricoid 
cartilages and the trachea below them.
■ Inspect the trachea for any deviation 
from its usual midline position. 
Then palpate for any deviation. 
Place your ﬁnger along one side of 
the trachea and note the space 
between it and the sternocleido-
mastoid (Fig. 7-81). Compare it 
with the other side. The spaces 
should be symmetric.
Generalized lymphadenopathy is seen 
in multiple infectious, inflammatory, 
or malignant conditions such as HIV 
or AIDS, infectious mononucleosis, 
lymphoma, leukemia, and sarcoidosis. 
F I G U R E  7 - 8 1 . Palpate the trachea.
Masses in the neck may cause tracheal 
deviation to one side, raising suspi-
cion of conditions in the thorax such 
as a mediastinal mass, atelectasis,  
or a large pneumothorax (see  
pp. 339–340). 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
If you palpate supraclavicular  
lymph nodes, a thorough work-up  
is warranted. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
262 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
■ Auscultate breath sounds over the trachea. This allows subtle counting of the 
respiratory rate and establishes a point of reference when assessing upper 
versus lower airway causes of shortness of breath. When assessing shortness 
of breath, always remember to listen over the trachea for stridor for upper 
airway etiologies in addition to examining the lungs.
■ Inspect the neck for the thyroid gland. Tip the patient’s head slightly back. Using 
tangential lighting directed downward from the tip of the patient’s chin, 
inspect the region below the cricoid cartilage to identify the contours of the gland. 
The shadowed lower border of the thyroid glands shown here is outlined by 
arrows (Fig. 7-82).
Stridor is an ominous, high-pitched 
musical sound from severe subglottic 
or tracheal obstruction that signals a 
respiratory emergency. Causes include 
epiglottitis,78 foreign body, goiter, and 
stenosis from placement of an artifi-
cial airway. See also Chapter 8, Thorax 
and Lungs, pp. 303–342. 
Thyroid
cartilage
Cricoid
cartilage
Thyroid
gland
F I G U R E  7 - 8 2 . Thyroid gland position at rest.
F I G U R E  7 - 8 3 . Thyroid gland with 
goiter at rest.
F I G U R E  7 - 8 4 . Thyroid gland with 
goiter while swallowing.
The patient in Figures 7-83 and 7-84 
has a goiter, defined as enlargement 
of the thyroid gland to twice its nor-
mal size. Goiters may be simple, with-
out nodules, or multinodular, and are 
usually euthyroid.79–81 
■ Observe the patient swallowing. Ask the patient to sip some water and to 
extend the neck again and swallow. Watch for upward movement of the 
thyroid gland, noting its contour and symmetry. The thyroid cartilage, the 
cricoid cartilage, and the thyroid gland all rise with swallowing and then fall 
to their resting positions.
With swallowing, the lower border of 
this large gland rises and looks less 
symmetric. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
263
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
■ Conﬁrm your visual observations by palpating the gland outlines as you 
stand facing the patient. This helps prepare you for the more systematic 
palpation to follow.
■ Palpate the thyroid gland. This may 
seem difﬁcult at ﬁrst. Use the cues 
from visual inspection. Find your 
landmarks—the notched thyroid 
cartilage and the cricoid cartilage 
below it (Fig. 7-85). Locate the 
thyroid isthmus, usually overlying 
the second, third, and fourth tra-
cheal rings.
Develop good technique by adopting the steps below, which outline the posterior 
approach to palpation. The anterior approach is similar and yields comparable 
ﬁndings.81 The thyroid gland is usually easier to palpate in a long slender neck. 
In shorter necks, hyperextension of the neck may be helpful. If the lower pole of 
the thyroid gland is not palpable, suspect a retrosternal location. If the thyroid 
gland is retrosternal, below the suprasternal notch, it is often not palpable.
See Table 7-26, Thyroid Enlargement 
and Function, p. 299. 
Cricoid
cartilage
F I G U R E  7 - 8 5 . Palpate the thyroid gland.
When the thyroid gland is retrosternal, 
below the suprasternal notch, it is 
often not palpable. 
Retrosternal goiters can cause hoarse-
ness, shortness of breath, stridor, or 
dysphagia from tracheal compression; 
neck hyperextension and arm eleva-
tion may cause flushing from com-
pression of the thoracic inlet from the 
gland itself or from clavicular move-
ment (Pemberton sign). Over 85% are 
benign.82,83 
Although physical characteristics of 
the thyroid gland, such as size, shape, 
and consistency, are important, assess-
ment of thyroid function depends  
on symptoms, signs elsewhere in the 
body, and laboratory tests.84–89 
The thyroid is soft in Graves disease 
and may be nodular; it is firm in Hashi-
moto thyroiditis (though not always 
uniformly) and malignancy. 
Steps for Palpating the Thyroid Gland  
(Posterior Approach)
● Ask the patient to ﬂex the neck slightly forward to relax the sternocleidomas-
toid muscles.
● Place the ﬁngers of both hands on the patient’s neck so that your index ﬁn-
gers are just below the cricoid cartilage.
● Ask the patient to sip and swallow water as before. Feel for the thyroid isth-
mus rising up under your ﬁnger pads. It is often, but not always, palpable.
● Displace the trachea to the right with the ﬁngers of the left hand; with the 
right-hand ﬁngers, palpate laterally for the right lobe of the thyroid in the 
space between the displaced trachea and the relaxed sternocleidomastoid. 
Find the lateral margin. In a similar fashion, examine the left lobe.
The lobes are somewhat harder to feel than the isthmus, so practice is 
needed. The anterior surface of a lateral lobe is approximately the size of the 
distal phalanx of the thumb and feels somewhat rubbery.
● Note the size, shape, and consistency (soft, ﬁrm, or hard) of the gland and 
identify any nodules or tenderness. In general, benign (or colloid) nodules 
tend to be more uniform, ovoid structures and are not ﬁxed to surrounding 
tissue.
● If the thyroid gland is enlarged, listen over the lateral lobes with a stethoscope to 
detect a bruit, a sound similar to a cardiac murmur but of not of cardiac origin.
The thyroid is tender in thyroiditis. 
A localized systolic or continuous 
bruit may be heard in hyperthyroidism 
from Graves disease or toxic multinod-
ular goiter. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
264 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
For palpable solitary nodules, ultrasound and possible ﬁne-needle aspiration are 
advised. Ultrasound usually reveals multiple additional nonpalpable nodules; 
only 5% of nodules are malignant.90,91
The Carotid Arteries and Jugular Veins. Defer a detailed examination 
of the neck vessels until the cardiovascular examination, when the patient is supine 
with the head elevated to 30°. For jugular venous distention visible with the patient 
in the sitting position, assess the heart and lungs promptly. Also be alert to unusu-
ally prominent arterial pulsations.
Note that many clinicians would examine the CNs at this point while facing the 
seated patient. 
Special Techniques
Eye Protrusion (Proptosis or Exophthalmos). For eyes with 
exophthalmos, or unusual forward protrusion, stand behind the seated patient 
and inspect from above. Draw the upper lids gently upward, then compare the 
protrusion of the eyes and the relationship of the corneas to the lower lids. For 
objective measurement, ophthalmologists use an exophthalmometer. This 
instrument measures the distance between the lateral angle of the orbit and an 
imaginary line across the most anterior point of the cornea. The upper limits of 
normal are 20 to 22 mm.92–94
When protrusion exceeds normal, further evaluation by ultrasound or comput-
erized tomography scan often follows.94
Nasolacrimal Duct Obstruc-
tion. This test helps identify the 
cause of excessive tearing. Ask the 
patient to look up. Press on the lower 
lid close to the medial canthus, just 
inside the rim of the bony orbit; this 
compresses the lacrimal sac (Fig. 7-86). 
Look for ﬂuid regurgitated out of the 
puncta into the eye. Avoid this test if the 
area is inﬂamed and tender.
Everting the Upper Eyelid to 
Search for a Foreign Body. To 
search thoroughly for a foreign body in 
the eye, evert the upper lid following 
the steps below.
■ Ask the patient to look down and relax the eyes. Be reassuring and use 
gentle deliberate movements. Raise the upper eyelid slightly so that the 
See Chapter 17, Nervous System,  
pp. 711–796. 
Jugular venous distention is a hall-
mark of heart failure. 
See Chapter 9, Cardiovascular System, 
pp. 343–417. 
Exophthalmos is present in approxi-
mately 60% of patients with Graves 
ophthalmopathy and half of patients 
with Graves disease from autoimmune 
hyperthyroidism. Common symptoms 
of Graves ophthalmopathy are diplopia 
and tearing, grittiness, and pain from 
corneal exposure. Eyelid retraction 
(91%), extraocular muscle dysfunction 
(43%), ocular pain (30%), and lacrima-
tion (23%) are also common.92–94 See 
also Table 7-27, Symptoms and Signs  
of Thyroid Disorders, p. 299. 
F I G U R E  7 - 8 6 . Compress the lower 
lid close to the medial canthus.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Discharge of mucopurulent fluid from 
the puncta suggests an obstructed 
nasolacrimal duct. 
A foreign body in the eye often 
involves dust, a speck of sand, a paint 
chip, an insect, or a dislodged eyelash 
trapped underneath the lid, causing 
patients to sense something in their 
eye. Foreign bodies can be superficial, 
sticking to the eye surface or beneath 
the lid, or penetrating—usually a 
piece of metal that pierces the outer 
cornea or sclera. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
265
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
lashes protrude, then grasp the upper 
eyelashes and pull them gently down 
and forward (Fig. 7-87).
■ Place a small stick such as a tongue 
blade or an applicator at least 1 cm 
above the lid margin at the upper 
border of the tarsal plate. Push down 
on the tongue blade as you raise the 
edge of the lid, thus everting the eye-
lid or turning it “inside out.” Do not 
press on the eyeball itself (Fig. 7-88).
■ Secure the upper lashes against the 
eyebrow with your thumb and inspect 
the palpebral conjunctiva (Fig. 7-89). 
After your inspection, grasp the upper 
eyelashes and pull them gently 
forward. Ask the patient to look up. 
The eyelid will return to its normal 
position.
Swinging Flashlight Test. The swinging ﬂashlight test is a clinical test for 
functional impairment of the optic nerves (Fig. 7-90). In dim light, note the 
size of the pupils. After asking the patient to gaze into the distance, swing the 
beam of a penlight for 1 to 2 seconds ﬁrst into one pupil, then into the other. 
Normally, each illuminated eye constricts promptly. The opposite eye also con-
stricts consensually.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
F I G U R E  7 - 8 7 . To evert eyelid, 
pull down the upper eyelashes.
F I G U R E  7 - 8 8 . Using a tongue 
blade, evert the edge of the lid.
F I G U R E  7 - 8 9 . Inspect the 
palpebral conjunctiva.
Direct 
Consensual
Consensual
“Dilation”
RIGHT
RIGHT
LEFT
LEFT
(optic nerve damage)
F I G U R E  7 - 9 0 . Swinging ﬂashlight test.
This view allows you to see the upper 
palpebral conjunctiva and look for a 
foreign body that might be lodged 
there. 
In left-sided optic nerve damage, the 
pupils usually react as follows:  When 
the light beam shines into the normal 
right eye, there is brisk constriction of 
both pupils (direct response on the 
right and consensual response on the 
left). When the light swings over to 
the abnormal left eye, partial dilation 
of both pupils will occur. The afferent 
stimulus on the left is reduced, so the 
efferent signals to both pupils are also 
reduced and a net dilation occurs. This 
demonstrates an afferent pupillary 
defect, sometimes termed a Marcus 
Gunn pupil. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
266 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
Initially you may use sentences to describe your ﬁndings; later you will use 
phrases. The style in the next box contains phrases appropriate for most 
write-ups.
Recording the Physical Examination—The Head, 
Eyes, Ears, Nose, and Throat (HEENT)
HEENT: Head—The skull is normocephalic/atraumatic (NC/AT). Hair with aver-
age texture. Eyes—Visual acuity 20/20 bilaterally. Sclera white, conjunctiva pink. 
Pupils are 4 mm constricting to 2 mm, equally round and reactive to light and 
accommodations. Disc margins sharp; no hemorrhages or exudates, no arterio-
lar narrowing. Ears—Acuity good to whispered voice. Tympanic membranes 
(TMs) with good cone of light. Weber midline. AC > BC. Nose—Nasal mucosa 
pink, septum midline; no sinus tenderness. Throat (or Mouth)—Oral mucosa 
pink, dentition good, pharynx without exudates.
Neck—Trachea midline. Neck supple; thyroid isthmus palpable, lobes not felt.
Lymph Nodes—No cervical, axillary, epitrochlear, inguinal adenopathy.
OR
Head—The skull is normocephalic/atraumatic. Frontal balding. Eyes—Visual 
acuity 20/100 bilaterally. Sclera white; conjunctiva injected. Pupils constrict 
3 mm to 2 mm, equally round and reactive to light and accommodation. Disc 
margins sharp; no hemorrhages or exudates. Arteriolar-to-venous ratio (AV 
ratio) 2:4; no AV nicking. Ears—Acuity diminished to whispered voice; intact to 
spoken voice. TMs clear. Nose—Mucosa swollen with erythema and clear drain-
age. Septum midline. Tender over maxillary sinuses. Throat—Oral mucosa pink, 
dental caries in lower molars, pharynx erythematous, no exudates.
Neck—Trachea midline. Neck supple; thyroid isthmus midline, lobes palpable 
but not enlarged.
Lymph Nodes—Submandibular and anterior cervical lymph nodes tender,  
1 cm × 1 cm, rubbery and mobile; no posterior cervical, epitrochlear, axillary, or 
inguinal lymphadenopathy.
These findings suggest myopia and 
mild arteriolar narrowing as well as 
upper respiratory infection. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Recording Your Findings
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
267
Table 7-1 Primary Headaches 
Headaches are classiﬁed as primary, without underlying pathology, or secondary, with a serious underlying cause often warranting 
urgent attention. Secondary headaches are more likely to occur after age 50 years with a sudden severe onset and should be ruled out 
before making the diagnosis of a primary headache.3 About 90% of headaches are primary headaches and fall into four categories: 
tension, migraine, cluster, and chronic daily headache. The features of tension, migraine, and cluster headaches are highlighted below. 
Chronic daily headache is not a diagnosis, but a category containing pre-existing headaches that have been transformed into more 
pronounced forms of migraines, chronic tension-type headaches, and medication-overuse headaches and last more than 15 days a 
month for more than 3 months.16 Risk factors include obesity; more than one headache a week; caffeine ingestion; use of headache 
medications >10 days a month, such as analgesics, ergots, and triptans; and sleep and mood disorders.
Tension
Migraines
Cluster
Process
Process unclear—possibly 
heightened CNS pain sensitivity. 
Involves pericranial muscle 
tenderness; etiology also unclear
Neuronal dysfunction, possibly of brainstem 
origin, involving low serotonin level, 
spreading cortical depression and 
trigeminovascular activation; types: with 
aura, without aura, variants
Process unclear—possibly 
hypothalamic then 
trigeminoautonomic 
activation
Lifetime  
Prevalence
Most common headache (40%); 
prevalence about 50%
10% of headaches; prevalence 18% of U.S. 
adults; affects ∼15% of women, 6% of men
<1%, more common in men.
Location
Usually bilateral; may be 
generalized or localized to the 
back of the head and upper neck 
or to the frontotemporal area
Unilateral in ∼70%; bifrontal or global in 
∼30%
Unilateral, usually behind or 
around the eye or temple
Quality and 
Severity
Steady; pressing or tightening; 
nonthrobbing pain; mild to 
moderate intensity
Throbbing or aching, pain, moderate to 
severe in intensity; preceded by an aura in  
up to 30%
Sharp, continuous, intense; 
severe in intensity
Timing
Onset
Gradual
Fairly rapid, reaching a peak in  
1–2 hours
Abrupt; peaks within 
minutes
Duration
30 minutes to 7 days
4–72 hours
15 minutes to 3 hours
Course
Episodic; may be chronic
Recurrent—usually monthly, but weekly in 
∼10%; peak incidence early to mid-
adolescence
Episodic, clustered in time, 
with several each day for  
4–8 weeks and then relief for 
6–12 months
Associated 
Symptoms
Sometimes photophobia, 
phonophobia; scalp tenderness; 
nausea absent
Prodrome: nausea, vomiting, photophobia, 
phonophobia; aura in 30%; either visual 
(ﬂickering, zig-zagging lines), or motor 
(paresthesias of hand, arm, or face, or 
language dysfunction)
Unilateral autonomic 
symptoms: lacrimation, 
rhinorrhea, miosis, ptosis, 
eyelid edema, conjunctival 
infection
Triggers/ 
Factors That 
Aggravate or 
Provoke
Sustained muscle tension, as in 
driving or typing; stress; sleep 
disturbances
Alcohol, certain foods, or stress may provoke; 
also menses, high altitude; aggravated by 
noise and bright light
During attack, sensitivity to 
alcohol may increase
Factors That 
Relieve
Possibly massage, relaxation
Quiet, dark room; sleep; sometimes transient 
relief from pressure on the involved artery
Sources: Headache Classiﬁcation Committee of the International Headache Society (IHS). The International Classiﬁcation of Headache Disorders, 3rd edition (beta 
version). Cephalalgia. 2013;33:629; Lipton RB, Bigal ME, Steiner TJ, et al. Classiﬁcation of primary headaches. Neurology. 2004;63:427; Sun-Edelstein C, Bigal ME, 
Rappoport AM. Chronic migraine and medication overuse headache: clarifying the current International Headache Society classiﬁcation criteria. Cephalalgia. 
2009;29:445; Lipton RB, Stewart WF, Seymour D, et al. Prevalence and burden of migraine in the United States: data from the American Migraine Study II. 
Headache. 2001;41:646; Fumal A, Schoenen J. Tension-type headache: current research and clinical management. Lancet Neurol. 2008;7:70; Nesbitt AD, Goadsby PJ. 
Cluster headache. BMJ. 2012;344:e2407.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
268 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 7-2  Secondary Headaches  
and Cranial Neuralgias  
Type
Process
Location
Quality and Severity
Secondary Headaches
Analgesic Rebound
Withdrawal of medication
Previous headache pattern
Variable
Headaches from Eye Disorders
Errors of Refraction  
(farsightedness and 
astigmatism, but not 
nearsightedness)
Probably the sustained contraction of the 
extraocular muscles, and possibly of the 
frontal, temporal, and occipital muscles
Around and over the eyes; 
may radiate to the occipital 
area
Steady, aching, dull
Acute Glaucoma
Sudden increase in intraocular pressure 
(see p. 270)
Pain in and around one eye
Steady, aching, often severe
Headache from  
Sinusitis
Mucosal inﬂammation of the paranasal  
sinuses
Usually frontal sinuses 
above the eyes or over the 
maxillary sinus
Aching or throbbing, severity  
variable; consider possible  
migraine
Meningitis
Viral or bacterial infection of the meninges 
surrounding the brain and spinal cord
Generalized
Steady or throbbing, very  
severe
Subarachnoid  
Hemorrhage—  
“Thunderclap  
Headache”
Bleeding from a ruptured cerebral saccular 
aneurysm; rarely from AV malformation, 
mycotic aneurysm
Generalized
Very severe, “the worst of  
my life”
Brain Tumor
Mass lesion causing displacement of or 
traction on pain-sensitive arteries and 
veins or pressure on nerves
Variable, including lobes of 
brain, cerebellum, brain-
stem
Aching, steady, dull pain  
worse on awakening the  
better after several hours
Giant Cell (Temporal)  
Arteritis
Transmural lymphocytic vasculitis often 
involving multinucleated giant cells that 
disrupts the internal elastic lamina of 
large-caliber arteries
Localized near the involved 
artery, most often the tem-
poral artery in those > age 
50, women > men (2:1 
ratio)
Throbbing, generalized,  
persistent; often severe
Postconcussion  
Headache
Follows mild acceleration-deceleration 
traumatic brain injury; may involve axo-
nal, cerebrovascular autoregulatory, neuro-
chemical injury
Often but not always local-
ized to the injured area
Dull, aching, constant; may  
have features of tension and  
migraine headaches
Cranial Neuralgias
Trigeminal Neuralgia  
(CN V)
Vascular compression of CN V, usually 
near entry to pons leading to focal demye-
lination, aberrant discharge; 10% with 
causative intracranial lesion
Cheek, jaws, lips, or gums; 
trigeminal nerve divisions 2 
and 3 > 1
Shock-like, stabbing,  
burning; severe
Note: Blanks appear in this table when the categories are not applicable or not usually helpful in assessing the problem.
Sources: Headache Classiﬁcation Committee of the International Headache Society (IHS). The International Classiﬁcation of Headache Disorders, 
3rd ed. (beta version). Cephalalgia. 2013;33:629; Schwedt TJ, Matharu MS, Dodick DW. Thunderclap headache. Lancet Neurol. 2006;5:621; Van de 
Beek D, de Gans J, Spanjaard L, et al. Clinical features and prognostic factors in adults with bacterial meningitis. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:1849; 
Salvarini C, Cantini F, Hunder GG. Polymyalgia rheumatica and giant cell arteritis. Lancet. 2008;372:234; Smetana GW, Shmerling RH. Does this 
patient have temporal arteritis? JAMA. 2002;287:92; Ropper AH, Gorson KC. Clinical practice. Concussion. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:166. American 
College of Physicians. Neurology—MKSAP 16. Philadelphia, 2012.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
269
Timing
Associated  
Symptoms
Factors That 
Aggravate or 
Provoke
Factors That 
Relieve
Onset
Duration
Course
Variable
Depends on prior 
headache pattern
Depends on frequency 
of “mini-withdrawals”
Depends on prior headache pat-
tern
Fever, carbon monox-
ide, hypoxia, with-
drawal of caffeine, other 
headache triggers
Depends on cause
Gradual
Variable
Variable
Eye fatigue, “sandy” sensations in 
eyes, redness of conjunctiva
Prolonged use of the 
eyes, particularly for 
close work
Rest of the eyes
Often rapid
Variable, may de-
pend on treat-
ment
Variable, may depend 
on treatment
Blurred vision, nausea and vom-
iting; halos around lights, red-
dening of eye
Sometimes provoked 
by mydriatic drops
Variable
Often daily sev-
eral hours at a 
time, persisting 
until treatment
Often daily in a repeti-
tive pattern
Local tenderness, nasal conges-
tion, discharge, and fever
May be aggravated by 
coughing, sneezing, or 
jarring the head
Nasal deconges-
tants, antibiotics
Fairly rapid, 
usually <24 
hours; may be 
sudden onset
Variable, usually 
days
Viral: usually  
<1 week; bacterial: 
persistent until treat-
ment
Fever, stiff neck, photophobia, 
change in mental status
Immediate antibi-
otics until diagno-
sis of if bacterial or 
viral
Sudden onset; 
can be less than 
a minute
Variable, usually 
days
Varies according to pre-
senting severity and 
level of consciousness; 
worst if initial coma
Nausea, vomiting, loss of con-
sciousness, neck pain. Possible 
prior neck symptoms from “sen-
tinel leaks”
Rebleeding, ↑ intracra-
nial pressure, cerebral 
edema
Subspecialty treat-
ments
Variable
Often brief; de-
pends on location 
and rate of 
growth
Intermittent but may 
progress in intensity 
over a period of days
Seizures, hemiparesis, ﬁeld cuts, 
personality changes. Also nausea, 
vomiting, vision change, gait 
change
May be aggravated by 
coughing, sneezing, or 
sudden movements of 
the head
Subspecialty treat-
ments
Gradual or rapid
Variable
Recurrent or persistent 
over weeks to months
Tenderness over temporal artery, 
adjacent scalp; fever (in ∼50%), 
fatigue, weight loss; new head-
ache (∼60%), jaw claudication 
(∼50%), visual loss or blindness 
(∼15%–20%), polymyalgia rheu-
matica (∼50%)
Movement of neck and 
shoulders
Often sterioids
Within 7 days of 
the injury up to 
3 months
Weeks to up to a 
year
Tends to diminish over 
time
Drowsiness, poor concentration, 
confusion, memory loss, blurred 
vision, dizziness, irritability, rest-
lessness, fatigue
Mental and physical 
exertion, straining, 
stooping, emotional 
excitement, alcohol
Rest; medication
Abrupt, paroxy-
smal
Each jab lasts sec-
onds but recurs at 
intervals of sec-
onds or minutes
May recur daily for 
weeks to months then 
resolve; can be chronic 
progressive
Exhaustion from recurrent pain
Touching certain areas 
of the lower face or 
mouth; chewing, talk-
ing, brushing teeth
Medication; neuro-
vascular decom-
pression
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
270 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 7-3 Red Eyes
Conjunctivitis
Subconjunctival Hemorrhage
Pattern of  
Redness
Conjunctival injection: diffuse dilatation 
of conjunctival vessels with redness that 
tends to be maximal peripherally
Leakage of blood outside of the vessels, producing a homogeneous, 
sharply demarcated, red area that resolves over 2 weeks
Pain
Mild discomfort rather than pain
Absent
Vision
Not affected except for temporary mild 
blurring due to discharge
Not affected
Ocular  
Discharge
Watery, mucoid, or mucopurulent
Absent
Pupil
Not affected
Not affected
Cornea
Clear
Clear
Signiﬁcance
Bacterial, viral, and other infections; 
highly contagious; allergy; irritation
Often none. May result from trauma, bleeding disorders, or 
sudden increase in venous pressure, as from cough
Corneal Injury or Infection
Acute Iritis
Acute Angle Closure 
Glaucoma
Pattern of  
Redness
Ciliary injection: The deeper vessels radiating from the limbus are dilated, creating a reddish violet ﬂush. Ciliary 
injection is an important sign of these three conditions but is not always visible. The eye may be diffusely red 
instead. Other signs of these serious disorders are pain, decreased vision, unequal pupils, and a clouded cornea.
Pain
Moderate to severe, superﬁcial
Moderate, aching, deep
Severe, aching, deep
Vision
Usually decreased
Decreased; photophobia
Decreased
Ocular  
Discharge
Watery or purulent
Absent
Absent
Pupil
Not affected unless iritis develops
Small and irregular
Dilated, ﬁxed
Cornea
Changes depending on cause
Clear or slightly clouded; injection 
conﬁned to corneal limbus
Steamy, cloudy
Signiﬁcance
Abrasions, and other injuries; viral and 
bacterial infections
Associated with systemic 
infection, Herpes zoster, 
tuberculosis, or autoimmune 
diseases; refer promptly
Acute increase in 
intraocular pressure 
constitutes an emergency
Source: Leibowitz HM. The red eye. N Engl J Med. 2000;342:345.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
271
Table 7-4 Dizziness and Vertigo
“Dizziness” is a nonspeciﬁc term used by patients encompassing several disorders that clinicians must carefully sort out. A 
detailed history usually identiﬁes the primary etiology. It is important to learn the speciﬁc meanings of the following terms or 
conditions:
■ Vertigo—a spinning sensation accompanied by nystagmus and ataxia; usually from peripheral vestibular dysfunction (∼40% of 
“dizzy” patients) but may be from a central brainstem lesion (∼10%; causes include atherosclerosis, multiple sclerosis, 
vertebrobasilar migraine, or transient ischemic attack [TIA])
■  Presyncope—a near faint from “feeling faint or lightheaded”; causes include orthostatic hypotension, especially from 
medication, arrhythmias, and vasovagal attacks (∼5%)
■  Disequilibrium—unsteadiness or imbalance when walking, especially in older patients, causes include fear of walking, visual 
loss, weakness from musculoskeletal problems, and peripheral neuropathy (up to 15%)
■  Psychiatric—causes include anxiety, panic disorder, hyperventilation, depression, somatization disorder, alcohol, and 
substance abuse (∼10%)
■  Multifactorial or unknown—(up to 20%)
Peripheral and Central Vertigo
Onset
Duration and 
Course
Hearing
Tinnitus
Additional  
Features
Peripheral Vertigo
Benign Positional 
Vertigo
Sudden, often when 
rolling onto the affected 
side or tilting up the 
head
Onset a few seconds 
to <1 minute
Lasts a few weeks, 
may recur
Not affected
Absent
Sometimes nausea, 
vomiting, nystagmus
Vestibular 
Neuronitis (Acute 
Labyrinthitis)
Sudden
Onset hours to up 
to  2 weeks
May recur over  
12–18 months
Not affected
Absent
Nausea, vomiting, 
nystagmus
Ménière Disease
Sudden
Onset several hours 
to ≥1 day
Recurrent
Sensorineural 
hearing loss—
recurs, eventually 
progresses
Present, 
ﬂuctuating
Pressure or fullness in 
affected ear; nausea, 
vomiting, nystagmus
Drug Toxicity
Insidious or acute—
linked to loop diuretics, 
aminoglycosides, 
salicylates, alcohol
May or may not  
be reversible
Partial adaptation 
occurs
May be impaired
May be 
present
Nausea, vomiting
Acoustic Neuroma
Insidious from CN VIII 
compression, vestibular 
branch
Variable
Impaired, one 
side
Present
May involve CN V 
and VII
Central Vertigo
Often sudden (see 
causes above)
Variable but rarely 
continuous
Not affected
Absent
Usually with other 
brainstem deﬁcits—
dysarthria, ataxia, 
crossed motor and 
sensory deﬁcits
Sources: Chan Y. Differential diagnosis of dizziness. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2009;17:200; Kroenke K, Lucas CA, Rosengerg ML, et al. Causes of 
persistent dizziness: a prospective study of 100 patients in ambulatory care. Ann Intern Med. 1992;117:898; Tusa RJ. Vertigo. Neurol Clin. 2001;19:23; Lockwood 
AH, Salvi RJ, Burkard RF. Tinnitus. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:904.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
272 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 7-5 Selected Facies
FACIAL SWELLING
Cushing Syndrome
The increased adrenal cortisol production 
of Cushing syndrome produces a round or 
“moon” face with red cheeks. Excessive 
hair growth may be present in the 
mustache, sideburn areas, and chin (as 
well as the chest, abdomen, and thighs).
Periorbital
edema
Lips may
be swollen
Puffy pale
face
Nephrotic Syndrome
Glomerular disease causes excess 
albumin excretion, which reduces 
intravascular colloid osmotic pressure, 
causing hypovolemia, then sodium 
and water retention. The face becomes 
edematous and often pale. Swelling 
usually appears ﬁrst around the eyes 
and in the morning. When severe, the 
eyes appear slitlike.
Periorbital
edema
Puffy dull face
with dry skin
Lateral
eyebrows
thin 
Hair dry, coarse,
sparse
Myxedema
In severe hypothyroidism (myxedema) 
mucopolysaccharide deposition in the 
dermis leads to a dull, puffy facies. The 
edema, often pronounced around the 
eyes, does not pit with pressure. The hair 
and eyebrows are dry, coarse, and thinned, 
classically with loss of the lateral third of 
the eyebrows. The skin is dry.
OTHER FACIES
Swelling
Parotid Gland Enlargement
Chronic bilateral asymptomatic parotid 
gland enlargement may be associated with 
obesity, diabetes, cirrhosis, and other 
conditions. Note the swellings anterior to 
the ear lobes and above the angles of the 
jaw. Gradual unilateral enlargement 
suggests neoplasm. Acute enlargement is 
seen in mumps.
Prominent brow
Prominent 
jaw
Enlarged
soft tissues
Acromegaly
The increased growth hormone of 
acromegaly produces enlargement of 
both bone and soft tissues. The head is 
elongated, with bony prominence of 
the forehead, nose, and lower jaw. Soft 
tissues of the nose, lips, and ears also 
enlarge. The facial features appear 
generally coarsened.
Decreased
mobility
Stare
Parkinson Disease
In this neurodegenerative disorder 
linked to loss of the neurotransmitter 
dopamine, there is decreased facial 
mobility and a masklike facies, with 
decreased blinking and a characteristic 
stare. Since the neck and upper trunk 
tend to ﬂex forward, the patient seems to 
peer upward toward the observer. Facial 
skin becomes oily, and drooling may 
occur.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
273
Table 7-6 Visual Field Defects
Visual Field Defects
1. Horizontal Defect Occlusion of a branch of the central 
retinal artery may cause a horizontal (altitudinal) defect. 
Ischemia of the optic nerve can produce a similar defect.
2. Blind Right Eye (Right Optic Nerve) A lesion of the 
optic nerve and, of course, of the eye itself, produces 
unilateral monocular blindness.
3. Bitemporal Hemianopsia (Optic Chiasm) A lesion at 
the optic chiasm (such as a pituitary tumor), may involve 
only ﬁbers crossing over to the opposite side. Since these 
ﬁbers originate in the nasal half of each retina, visual loss 
involves the temporal half of each ﬁeld.
 
4. Left Homonymous Hemianopsia (Right Optic Tract) 
A lesion of the optic tract, interrupts ﬁbers originating on the 
same side of both eyes. Visual loss in the eyes is, therefore, 
similar (homonymous) and involves half of each ﬁeld (hemi-
anopsia).
5. Homonymous Left Superior Quadrantic Defect 
(Right Optic Radiation, Partial) A partial lesion of the 
optic radiation in the temporal lobe, may involve only a 
portion of the nerve ﬁbers, producing, for example, a hom-
onymous quadrantic (“pie in the sky”) defect.
Temporal 
Right Eye
 Left Eye
Nasal
Temporal 
Nasal
Optic nerve
Optic chiasm
Optic tract
Optic
radiation
Visual cortex
1
2
4
3
5
6
6. Left Homonymous Hemianopsia (Right Optic Radia-
tion) A complete interruption of ﬁbers in the optic radiation, 
produces a visual defect similar to that produced by a lesion of 
the optic tract.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
274 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 7-7 Variations and Abnormalities of the Eyelids
Ptosis
Ptosis is a drooping of the upper lid. Causes include myasthenia gravis, 
damage to the oculomotor nerve (CN III), and damage to the sympathetic 
nerve supply (Horner syndrome). A weakened muscle, relaxed tissues, and 
the weight of herniated fat may cause senile ptosis. Ptosis may also be 
congenital.
Entropion
Entropion, more common in the elderly, is an inward turning of the lid 
margin. The lower lashes, which are often invisible when turned inward, 
irritate the conjunctiva and lower cornea. Ask the patient to squeeze the 
lids together and then open them; then check for an entropion that is less 
obvious.
Ectropion
In ectropion, the lower lid margin turns outward, exposing the palpebral 
conjunctiva. When the punctum of the lower lid turns outward, the eye no 
longer drains well, and tearing occurs. Ectropion is also more common in 
older adults.
Lid Retraction and Exophthalmos
A wide-eyed stare suggests retracted eyelids. Note the rim of sclera between 
the upper lid and the iris. Retracted lids and “lid lag” when eyes move from 
up to down markedly increase the likelihood of hyperthyroidism, especially 
when accompanied by a ﬁne tremor, moist skin, and heart rate >90 beats 
per minute.99
Exophthalmos describes protrusion of the eyeball, a common feature of 
Graves ophthalmopathy, triggered by autoreactive T lymphocytes. In this 
disorder, there is a spectrum of eye changes, ranging from lid retraction to 
extraocular muscle dysfunction, dry eyes, ocular pain, and lacrimation. 
Changes do not always progress. In unilateral exophthalmos, consider 
Graves disease (though usually bilateral), trauma, orbital tumor, and 
granulomatous disorders.94
Source of photos: Ptosis, Ectropion, Entropion—Tasman W, Jaeger E, eds. The Wills Eye Hospital Atlas of Clinical Ophthalmology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins, 2001.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
275
Table 7-8 Lumps and Swellings in and Around the Eyes
Pinguecula
A harmless yellowish triangular nodule in the bulbar 
conjunctiva on either side of the iris. Appears frequently with 
aging, ﬁrst on the nasal and then on the temporal side.
Episcleritis
A localized ocular inﬂammation of the episcleral vessels. 
Vessels appear movable over the scleral surface. May be 
nodular or show only redness and dilated vessels. Seen in 
rheumatoid arthritis, Sjögren syndrome, and herpes zoster.
Stye (Hordeolum)
A painful, tender, red infection at the inner or outer margin of 
the eyelid, usually from Staphylococcus aureus (at the inner 
margin—from an obstructed meibomian gland; at the outer 
margin—from an obstructed eyelash follicle or tear gland).
Chalazion
A subacute nontender, usually painless nodule caused by a 
blocked meibomian gland. May become acutely inﬂamed 
but, unlike a stye, usually points inside the lid rather than on 
the lid margin.
Xanthelasma
Slightly raised, yellowish, well-circumscribed cholesterol-ﬁlled 
plaques that appear along the nasal portions of one or both 
eyelids. Half of affected patients have hyperlipidemia; it is also 
common in primary biliary cirrhosis.
Blepharitis
A chronic inﬂammation of the eyelids at the base of the hair 
follicles, often from S. aureus. There is also a scaling 
seborrheic variant.
Source of photos: Tasman W, Jaeger E, eds. The Wills Eye Hospital Atlas of Clinical Ophthalmology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
276 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 7-9 Opacities of the Cornea and Lens
Corneal Arcus. A thin grayish white arc or circle not quite at 
the edge of the cornea. Accompanies normal aging but also seen 
in younger adults, especially African Americans. In young 
adults, suggests possible hyperlipoproteinemia. Usually benign.
Kayser-Fleischer Ring. A golden to red brown ring, sometimes 
shading to green or blue, from copper deposition in the periphery 
of the cornea found in Wilson disease. Due to a rare autosomal 
recessive mutation of the ATO7B gene on chromosome 13 causing 
abnormal copper transport, reduced biliary copper excretion, and 
abnormal accumulation of copper in the liver and tissues 
throughout the body. Patients present with liver disease, renal 
failure, and neurologic symptoms of tremor, dystonia, and a variety 
of psychiatric disorders.95,96
Corneal Scar. A superﬁcial grayish white opacity in the 
cornea, secondary to an old injury or to inﬂammation. Size and 
shape are variable. Do not confuse with the opaque lens of a 
cataract, visible on a deeper plane and only through the pupil.
Pterygium. A triangular thickening of the bulbar conjunctiva that 
grows slowly across the outer surface of the cornea, usually from 
the nasal side. Reddening may occur. May interfere with vision as it 
encroaches on the pupil.
Cataracts. Opacitiy of the lenses visible through the pupil. Risk 
factors are older age, smoking, diabetes, corticosteroid use.
Nuclear Cataract. A nuclear cataract looks gray when seen by 
a ﬂashlight. If the pupil is widely dilated, the gray opacity is 
surrounded by a black rim.
Peripheral Cataract. Produces spokelike shadows that point—
gray against black, as seen with a ﬂashlight, or black against red 
with an ophthalmoscope. A dilated pupil, as shown here, facilitates 
this observation.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
277
Table 7-10 Pupillary Abnormalities
Unequal Pupils (Anisocoria)—Anisocoria represents a defect in the constriction or dilatation of one pupil. Constriction to light 
and near effort is mediated by parasympathetic pathways, and pupillary dilatation by sympathetic pathways. The light reaction in 
bright and dim light identiﬁes the abnormal pupil. When anisocoria is greater in bright light than in dim light, the larger pupil 
cannot constrict properly. Causes include blunt trauma to the eye, open-angle glaucoma (p. 270), and impaired parasympathetic 
innervation to the iris, as in tonic pupil and oculomotor nerve (CN III) paralysis. When anisocoria is greater in dim light, the 
smaller pupil cannot dilate properly, as in Horner syndrome, caused by an interruption of the sympathetic innervation. 
Assessing the near reaction is also important in determining the cause. See also Table 17-13, Pupils in Comatose Patients, p. 792.
Tonic Pupil (Adie Pupil). Pupil is large (dilated), regular, and usually 
unilateral. Reaction to light is severely reduced and slowed, or even absent. 
Constriction during the near vision is present, although very slow (tonic). 
These changes reﬂect parasympathetic denervation. Slow accommodation 
causes blurred vision.
Oculomotor Nerve (CN III) Paralysis. The pupil is large and ﬁxed to light 
and near effort. Ptosis of the upper eyelid (due to impaired CN III innervation 
of the levator palpebrae muscle) and lateral deviation of the eye downward 
and outward are almost always present.
Horner Syndrome. The affected pupil is small, unilateral, reacts briskly to 
light and near effort, but dilates slowly, especially in dim light. Anisocoria is  
>1 mm, with ipsilateral ptosis of the eyelid and often loss of sweating on the 
forehead. These ﬁndings reﬂect the classic triad of Horner syndrome—miosis, 
ptosis and anhydrosis, due to a lesion in the sympathetic pathways anywhere 
from the hypothalamus through the brachial plexus and cervical ganglia into 
the oculasympathetic ﬁbers of the eye. Causes include ipsilateral brainstem 
lesions, neck and chest tumors affecting the ipsilateral sympathetic ganglia, 
and orbital trauma or migraines.100 In congenital Horner syndrome, the 
involved iris is lighter in color than its fellow (heterochromia).
Small, Irregular Pupils (Argyll Robertson Pupils). The pupils are small, 
irregular and usually bilateral. They constrict with near vision and dilate with 
far vision (a normal near reaction) but do not react to light, seen in 
neurosyphilis and rarely in diabetes.
Equal Pupils and One Blind Eye. Unilateral blindness does not cause anisocoria as long as the sympathetic and 
parasympathetic innervation to both irises is normal. A light directed into the seeing eye produces a direct reaction in that eye 
and a consensual reaction in the blind eye. A light directed into the blind eye, however, causes no response in either eye.
Blind eye
Light
 
Blind eye
Light
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
278 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 7-11 Dysconjugate Gaze
There are a number of abnormal patterns of gaze related to developmental disorders and cranial nerve abnormalities.
Developmental Disorders
Developmental dysconjugate gaze is caused by an imbalance in 
ocular muscle tone. This imbalance has many causes, may be 
hereditary, and usually appears in early childhood. These gaze 
deviations are classiﬁed according to direction:
Disorders of Cranial Nerves
New onset of dysconjugate gaze in adults usually results 
from cranial nerve injuries, lesions, or abnormalities from 
causes such as trauma, multiple sclerosis, syphilis, and 
others.
Esotropia
Exotropia
A Left Cranial Nerve VI Paralysis
LOOKING TO THE RIGHT
Eyes are conjugate.
Cover–Uncover Test
A cover–uncover test may be helpful. Here is what you would see in the right monocular esotropia illustrated above.
Corneal reﬂections are 
asymmetric.
LOOKING STRAIGHT AHEAD
Esotropia appears.
COVER
The right eye moves outward 
to ﬁx on the light. (The left 
eye is not seen but moves 
inward to the same degree.)
LOOKING TO THE RIGHT
Esotropia is 
maximum.
UNCOVER
The left eye moves outward 
to ﬁx on the light. The right 
eye deviates inward again.
A Left Cranial Nerve IV 
Paralysis
LOOKING DOWN AND TO THE RIGHT
The left eye cannot 
look down when 
turned inward. 
Deviation is 
maximum in this 
direction.
A Left Cranial Nerve III 
Paralysis
LOOKING STRAIGHT AHEAD
The eye is pulled 
outward by action of 
the CN VI. Upward, 
downward, and 
inward movements 
are impaired or lost. 
Ptosis and pupillary 
dilation may be 
associated.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
279
Table 7-12 Normal Variations of the Optic Disc
Physiologic Cupping
Central cup
Temporal cup
The physiologic cup is a small whitish depression in the optic disc, the entry point for the retinal vessels. Although sometimes 
absent, the cup is usually visible either centrally or toward the temporal side of the disc. Grayish spots are often seen at its base.
Rings and Crescents
Rings and crescents are often seen around the optic disc. 
These are developmental variations that appear as either 
white sclera, black retinal pigment, or both, especially along 
the temporal border of the disc. Rings and crescents are not 
part of the disc itself and should not be included in your 
estimate of the disc diameter.
Medullated Nerve Fibers
Medullated or myelinated nerve ﬁbers are a much less common 
but dramatic ﬁnding. Appearing as irregular white patches with 
feathered margins, they obscure the disc edge and retinal 
vessels. They have no pathologic signiﬁcance.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
280 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 7-13 Abnormalities of the Optic Disc
Normal
Papilledema
Process
Tiny disc vessels give normal color to the disc.
Appearance
Color yellowish orange to creamy pink
Disc vessels tiny
Disc margins sharp (except perhaps nasally)
The physiologic cup is located centrally or somewhat 
temporally. It may be conspicuous or absent. Its 
diameter from side to side is usually less than half that 
of the disc.
Process
Elevated intracranial pressure causes intraaxonal edema along the 
optic nerve, leading to engorgement and swelling of the optic disc.
Appearance
Color pink, hyperemic
Often with loss of venous pulsations
Disc vessels more visible, more numerous, curve over the borders 
of the disc
Disc swollen with margins blurred
The physiologic cup is not visible.
Seen in intracranial mass, lesion, or hemorrhage, meningitis
Glaucomatous Cupping
Optic Atrophy
Process
Increased intraocular pressure within the eye leads to 
increased cupping (backward depression of the disc) and 
atrophy. The base of the enlarged cup is pale.
Appearance
Death of optic nerve ﬁbers leads to loss of the tiny disc 
vessels.
Process
The physiologic cup is enlarged, occupying more than half of the 
disc’s diameter, at times extending to the edge of the disc. Retinal 
vessels sink in and under the cup, and may be displaced nasally.
Appearance
Color white
Tiny disc vessels absent
Seen in optic neuritis, multiple sclerosis, temporal arteritis
Sources of photos for Normal—Tasman W, Jaeger E, eds. The Wills Eye Hospital Atlas of Clinical Ophthalmology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins, 2001; Papilledema, Glaucomatous Cupping, Optic Atrophy—Courtesy of Ken Freedman, MD.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
281
Retinal Arteries in Hypertension 
Copper Wiring 
Silver Wiring
Focal 
narrowing
Narrowed  column 
of blood
Narrowed light 
reflex
  
Table 7-14  Retinal Arteries and Arteriovenous 
Crossings: Normal and Hypertensive
Normal Retinal Artery and Arteriovenous (AV) Crossing
    Arterial wall (invisible)
    Column of blood
    Light reflex
 
The normal arterial wall is transparent; usually only the column of 
blood is visible. The normal light reﬂex is narrow—about one-
fourth the diameter of the blood column. Because the arterial wall is 
transparent, a vein crossing beneath the artery appears right up to 
the column of blood on either side. 
Vein
Arterial wall
Artery
In hypertension, increased pressure damages the 
vascular endothelium, leading to deposition of 
plasma macromolecules and thickening of the 
arterial wall, causing focal or generalized 
narrowing of the lumen and the light reﬂex.
Sometimes the arteries, especially 
those close to the disc, become full 
and somewhat tortuous and 
develop an increased light reﬂex 
with a bright coppery luster, called 
copper wiring.
Occasionally the wall of a narrowed 
artery becomes opaque so there is no 
visible blood, called silver wiring. 
AV Crossing
When the arterial walls lose their transparency, changes appear in the arteriovenous crossings. Decreased transparency of the 
retina probably also contributes to the ﬁrst two changes shown below.
Concealment or AV Nicking. The 
vein appears to stop abruptly on either 
side of the artery.
Tapering. The vein appears to taper 
down on either side of the artery.
Banking. The vein is twisted on the 
distal side of the artery and forms a dark, 
wide knuckle
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
282 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 7-15 Red Spots and Streaks in the Fundi
F
O
Superﬁcial Retinal Hemorrhages. Small, linear, ﬂame-shaped, red streaks in the fundi, shaped by the superﬁcial bundles 
of nerve ﬁbers that radiate from the optic disc in the pattern illustrated (O = optic disc; F = fovea). Sometimes the hemorrhages 
occur in clusters and look like a larger hemorrhage but can be identiﬁed by the linear streaking at the edges. These hemorrhages 
are seen in severe hypertension, papilledema, and occlusion of the retinal vein, among other conditions. An occasional superﬁcial 
hemorrhage has a white center consisting of ﬁbrin, which has many causes.
Preretinal Hemorrhage. Develops when blood escapes into 
the potential space between the retina and vitreous. This hemor-
rhage is typically larger than retinal hemorrhages. Because it is  
anterior to the retina, it obscures any underlying retinal vessels.  
In an erect patient, red cells settle, creating a horizontal line of  
demarcation between plasma above and cells below. Causes  
include a sudden increase in intracranial pressure.
Deep Retinal Hemorrhages. Small, rounded, slightly  
irregular red spots that are sometimes called dot or blot  
hemorrhages. They occur in a deeper layer of the retina than 
ﬂame-shaped hemorrhages. Diabetes is a common cause.
Microaneurysms. Tiny, round, red spots commonly seen in 
and around the macular area. They are minute dilatations of 
very small retinal vessels; the vascular connections are too small 
to be seen with an ophthalmoscope. A hallmark of diabetic reti-
nopathy.
Neovascularization. Refers to the formation of new blood 
vessels. They are more numerous, more tortuous, and nar-
rower than neighboring blood vessels in the area and form 
disorderly looking red arcades. A common feature of the pro-
liferative stage of diabetic retinopathy. The vessels may grow 
into the vitreous, where retinal detachment or hemorrhage 
may cause loss of vision.
Source of photos: Tasman W, Jaeger E, eds. The Wills Eye Hospital Atlas of Clinical Ophthalmology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
283
Table 7-16  Ocular Fundi: Normal and Hypertensive Retinopathy
Normal Fundus of a Light-Skinned Person
Inspect the optic disc. Follow the major vessels in four 
directions, noting their relative sizes and any arteriovenous 
crossings—both are normal here. Inspect the macular area. The 
slightly darker fovea is just discernible; no light reﬂex is visible 
in this subject. Look for any lesions in the retina. Note the 
striped, or tessellated, character of the fundus, especially in the 
lower ﬁeld, that comes from normal underlying choroidal 
vessels. The fundus of a light-skinned person with brunette 
coloring is redder.
Normal Fundus of a Dark-Skinned Person
Again, inspect the disc, vessels, macula, and retina. The ring 
around the fovea is a normal light reﬂection. The color of the 
fundus has a grayish brown, almost purplish cast, which 
comes from pigment in the retina and the choroid that 
characteristically obscures the choroidal vessels; no 
tessellation is visible.
Hypertensive Retinopathy
Marked arteriolar-venous crossing changes are seen, especially 
along the inferior vessels. Copper wiring of the arterioles is 
present. A cotton-wool spot is seen just superior to the disc. 
Incidental disc drusen are also present but are unrelated to 
hypertension.
Hypertensive Retinopathy with Macular Star
Note the punctate exudates are readily visible: some are 
scattered; others radiate from the fovea to form a macular star. 
Note the two small, soft exudates about 1 disc diameter from 
the disc. Find the ﬂame-shaped hemorrhages sweeping 
toward 7, 8, and 10 o’clock; a few more may be seen toward 
10 o’clock. These two fundi show changes typical of severe 
hypertensive retinopathy, which is often accompanied by 
papilledema (p. 241).
Source of photos: Hypertensive Retinopathy, Hypertensive Retinopathy with Macular Star—Tasman W, Jaeger E, eds. The Wills Eye Hospital Atlas of Clinical 
Ophthalmology. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001.
Source: Wong TY, Mitchell P. Hypertensive retinopathy. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:2310.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
284 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 7-17 Ocular Fundi: Diabetic Retinopathy
Diabetic Retinopathy
Study carefully the fundi in the series of photographs below. They represent a national standard used by ophthalmologists to 
assess diabetic retinopathy.97, 98
Nonproliferative Retinopathy, Moderately Severe
Note tiny red dots or microaneurysms. Note also the ring of hard exudates 
(white spots) located superotemporally. Retinal thickening or edema in the 
area of the hard exudates can impair visual acuity if it extends into the center 
of the macula. Detection requires specialized stereoscopic examination.
Nonproliferative Retinopathy, Severe
In the superior temporal quadrant, note the large retinal hemorrhage 
between two cotton-wool patches, beading of the retinal vein just above 
them, and tiny tortuous retinal vessels above the superior temporal artery.
Proliferative Retinopathy, with Neovascularization
Note new preretinal vessels arising on the disc and extending across the disc 
margins. Visual acuity is still normal, but the risk for visual loss is high. 
Photocoagulation reduces this risk by >50%.
Proliferative Retinopathy, Advanced
This is the same eye, but 2 years later and without treatment. 
Neovascularization has increased, now with ﬁbrous proliferations, distortion 
of the macula, and reduced visual acuity.
Source of photos: Nonproliferative Retinopathy, Moderately Severe; Proliferative Retinopathy, With Neovascularization; Nonproliferative Retinopathy, Severe; Proliferative 
Retinopathy, Advanced—Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study Research Group. Courtesy of MF Davis, MD, University of Wisconsin, Madison.
Source: Frank RB. Diabetic retinopathy. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:48.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
285
Table 7-18 Light-Colored Spots in the Fundi
Soft Exudates: Cotton-Wool Patches
Cotton-wool patches are white or grayish, ovoid lesions with 
irregular “soft” borders. They are moderate in size but usually 
smaller than the disc. They result from extruded axoplasm 
from retinal ganglion cells caused by microinfarcts of the retinal 
nerve ﬁber layer. Seen in hypertension, diabetes, HIV and other 
viruses, and numerous other conditions.
Hard Exudates
Hard exudates are creamy or yellowish, often bright, lesions 
with well-deﬁned “hard” borders. They are small and round 
but may coalesce into larger irregular spots. They often occur 
in clusters or in circular, linear, or star-shaped patterns. They 
are lipid residues of serous leakage from damaged capillaries. 
Causes include diabetes and vascular dysplasias.
Drusen
Drusen are yellowish round spots that vary from tiny to small. 
The edges may be soft, as here, or hard (p. 242). They are 
haphazardly distributed but may concentrate at the posterior 
pole between the optic disc and the macula. Drusen consist of 
dead retinal pigment epithelial cells. Seen in normal aging and 
age-related macular degeneration.
Healed Chorioretinitis
Here inﬂammation has destroyed the superﬁcial tissues to 
reveal a well-deﬁned, irregular patch of white sclera marked 
with dark pigment. Size varies from small to very large. 
Toxoplasmosis is illustrated. Multiple, small, somewhat similar-
looking areas may be due to laser treatments. Here there is 
also a temporal scar near the macula.
Source of photos: Cotton-Wool Patches, Drusen, Healed Chorioretinitis—Tasman W, Jaeger E, eds. The Wills Eye Hospital Atlas of Clinical Ophthalmology. 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001; Hard Exudates—Courtesy of Ken Freedman, MD. American Academy of Ophthalmology. Optic fundus 
signs. At http://www.aao.org/theeyeshaveit/optic-fundus/index.cfm. Accessed March 23, 2015.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
286 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 7-19 Lumps on or Near the Ear
Keloid. A ﬁrm, nodular, 
hypertrophic mass of scar 
tissue extending beyond the 
area of injury. It may de-
velop in any scarred area but 
is most common on the 
shoulders and upper chest. 
A keloid on a pierced ear-
lobe may have unwanted 
cosmetic effects. Keloids are 
more common in darker-
skinned people and may 
recur following treatment.
Chondrodermatitis 
 Helicis. This chronic inﬂam-
matory lesion starts as a pain-
ful, tender papule on the helix 
or antihelix. Here the upper le-
sion is at a later stage of ulcer-
ation and crusting. Reddening 
may occur. Biopsy is needed to 
rule out carcinoma.
Tophi. A deposit of uric acid 
crystals characteristic of 
chronic tophaceous gout. It 
appears as hard nodules in 
the helix or antihelix and 
may discharge chalky white 
crystals through the skin. It 
also may appear near the 
joints, hands (p. 703), feet, 
and other areas. It usually de-
velops after chronic sustained 
high blood levels of uric acid.
Basal Cell Carcinoma. 
This raised nodule shows the 
lustrous surface and telangiec-
tatic vessels of basal cell carci-
noma, a common 
slow-growing malignancy that 
rarely metastasizes. Growth 
and ulceration may occur. 
These are more frequent in 
fair-skinned people overex-
posed to sunlight.
Cutaneous Cyst. For-
merly called a sebaceous cyst, 
a dome-shaped lump in the 
dermis forms a benign closed 
ﬁrm sac attached to the epi-
dermis. A dark dot (black-
head) may be visible on its 
surface. Histologically, it is 
usually either (1) an epider-
moid cyst, common on the 
face and neck, or (2) a pilar 
(trichilemmal) cyst, common 
in the scalp. Both may be-
come inﬂamed.
Rheumatoid Nodules. In 
chronic rheumatoid arthritis, 
look for small lumps on the 
helix or antihelix and addi-
tional nodules elsewhere on 
the hands and along the sur-
face of the ulna distal to the 
elbow (p. 702), and on the 
knees and heels. Ulceration 
may result from repeated inju-
ries. These nodules may ante-
date the arthritis.
Sources of photos: Keloid—Sams WM Jr, Lynch PJ, eds. Principles and Practice of Dermatology. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1990; Tophi—du Vivier A. Atlas of 
Clinical Dermatology. 2nd ed. London, UK: Gower Medical Publishing, 1993; Cutaneous Cyst, Chondrodermatitis Helicis—Young EM, Newcomer VD, Kligman AM. 
Geriatric Dermatology: Color Atlas and Practitioner’s Guide. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1993; Basal Cell Carcinoma—Phillips T, Dover J. Recent Advances in 
Dermatology. N Engl J Med. 326:169–170, 1992; Rheumatoid Nodules—Champion RH, Burton JL, Ebling FJG, eds. Rook/Wilkinson/Ebling Textbook of Dermatology. 
5th ed. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Scientiﬁc, 1992.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
287
Table 7-20 Abnormalities of the Eardrum
Normal Eardrum (Right)
This normal right eardrum the tympanic membrane, is pinkish gray. Note the 
malleus lying behind the upper part of the drum. Above the short process lies the 
pars ﬂaccida. The remainder of the drum is the pars tensa. From the umbo, the 
bright cone of light fans anteriorly and downward. Posterior to the malleus, part 
of the incus is visible behind the drum. The small blood vessels along the handle 
of the malleus are normal.
Perforation of the Eardrum
Perforations are holes in the eardrum, usually from purulent infections of the 
middle ear. They may be central, if not involving the margin of the drum, or 
marginal, when the margin is involved. The membrane covering the perforation 
may be notably thin and transparent.
The more common central perforation is illustrated here. A reddened ring of 
granulation tissue surrounds the perforation, indicating chronic infection. The 
eardrum itself is scarred, and no landmarks are visible. Discharge from the 
infected middle ear may drain out through the perforated opening, which often 
closes in the healing process, as in the next photo. There may be associated 
earache or even hearing loss, especially if the perforations are large.
Tympanosclerosis
Tympanosclerosis is a scarring process of the middle ear from otitis media that 
involves deposition of hyaline and calcium and phosphate crystals in the eardrum 
and middle ear. When severe it may entrap the ossicles and cause conductive 
hearing loss.
In the inferior portion of this left eardrum, note the large, chalky white patch with 
irregular margins. It is typical of tympanosclerosis: a deposition of hyaline 
material within the layers of the tympanic membrane that sometimes follows a 
severe episode of otitis media. It does not usually impair hearing and is seldom 
clinically signiﬁcant.
Other abnormalities in this eardrum include a healed perforation (the large oval 
area in the upper posterior drum) and signs of a retracted drum. A retracted drum 
is pulled medially, away from the examiner’s eye, and the malleolar folds are 
tightened into sharp outlines. The short process often protrudes sharply, and the 
handle of the malleus, pulled inward at the umbo, looks foreshortened and more 
horizontal.
(continued)
Sources of photos: Normal Eardrum—Hawke M, Keene M, Alberti PW. Clinical Otoscopy: A Text and Colour Atlas. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1984; 
Perforation of the Drum, Tympanosclerosis—Courtesy of Michael Hawke, MD, Toronto, Canada.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
288 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 7-20 Abnormalities of the Eardrum (Continued )
Serous Effusion
Serous effusions are usually caused by viral upper respiratory infections (otitis 
media with serous effusion) or by sudden changes in atmospheric pressure as from 
ﬂying or diving (otitic barotrauma). The eustachian tube cannot equalize the air 
pressure in the middle ear and outside air. Air is absorbed from the middle ear 
into the bloodstream, and serous ﬂuid accumulates in the middle ear instead. 
Symptoms include fullness and popping sensations in the ear, mild conduction 
hearing loss, and, sometimes, pain.
Amber ﬂuid behind the eardrum is characteristic, as in this patient with otitic 
barotrauma. A ﬂuid level, a line between air above and amber ﬂuid below, can be 
seen on either side of the short process. Air bubbles (not always present) can be 
seen here within the amber ﬂuid.
Acute Otitis Media with Purulent Effusion
Acute otitis media with purulent effusion is commonly caused by bacterial infection 
from S. pneumoniae or H. inﬂuenzae. Symptoms include earache, fever, and hearing 
loss. The eardrum reddens, loses its landmarks, and bulges laterally, toward the 
examiner’s eye.
Here the eardrum is bulging, and most landmarks are obscured. Redness is most 
obvious near the umbo, but dilated vessels can be seen in all segments of the 
drum. A diffuse redness of the entire drum often develops. Spontaneous rupture 
(perforation) of the drum may follow, with discharge of purulent material into the 
ear canal.
Hearing loss is the conductive type. Acute purulent otitis media is much more 
common in children than in adults.
Bullous Myringitis
In bullous myringitis, painful hemorrhagic vesicles appear on the tympanic 
membrane, the ear canal, or both. Symptoms include earache, blood-tinged 
discharge from the ear, and conductive hearing loss.
In this right ear, at least two large vesicles (bullae) are discernible on the drum. 
The drum is reddened, and its landmarks are obscured.
This condition is caused by mycoplasma, viral, and bacterial otitis media.
Sources of photos: Serous Effusion—Hawke M, Keene M, Alberti PW. Clinical Otoscopy: A Text and Colour Atlas. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1984; Acute Otitis 
Media, Bullous Myringitis—The Wellcome Trust, National Medical Slide Bank, London, UK.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
289
Table 7-21 Patterns of Hearing Loss
Conductive Loss
Sensorineural Loss
Tympanic membrane
Middle ear
Cochlear
nerve
Tympanic membrane
Middle ear
Cochlear
nerve
Pathophysiology
External or middle ear disorder impairs sound 
conduction to inner ear. Causes include foreign 
body, otitis media, perforated eardrum, and 
otosclerosis of ossicles.
Inner ear disorder involves cochlear nerve and 
neuronal impulse transmission to the brain. Causes 
include loud noise exposure, inner ear infections, 
trauma, acoustic neuroma, congenital and familial 
disorders, and aging.
Usual Age of 
Onset
Childhood and young adulthood, up to age  
40 years
Middle or later years
Ear Canal and 
Drum
Abnormality usually visible, except in otosclerosis
Problem not visible
Effects
Little effect on sound
Hearing seems to improve in noisy environment
Voice remains soft because inner ear and cochlear 
nerve are intact
Higher registers are lost, so sound may be distorted
Hearing worsens in noisy environment
Voice may be loud because hearing is difﬁcult
Weber Test  
(in Unilateral 
Hearing Loss)
Tuning fork at vertex
Sound lateralizes to impaired ear—room noise not 
well heard, so detection of vibrations improves.
Tuning fork at vertex
Sound lateralizes to good ear—inner ear or cochlear 
nerve damage impairs transmission to affected ear.
Rinne Test
Tuning fork at external auditory meatus; then on 
mastoid bone
BC longer than or equal to AC (BC ≥ AC). While 
air conduction through the external or middle ear 
is impaired, vibrations through bone bypass the 
problem to reach the cochlea.
Tuning fork at external auditory meatus; then on 
mastoid bone
AC longer than BC (AC > BC). The inner ear or 
cochlear nerve is less able to transmit impulses 
regardless of how the vibrations reach the cochlea. 
The normal pattern prevails.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
290 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 7-22 Abnormalities of the Lips
Angular Cheilitis
Angular cheilitis starts with softening of the skin at the angles of the mouth, 
followed by ﬁssuring. It may be due to nutritional deﬁciency or, more 
commonly, to overclosure of the mouth, seen in people with no teeth or with 
ill-ﬁtting dentures. Saliva wets and macerates the infolded skin, often leading 
to secondary infection with Candida, as seen here.
Actinic Cheilitis
Actinic cheilitis is a precancerous condition that results from excessive 
exposure to sunlight and affects primarily the lower lip. Fair-skinned men 
who work outdoors are most often affected. The lip loses its normal redness 
and may become scaly, somewhat thickened, and slightly everted. Solar 
damage predisposes to squamous cell carcinoma of the lip, so examine these 
skin lesions carefully.
Herpes Simplex (Cold Sore, Fever Blister)
The herpes simplex virus (HSV) produces recurrent and painful vesicular 
eruptions of the lips and surrounding skin. A small cluster of vesicles ﬁrst 
develops. As these break, yellow-brown crusts form. Healing takes 10 to 14 
days. Both new and erupted vesicles are visible here.
Angioedema
Angioedema is a localized subcutaneous or submucosal swelling caused by 
leakage of intravascular ﬂuid into interstitial tissue. Two types are common. 
When vascular permeability is triggered by mast cells in allergic and NSAID 
reactions, look for associated urticaria and pruritus. These are uncommon in 
angioedema from bradykinin and complement-derived mediators, the 
mechanism in ACE-inhibitor reactions. Angioedema is usually benign and 
resolves within 24 to 48 hours. It can be life threatening when it involves the 
larynx, tongue, or upper airway or develops into anaphylaxis.
Sources of photos: Angular Cheilitis, Herpes Simplex, Angioedema—Neville B, et al. Color Atlas of Clinical Oral Pathology. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1991; Used 
with permission; Actinic Cheilitis—Langlais RP, Miller CS. Color Atlas of Common Oral Diseases. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1992. Used with permission.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
291
Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia  
(Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome)
Multiple small red spots on the lips strongly suggest hereditary hemorrhagic 
telangiectasia, an autosomal dominant endothelial disorder causing vascular 
fragility and arteriovascular malformations (AVMs). Telangiectasias are also 
visible on the oral mucosa, nasal septal mucosa, and ﬁngertips. Nosebleeds, 
gastrointestinal bleeding, and iron deﬁciency anemia are common. AVMs in 
the lungs and brain can cause life-threatening hemorrhage and embolic 
disease.
Peutz–Jeghers Syndrome
Look for prominent small brown pigmented spots in the dermal layer of the 
lips, buccal mucosa, and perioral area. These spots may also appear on the 
hands and feet. In this autosomal dominant syndrome, these characteristic 
skin changes accompany numerous intestinal polyps. The risk of 
gastrointestinal and other cancers ranges from 40% to 90%. Note that these 
spots rarely appear around the nose and mouth.
Chancre of Primary Syphilis
This ulcerated papule with an indurated edge usually appears after 3 to 6 
weeks of incubating infection from the spirochete Treponema pallidum. These 
lesions may resemble a carcinoma or crusted cold sore. Similar primary 
lesions are common in the pharynx, anus, and vagina but may escape 
detection since they are painless, nonsuppurative, and usually heal 
spontaneously in 3 to 6 weeks. Wear gloves during palpation since these 
chancres are infectious.
Carcinoma of the Lip
Like actinic cheilitis, squamous cell carcinoma usually affects the lower lip. It 
may appear as a scaly plaque, as an ulcer with or without a crust, or as a 
nodular lesion, as illustrated here. Fair skin and prolonged exposure to the 
sun are common risk factors.
Sources of photos: Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia—Langlais RP, Miller CS. Color Atlas of Common Oral Diseases. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1992; Used 
with permission; Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome—Robinson HBG, Miller AS. Colby, Kerr, and Robinson’s Color Atlas of Oral Pathology. Philadelphia, PA: JB Lippincott, 1990; 
Chancre of Syphilis—Wisdom A. A Colour Atlas of Sexually Transmitted Diseases. 2nd ed. London: Wolfe Medical Publications, 1989; Carcinoma of the Lip—Tyldesley 
WR. A Colour Atlas of Orofacial Diseases. 2nd ed. London: Wolfe Medical Publications, 1991.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
292 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 7-23  Findings in the Pharynx, Palate, and  
Oral Mucosa
Large Normal Tonsils
Normal tonsils may be large without being infected, especially in children. 
They may protrude medially beyond the pillars and even to the midline. Here 
they touch the sides of the uvula and obscure the pharynx. Their color is 
pink. The white marks are light reﬂections, not exudate.
Exudative Tonsillitis
This red throat has a white exudate on the tonsils. This, together with fever 
and enlarged cervical nodes, increases the probability of group A streptococcal 
infection or infectious mononucleosis. Anterior cervical lymph nodes are usually 
enlarged in the former, posterior nodes in the latter.
A
Pharyngitis
These two photos show reddened throats without exudate.
In A, redness and vascularity of the pillars and uvula are mild to moderate.
B
In B, redness is diffuse and intense. Each patient would probably complain of 
a sore throat, or at least a scratchy one. Causes are both viral and bacterial. If 
the patient has no fever, exudate, or enlargement of cervical lymph nodes, the 
chances of infection by either of two common causes—Group A streptococci 
and Epstein-Barr virus (infectious mononucleosis)—are reduced.
Sources of photos: Large Normal Tonsils, Exudative Tonsillitis, Pharyngitis [A and B]—The Wellcome Trust, National Medical Slide Bank, London, UK.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
293
Diphtheria
Diphtheria, an acute infection caused by Corynebacterium diphtheriae, is now 
rare but still important. Prompt diagnosis may lead to life-saving treatment. 
The throat is dull red, and a gray exudate (pseudomembrane) is present on 
the uvula, pharynx, and tongue. The airway may become obstructed. Prompt 
diagnosis may lead to life-saving treatment.
Thrush on the Palate (Candidiasis)
Thrush is a yeast infection from Candida species. Shown here on the palate, it 
may appear elsewhere in the mouth (see p. 297). Thick, white plaques are 
somewhat adherent to the underlying mucosa. Predisposing factors include 
(1) prolonged treatment with antibiotics or corticosteroids and (2) AIDS.
Kaposi Sarcoma in AIDS
The deep purple color of these lesions suggests Kaposi sarcoma, a low-grade 
vascular tumor associated with human herpesvirus 8. The lesions may be 
raised or ﬂat. About a third of patients with Kaposi sarcoma have lesions in 
the oral cavity; other affected sites are the gastrointestinal tract and the lungs. 
Antiretroviral therapy has markedly reduced the prevalence of this disease.
Torus Palatinus
A torus palatinus is a midline bony growth in the hard palate that is fairly 
common in adults. Its size and lobulation vary. Although alarming at ﬁrst 
glance, it is harmless. In this example, an upper denture has been ﬁtted 
around the torus.
Sources of photos: Diphtheria—Harnisch JP, et al. Diphtheria among alcoholic urban adults. Ann Intern Med. 1989;111:77; Thrush on the Palate—The Wellcome 
Trust, National Medical Slide Bank, London, UK; Kaposi’s Sarcoma in AIDS—Ioachim HL. Textbook and Atlas of Disease Associated with Acquired Immune Deﬁciency 
Syndrome. London: Gower Medical Publishing, 1989.
(continued)
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
294 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 7-23  Findings in the Pharynx, Palate, and  
Oral Mucosa (Continued )
Fordyce Spots (Fordyce Granules)
Fordyce spots are normal sebaceous glands that appear as small yellowish 
spots in the buccal mucosa or on the lips. Here they are seen best anterior to 
the tongue and lower jaw. These spots are usually not numerous.
Koplik Spots
Koplik spots are an early sign of measles (rubeola). Search for small white 
specks that resemble grains of salt on a red background. They usually 
appear on the buccal mucosa near the ﬁrst and second molars. In this 
photo, look also in the upper third of the mucosa. The rash of measles 
appears within a day.
Petechiae
Petechiae are small red spots caused by blood that escapes from capillaries into 
the tissues. Petechiae in the buccal mucosa, as shown, are often caused by 
accidentally biting the cheek. Oral petechiae may be due to infection or 
decreased platelets, and trauma.
Leukoplakia
A thickened white patch (leukoplakia) may occur anywhere in the oral 
mucosa. The extensive example shown on this buccal mucosa resulted from 
frequent chewing of tobacco, a local irritant. This benign reactive process of 
the squamous epithelium may lead to cancer and should be biopsied. Another 
risk factor is human papillomavirus infection.
Sources of photos: Fordyce Spots—Neville B, et al. Color Atlas of Clinical Oral Pathology. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1991; Used with permission; Koplik 
Spots—Harvey RA, Cornelissen CN. Microbiology, 3rd ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2013; Petechiae—The Wellcome Trust, National Medical 
Slide Bank, London, UK; Leukoplakia—Robinson HBG, Miller AS. Colby, Kerr, and Robinson’s Color Atlas of Oral Pathology. Philadelphia, PA: JB Lippincott, 1990.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
295
Table 7-24 Findings in the Gums and Teeth
Marginal Gingivitis
Marginal gingivitis is common during adolescence, early adulthood, and 
pregnancy. The gingival margins are reddened and swollen, and the 
interdental papillae are blunted, swollen, and red. Brushing the teeth often 
makes the gums bleed. Plaque—the soft white ﬁlm of salivary salts, protein, 
and bacteria that covers the teeth and leads to gingivitis—is not readily 
visible.
Acute Necrotizing Ulcerative Gingivitis
This uncommon form of gingivitis occurs suddenly in adolescents and young 
adults and is accompanied by fever, malaise, and enlarged lymph nodes. 
Ulcers develop in the interdental papillae. Then the destructive (necrotizing) 
process spreads along the gum margins, where a grayish pseudomembrane 
develops. The red, painful gums bleed easily; the breath is foul.
Gingival Hyperplasia
Gums enlarged by hyperplasia are swollen into heaped-up masses that may 
even cover the teeth. The redness of inﬂammation may coexist, as in this 
example. Causes include phenytoin therapy (as in this case), puberty, 
pregnancy, and leukemia.
Pregnancy Tumor (Pregnancy Epulis or 
Pyogenic Granuloma)
Red purple papules of granulation tissue form in the gingival interdental 
papillae, in the nasal cavity, and sometimes on the ﬁngers. They are red, soft, 
painless, and usually bleed easily. They occur in 1% to 5% of pregnancies 
and usually regress after delivery. Note the accompanying gingivitis.
Sources of photos: Marginal Gingivitis, Acute Necrotizing Ulcerative Gingivitis—Tyldesley WR. A Colour Atlas of Orofacial Diseases. 2nd ed. London: Wolfe Medical 
Publications, 1991; Gingival Hyperplasia—Courtesy of Dr. James Cottone; Pregnancy Tumor—Langlais RP, Miller CS. Color Atlas of Common Oral Diseases. 
Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1992. Used with permission.
(continued)
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
296 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 7-24 Findings in the Gums and Teeth (Continued )
Attrition of Teeth; Recession of Gums
In many elderly people, the chewing surfaces of the teeth are worn down by 
repetitive use so that the yellow-brown dentin becomes exposed—a process 
called attrition. Note also the recession of the gums, which has exposed the 
roots of the teeth, giving a “long in the tooth” appearance.
Erosion of Teeth
Teeth may be eroded by chemical action. Note here the erosion of the enamel 
from the lingual surfaces of the upper incisors, exposing the yellow-brown 
dentin. This results from recurrent regurgitation of stomach contents, as in 
bulimia.
Abrasion of Teeth with Notching
The biting surface of the teeth may become abraded or notched by recurrent 
trauma, such as holding nails or opening bobby pins between the teeth. 
Unlike Hutchinson teeth, the sides of these teeth show normal contours; size 
and spacing of the teeth are unaffected.
Hutchinson Teeth in Congenital Syphilis
Hutchinson teeth are smaller and more widely spaced than normal and are 
notched on their biting surfaces. The sides of the teeth taper toward the 
biting edges. The upper central incisors of the permanent (not the deciduous) 
teeth are most often affected. These teeth are a sign of congenital syphilis.
Sources of photos: Attrition of Teeth, Erosion of Teeth—Langlais RP, Miller CS. Color Atlas of Common Oral Diseases. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1992. Used with 
permission; Abrasion of Teeth, Hutchinson Teeth—Robinson HBG, Miller AS. Colby, Kerr, and Robinson’s Color Atlas of Oral Pathology. Philadelphia, PA: JB Lippincott, 
1990.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
297
Table 7-25 Findings in or Under the Tongue
Geographic Tongue. In this benign condition, the dorsum 
shows scattered smooth red areas denuded of papillae. Together 
with the normal rough and coated areas, they give a maplike 
pattern that changes over time.
Black Hairy Tongue. Note the “hairy” yellowish to brown 
and black hypertrophied and elongated papillae on the 
tongue’s dorsum. This benign condition is associated with 
Candida and bacterial overgrowth, antibiotic therapy, and 
poor dental hygiene. It also may occur spontaneously.
Fissured Tongue. Fissures appear with increasing age, 
sometimes termed furrowed tongue. Food debris may accumu-
late in the crevices and become irritating, but a ﬁssured tongue 
is benign.
Smooth Tongue (Atrophic Glossitis). A smooth and 
often sore tongue that has lost its papillae, sometimes just in 
patches, suggests a deﬁciency in riboﬂavin, niacin, folic acid, 
vitamin B12, pyridoxine, or iron, or treatment with chemo-
therapy.
Candidiasis. Note the thick white coating from Candida in-
fection. The raw red surface is where the coat was scraped off. 
Infection may also occur without the white coating. It is seen 
in immunosuppression from chemotherapy or prednisone 
therapy.
Oral Hairy Leukoplakia. These whitish raised asymp-
tomatic plaques with a feathery or corrugated pattern occur 
most often on the sides of the tongue. Unlike candidiasis, 
these areas cannot be scraped off. This condition is caused 
by Epstein-Barr virus infection and is seen in HIV and AIDS 
infection.
(continued)
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
298 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 7-25 Findings in or Under the Tongue (Continued )
Varicose Veins. Small purplish or blue-black round swell-
ings appear under the tongue with age. These dilatations of the 
lingual veins have no clinical signiﬁcance.
Aphthous Ulcer (Canker Sore). A painful, shallow 
whitish-gray oval ulceration surrounded by a halo of red-
dened mucosa. It may be single or multiple and may also 
occur on the gingiva and oral mucosa. It heals in 7–10 days, 
but may recur, as in Bechet disease.
Mucous Patch of Syphilis. This painless lesion of second-
ary syphilis is highly infectious. It is slightly raised, oval, and 
covered by a grayish membrane. It may be multiple and occur 
elsewhere in the mouth.
Leukoplakia. With this persisting painless white patch in 
the oral mucosa, the undersurface of the tongue appears 
painted white. Patches of any size raise the possibility of squa-
mous cell carcinoma and require biopsy.
Tori Mandibulares. Rounded bony growths on the inner 
surfaces of the mandible are typically bilateral, asymptomatic, 
and harmless.
Carcinoma, Floor of the Mouth. This ulcerated lesion 
is in a common location for carcinoma. Medially, note the red-
dened area of mucosa, called erythroplakia, that is suspicious 
for malignancy and should be biopsied.
Sources of photos: Fissured Tongue, Candidiasis, Mucous Patch, Leukoplakia, Carcinoma—Robinson HBG, Miller AS. Colby, Kerr, and Robinson’s Color Atlas of Oral 
Pathology. Philadelphia, PA: JB Lippincott, 1990; Smooth Tongue—Courtesy of Dr. R. A. Cawson, from Cawson RA. Oral Pathology, 1st ed. London: Gower Medical 
Publishing, 1987; Geographic Tongue—The Wellcome Trust, National Medical Slide Bank, London, UK; Hairy Leukoplakia—Ioachim HL. Textbook and Atlas of 
Disease Associated With Acquired Immune Deﬁciency Syndrome. London: Gower Medical Publishing, 1989; Varicose Veins—Neville B, et al. Color Atlas of Clinical Oral 
Pathology. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1991. Used with permission.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
299
Table 7-26 Thyroid Enlargement and Function
Diffuse Enlargement. Includes the isthmus and lateral 
lobes; there are no discretely palpable nodules. Causes include 
Graves disease, Hashimoto thyroiditis, and endemic goiter.
Single Nodule. May be a cyst, a benign tumor, or one 
nodule within a multinodular gland. It raises the question of 
malignancy. Risk factors are prior irradiation, hardness, rapid 
growth, ﬁxation to surrounding tissues, enlarged cervical 
nodes, and occurrence in men.
 
 Multinodular Goiter. An enlarged thyroid gland with two or more nodules suggests 
a metabolic rather than a neoplastic process. Positive family history and continuing 
nodular enlargement are additional risk factors for malignancy.
Table 7-27 Symptoms and Signs of Thyroid Dysfunction
Hyperthyroidism
Hypothyroidism
Symptoms
Nervousness
Weight loss despite increased appetite
Excessive sweating and heat intolerance
Palpitations
Frequent bowel movements
Tremor and proximal muscle weakness
Fatigue, lethargy
Modest weight gain with anorexia
Dry, coarse skin and cold intolerance
Swelling of face, hands, and legs
Constipation
Weakness, muscle cramps, arthralgias, paresthesias, 
impaired memory and hearing
Signs
Warm, smooth, moist skin
With Graves disease, eye signs such as stare, lid 
lag, and exophthalmos
Increased systolic and decreased diastolic blood 
pressures
Tachycardia or atrial ﬁbrillation
Hyperdynamic cardiac pulsations with an 
accentuated S1
Tremor and proximal muscle weakness
Dry, coarse, cool skin, sometimes yellowish from carotene, 
with nonpitting myxedema and loss of hair
Periorbital myxedema
Low-pitched speech
Decreased systolic and increased diastolic blood pressures
Bradycardia and, in late stages, hypothermia
Sometimes decreased intensity of heart sounds
Prolonged relaxation phase during ankle reﬂex
Impaired memory, mixed hearing loss, somnolence, 
peripheral neuropathy, carpal tunnel syndrome
Sources: Siminoski K. Does this patient have a goiter? JAMA. 1995;273:813. McDermott MT. In the clinic: hypothyroidism. Ann Intern Med. 2009;151:ITC6–1; 
McDermott MT. In the clinic: hyperthyroidism. Ann Intern Med. 2012;157:ITC1–1. Franklyn JA. Subclinical thyroid disorders—consequences and implications  
for treatment. Ann Endocrinol. 2007;68:229.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
300 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
References
 1. Lipton RB, Bigal ME, Diamond M, et al. Migraine prevalence, dis-
ease burden, and the need for preventative therapy. Neurology. 
2007;68:343.
 2. Lipton RB, Stewart WF, Seymour D, et al. Prevalence and burden 
of migraine in the United States: data from the American Migraine 
Study II. Headache. 2001;41:646.
 3. Hale N, Paauw DS. Diagnosis and treatment of headache in the 
ambulatory care setting: a review of classic presentations and new 
considerations in diagnosis and management. Med Clin North Am. 
2014;98:505.
 4. Lipton RB, Bigal ME, Steiner TJ, et al. Classiﬁcation of primary 
headaches. Neurology. 2004;63:427.
 5. Headache Classiﬁcation Committee of the International Headache 
Society (IHS). The International Classiﬁcation of Headache Disor-
ders, 3rd edition (beta version). Cephalalgia. 2013;33:629.
 6. Hainer B, Matheson E. Approach to acute headache in adults. Am 
Fam Physician. 2013;87:682.
 7. Sun-Edelstein C, Bigal ME, Rappoport AM. Chronic migraine and 
medication overuse headache: clarifying the current International 
Headache Society classiﬁcation criteria. Cephalalgia. 2009;29:445.
 8. Fumal A, Schoenen J. Tension-type headache: current research 
and clinical management. Lancet Neurol. 2008;7:70.
 9. Olesen J, Steiner T, Bousser MG, et al. Proposals for new standard-
ized general diagnostic criteria for the secondary headaches. Ceph-
alalgia. 2009;29:1331.
 10. Schwedt TJ, Matharu MS, Dodick DW. Thunderclap headache. 
Lancet Neurol. 2006;5:621.
 11. McGregor EA. In the clinic: migraine. Ann Intern Med. 2013; 
159:ITC5–1.
 12. World Health Organization. Medical Eligibility Criteria For Contra-
ceptive Use. 4th ed. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010. 
Available at: http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/
family_planning/9789241563888/en/. Accessed March 26, 2015.
 13. Spector JT, Kahn SR, Jones MR, et al. Migraine headache and isch-
emic stroke risk: an updated meta-analysis. Am J Med. 2010; 
123:612.
 14. Harris M, Kaneshiro B. An evidence-based approach to hormonal 
contraception and headaches. Contraception. 2009;80:417.
 15. Kurth T, Slomke MA, Kase CS, et al. Migraine, headache, and the 
risk of stroke in women: a prospective study. Neurology. 2005;64: 
1020.
 16. Dodick DW. Chronic daily headache. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:158.
 17. Gardner K. Genetics of migraine: an update. Headache. 2006; 
46:S19.
 18. Shingleton BJ, O’Donoghue MW. Blurred vision. N Engl J Med. 
2000;343:556.
 19. Patel K, Patel S. Angle-closure glaucoma. Dis Mon. 2014;60:254.
 20. Hollands H, Johnson D, Hollands S, et al. Do ﬁndings on routine 
examination identify patients at risk for primary open-angle glau-
coma? The rational clinical examination systematic review. JAMA. 
2013;309:2035.
 21. Graves J, Balcer LJ. Eye disorders in patients with multiple sclero-
sis: natural history and management. Clin Ophthalmol. 2010;4: 
1409.
 22. Dooley MC, Foroozan R. Optic neuritis. J Ophthalmic Vis Res. 
2010;5:182.
 23. Balcer LJ. Optic neuritis. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:1273.
 24. Noble J, Chaudhary V. Age-related macular degeneration. CMAJ. 
2010;182:1759.
 25. Hollands H, Johnson D, Brox AC, et al. Acute-onset ﬂoaters and 
ﬂashes: is this patient at risk for retinal detachment? JAMA. 
2009;302:2243.
 26. Meltzer DI. Painless red eye. Am Fam Physician. 2013;88:533.
 27. Singh M, Sanborn A. Painful red eye. Am Fam Physician. 2013; 
87:127.
 28. Uy J, Forciea MA. In the clinic. Hearing loss. Ann Intern Med. 
2013;158:ITC4–1.
 29. Raviv D, Dror AA, Avraham KB. Hearing loss: a common disorder 
caused by many rare alleles. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010;1214:168.
 30. Pichichero ME. Otitis media. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2013;60:391.
 31. Baguley D, McFerran D, Hall D. Tinnitus. Lancet. 2013 382(9904): 
1600.
 32. Chan Y. Differential diagnosis of dizziness. Curr Opin Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg. 2009;17:200.
 33. Wheatley LM, Togias A. Clinical Practice. Allergic rhinitis. N Engl 
J Med. 2015;372:456.
 34. Foden N, Burgess C, Shepherd K, et al. A guide to the manage-
ment of acute rhinosinusitis in primary care: management strategy 
based on best evidence and recent European guidelines. Br J Gen 
Pract. 2013;63:611.
 35. Aring AM, Chan MM. Acute rhinosinusitis in adults. Am Fam Phy-
sician. 2011;83:1057.
 36. Dykewicz MS, Hamilos DL. Rhinitis and sinusitis. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol. 2010;125(2 Suppl 2):S103.
 37. McIsaac WJ, Kellner JD, Aufricht P, et al. Empirical validation of 
guidelines for the management of pharyngitis in children and 
adults. JAMA. 2004;291:1587.
 38. Shulman ST, Bisno AL, Clegg HW, et al. Clinical practice guideline 
for the diagnosis and management of Group A Streptococcal phar-
yngitis: 2012 Update by the Infectious Diseases Society of Amer-
ica. Clin Infect Dis. 2012;55:1279.
 39. Wessels MR. Streptococcal pharyngitis. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:648.
 40. Schwartz SR, Cohen SM, Dailey SH, et al. Clinical practice guide-
line: hoarseness (dysphonia). Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2009; 
141(3 Suppl 2):S1.
 41. Vitale S, Cotch MF, Sperduto RD. Prevalence of visual impairment 
in the United States. JAMA. 2006;295:2158.
 42. Chou CF, Cotch MF, Vitale S, et al. Age-related eye diseases and 
visual impairment among U.S. adults. Am J Prev Med. 2013; 
45:29.
 43. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for impaired visual 
acuity in older adults: recommendation statement. Ann Intern 
Med. 2009;151:37, W10.
 44. American Academy of Ophthalmology Preferred Practice Patterns 
Committee. Preferred Practice Pattern Guideline. Comprehensive 
Adult Medical Eye Evaluation. San Francisco, CA: American Acad-
emy of Ophthalmology; 2010. Available at http://one.aao.org/
preferred-practice-pattern/comprehensive-adult-medical-eye-
evaluationoctobe. Accessed March 28, 2015.
 45. Vajaranant TS, Wu S, Torres M, et al. The changing face of primary 
open-angle glaucoma in the United States: demographic and geo-
graphic changes from 2011 to 2050. Am J Ophthalmol. 2012; 
154:303.
 46. Moyer VA. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation 
Statement: Screening for glaucoma. Ann Intern Med. 2013;159:484.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  7 |
 
The Head and Neck 
301
REFERENCES
 47. American Academy of Ophthalmology, Screening for Diabetic 
Retinopathy 2014—Information Statement. November 2006. 
Updated October 2014. At http://one.aao.org/clinical-statement/
screening-diabetic-retinopathy–june-2012. Accessed March 23, 
2015.
 48. Roberts JE. Ultraviolet radiation as a risk factor for cataract and 
macular degeneration. Eye Contact Lens. 2011;37:246.
 49. Ventry IM, Weinstein BE. Identiﬁcation of elderly people with 
hearing problems. ASHA. 1983;25:37.
 50. Moyer VA. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation 
statement: Screening for hearing loss in older adults. Ann Intern 
Med. 2012;157:655.
 51. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Untreated dental car-
ies (cavities) in children ages 2–19, United States. Updated Febru-
ary 2011. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/Features/dsUntreated 
CavitiesKids/. Accessed March 28, 2015.
 52. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Oral health for adults. 
Updated July 2013. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/oralhealth/
children_adults/adults.htm. Accessed March 28, 2015.
 53. Eke PI, Dye BA, Wei L, et al. Prevalence of periodontitis in adults 
in the United States: 2009 and 2010. J Dent Res. 2012;91:914.
 54. Siegel R, Ma J, Zou Z, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2014. CA Cancer 
J Clin. 2014;64:9.
 55. Moyer VA. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommenda-
tion statement: Screening for oral cancer. Ann Intern Med. 2014; 
160:55.
 56. Cleveland JL, Junger ML, Saraiya M, et al. The connection between 
human papillomavirus and oropharyngeal squamous cell carcino-
mas in the United States: implications for dentistry. J Am Dent 
Assoc. 2011;142:915.
 57. Gillison ML, Broutian T, Pickard RK, et al. Prevalence of oral HPV 
infection in the United States, 2009–2010. JAMA. 2012;307:693.
 58. Rethman MP, Carpenter W, Cohen EE, et al. Evidence-based clin-
ical recommendations regarding screening for oral squamous cell 
carcinomas. J Am Dent Assoc. 2010;141:509.
 59. Harper RA. Basic Ophthalmology. 9th ed. San Francisco, CA: Amer-
ican Academy of Ophthalmology; 2010.
 60. Kerr NM, Chew SS, Eady EK, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of con-
frontation visual ﬁeld tests. Neurology. 2010;74:1184.
 61. McGee S. Evidence Based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. St. Louis, MO: 
Elsevier; 2012:516–520.
 62. Goodwin D. Homonymous hemianopia: challenges and solutions. 
Clin Ophthalmol. 2014;8:1919.
 63. McGee S. Evidence Based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. St. Louis, MO: 
Elsevier; 2012:161.
 64. Morgan WH, Lind CR, Kain S. Retinal vein pulsation is in phase 
with intracranial pressure and not intraocular pressure. Invest 
Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2012;53:4676.
 65. Jacks AS, Miller NR. Spontaneous retinal venous pulsation: aetiol-
ogy and signiﬁcance. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2004;74:7.
 66. Bagai A, Thavendiranathan P, Detsky AS. Does this patient have 
hearing impairment? JAMA. 2006;295:416.
 67. McShefferty D, Whitmer WM, Swan IR, et al. The effect of experi-
ence on the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of the whispered voice test: 
a diagnostic accuracy study. BMJ Open. 2013;3(4). doi: 10.1136/
bmjopen-2012–002394.
 68. Pirozzo S, Papinczak T, Glasziou P. Whispered voice test for 
screening for hearing impairment in adults and children: system-
atic review. BMJ. 2003;327:967.
 69. Eekhof JA, de Bock GH, de Laat JA, et al. The whispered voice: the 
best test for screening for hearing impairment in general practice? 
Br J Gen Pract. 1996;46:473.
 70. McGee S. Evidence Based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. St. Louis, MO: 
Elsevier; 2012:190.
 71. Kaplan A. Canadian guidelines for acute bacterial rhinosinusitis: 
clinical summary. Can Fam Physician. 2014;60:227.
 72. Neville BW, Day TA. Oral cancer and precancerous lesions. CA 
Cancer J Clin. 2002;52:195.
 73. Brocklehurst P, Kujan O, O’Malley LA, et al. Screening pro-
grammes for the early detection and prevention of oral cancer. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;(11):CD004150.
 74. Lestón J, Dios DP. Diagnostic clinical aids in oral cancer. Oral 
Oncol. 2010;46:418.
 75. Gonsalves WC, Chi AC, Neville BW. Common oral lesions: Part I. 
Superﬁcial mucosal lesions; Part II: Masses and neoplasia. Am 
Fam Physician. 2007;75:501, 507.
 76. Reamy BV, Derby R, Bunt CW. Common tongue conditions in 
primary care. Am Fam Physician. 2010;81(5):627.
 77. Kociolek LK, Shulman ST. In the clinic: pharyngitis. Ann Intern 
Med. 2012;157:ITC3–1.
 78. Bitner MD, Capes JP, Houry DE. Images in emergency medicine. 
Adult epiglottitis. Ann Emerg Med. 2007;49:560.
 79. Bahn RS, Castro MR. Approach to the patient with nontoxic mul-
tinodular goiter. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011;96:1202.
 80. Syrenicz A, Koziołek M, Ciechanowicz A, et al. New insights into 
the diagnosis of nodular goiter. Thyroid Res. 2014;7:6.
 81. Siminoski K. Does this patient have a goiter? JAMA. 1995;273:813.
 82. White ML, Doherty GM, Gauger PG. Evidence-based surgical 
management of substernal goiter. World J Surg. 2008;32:1285.
 83. De Filippis EA, Sabet A, Sun MR, et al. Pemberton’s sign: explained 
nearly 70 years later. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014;99:1949.
 84. Almandoz JP, Gharib H. Hypothyroidism: etiology, diagnosis, and 
management. Med Clin North Am. 2012;96:203.
 85. Garber JR, Cobin RH, Gharib H, et al. Clinical practice guidelines 
for hypothyroidism in adults: cosponsored by the American Asso-
ciation of Clinical Endocrinologists and the American Thyroid 
Association.; American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists 
and American Thyroid Association Taskforce on Hypothyroidism 
in Adults. Endocr Pract. 2012;18:988.
 86. McDermott MT. In the clinic: hypothyroidism. Ann Intern Med. 
2009;151:ITC6–1.
 87. Bahn RS, Burch HB, Cooper DS, et al. American Thyroid Associa-
tion; American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists. Hyperthy-
roidism and other causes of thyrotoxicosis: management guidelines 
of the American Thyroid Association and American Association of 
Clinical Endocrinologists. Endocr Pract. 2011;17:456.
 88. McDermott MT. In the clinic: hyperthyroidism. Ann Intern Med. 
2012;157:ITC1–1.
 89. Franklyn JA. Subclinical thyroid disorders—consequences and 
implications for treatment. Ann Endocrinol. 2007;68:229.
 90. Durante C, Costante G, Lucisano G, et al. The natural history of 
benign thyroid nodules. JAMA. 2015;313:926.
 91. Popoveniuc G, Jonklaas J. Thyroid nodules. Med Clin North Am. 
2012;96:329.
 92. Bahn RS. Mechanisms of disease: Graves’ ophthalmopathy. N Engl 
J Med. 2010;362:726.
 93. Phelps PO, Williams K. Thyroid eye disease for the primary care 
physician. Dis Mon. 2014;60:292.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
302 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
 94. Bartalena L, Tanda LM. Graves’ ophthalmopathy. N Engl J Med. 
2009;380:994.
 95. Birkholz ES, Oetting TA. Kayser Fleischer Ring: A systems based 
review of the ophthalmologist’s role in the diagnosis of Wilson’s 
disease. EyeRounds.org. July 28 2009. Available at http://webeye.
ophth.uiowa.edu/eyeforum/cases/97-kayser-ﬂeischer-ring-wil-
sons-disease.htm. Accessed March 29, 2015.
 96. Sullivan CA, Chopdar A, Shun-Shin GA. Dense Kayser-Fleischer 
ring in asymptomatic Wilson’s disease (hepatolenticular degen-
eration). Br J Ophthalmol. 2002;86:114.
 97. Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study Research Group. 
Grading diabetic retinopathy from stereoscopic color fundus 
photographs—an extension of the modiﬁed Airlie House classiﬁ-
cation. Ophthalmology. 1991;98:786.
 98. Antonetti DA, Klein R, Gardner TW. Diabetic retinopathy—
mechanisms of disease. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:1237.
 99. McGee S. Evidence Based Physical Diagnosis, 3rd ed. St. Louis, MO: 
Elsevier; 2012:208.
 100. McGee S. Evidence Based Physical Diagnosis, 3rd ed. St. Louis, MO: 
Elsevier; 2012:163–179
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  8 |
 
The Thorax and Lungs 
303
Study the anatomy of the chest wall, identifying the structures illustrated 
(Fig. 8-1). Note that the number of the intercostal space between two ribs is the 
same number as the rib above it.
C H A P T E R8
The Thorax and Lungs
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate 
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 9: Thorax and Lungs)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com
Manubrium of
sternum
Body of sternum
Xiphoid process
2nd costal 
cartilage
2nd rib 
interspace
Costochondral 
junctions
Suprasternal notch
Sternal angle
2nd rib
Costal angle
F I G U R E  8 - 1 .  Chest wall anatomy.
Anatomy and Physiology
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
304 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Locating Findings on the Chest
Describe chest ﬁndings in two dimensions: along the vertical axis and around the 
circumference of the chest.
Vertical Axis. To locate ﬁndings in the thorax, learn to number the ribs and 
intercostal spaces (Fig. 8-2). Place your ﬁnger in the hollow curve of the supra-
sternal notch, then move it down approximately 5 cm to the horizontal bony 
ridge where the manubrium joins the body of the sternum, called the sternal 
angle or the angle of Louis. Directly adjacent to the sternal angle is the 2nd rib and 
its costal cartilage. From here, using two ﬁngers, “walk down” the interspaces on 
an oblique line, illustrated by the red numbers below. (Note that the ribs at the 
lower edge of the sternum may be too close together to count correctly.) To count 
the intercostal spaces in a woman, displace the breast laterally or palpate more 
medially. Avoid pressing too hard on the tender breast tissue.
Sternal angle
(Angle of Louis)
2nd rib
Suprasternal notch
2
1
1
2
3
3
4
T4
4
5
5
6
6
7
7
8
9
8
9
10
12
11
F I G U R E  8 - 2 .  Anterior ribs and intercostal spaces.
Note that the costal cartilages of the ﬁrst seven ribs articulate with the sternum; 
the cartilages of the 8th, 9th, and 10th ribs articulate with the costal cartilages 
just above them. The 11th and 12th ribs, the “ﬂoating ribs,” have no anterior 
attachments. The cartilaginous tip of the 11th rib usually can be felt laterally, and 
Note special landmarks: 
●  2nd intercostal space for needle 
insertion for tension pneumothorax.
●  4th intercostal space for chest tube 
insertion.
●  T4 for the lower margin of an endo-
tracheal tube on a chest x-ray.
Neurovascular structures run along 
the inferior margin of each rib, so  
needles and tubes should be placed 
just at the superior rib margins.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  8 |
 
The Thorax and Lungs 
305
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
the 12th rib may be felt posteriorly. When palpated, costal cartilages and ribs feel 
identical.
Posteriorly, the 12th rib is a starting point for counting ribs and intercostal spaces 
and provides an alternative to the anterior approach (Fig. 8-3). With the ﬁngers 
of one hand, press in and up against the lower border of the 12th rib; then “walk 
up” the intercostal spaces, numbered in red below, or follow a more oblique line 
up and around to the front of the chest.
2
1
1
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
6
6
7
7
8
9
10
12
11
8
9
10
11
Spinous process of C7
Spinous process of T1
Inferior angle
of scapula
7th rib
F I G U R E  8 - 3 .  Posterior ribs and intercostal spaces.
The inferior tip of the scapula is another useful bony landmark; it usually lies at 
the level of the 7th rib or interspace.
The spinous processes of the vertebrae are also useful landmarks. When the 
neck is ﬂexed forward, the most protruding process is usually the vertebra of 
C7. If two processes are equally prominent, they are C7 and T1. You can often 
palpate and count the processes below them, especially when the spine is 
ﬂexed.
Note the T7–T8 intercostal space as a 
landmark for thoracentesis with nee-
dle insertion immediately superior to 
the 8th rib.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
306 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Circumference of the Chest. Visual-
ize a series of vertical lines as shown in 
Figures 8-4 through 8-6. The midsternal 
and vertebral lines are easily demarcated 
and reproducible; the others are visual-
ized. The midclavicular line drops verti-
cally from the midpoint of the clavicle. To 
ﬁnd it, accurately identify both ends of 
the clavicle (see p. 646).
The anterior and posterior axillary lines 
drop vertically from the anterior and pos-
terior axillary folds, the muscle masses that 
border the axilla. The midaxillary line 
drops from the apex of the axilla.
Posteriorly, the vertebral line overlies the 
spinous processes of the vertebrae. The 
scapular line drops from the inferior angle 
of the scapula.
Midsternal
line
Midclavicular
line
Anterior
axillary
line
F I G U R E  8 - 4 .  Midsternal, midclavicular, and 
anterior axillary lines.
Anterior
axillary
line
Posterior
axillary
line
Midaxillary
line
F I G U R E  8 - 5 .  Anterior, midaxillary, and 
posterior lines.
Scapular 
line
Vertebral
line
F I G U R E  8 - 6 .  Vertebral and scapular lines.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  8 |
 
The Thorax and Lungs 
307
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Lungs, Fissures, and Lobes. Picture the lungs and their ﬁssures and lobes 
on the chest wall. Anteriorly, the apex of each lung rises approximately 2 to 4 cm 
above the inner third of the clavicle (Fig. 8-7). The lower border of the lung 
crosses the 6th rib at the midclavicular line and the 8th rib at the midaxillary line. 
Posteriorly, the lower border of the lung lies at about the level of the T10 spinous 
process (Fig. 8-8). On inspiration, it descends in the chest cavity during contrac-
tion and descent of the diaphragm.
Apex 
of lung
Horizontal
fissure
Oblique
fissure
RUL
RML
RLL
LUL
LLL
F I G U R E  8 - 7 .  The anterior lungs.
LUL
LLL
RUL
RLL
Spinous
process
of T3
Inspiratory
descent
F I G U R E  8 - 8 .  The posterior lungs.
Each lung is divided roughly in half by an oblique (major) ﬁssure. This ﬁssure may 
be approximated by a string that runs from the T3 spinous process obliquely 
down and around the chest to the 6th rib at the midclavicular line (Fig. 8-9). The 
right lung is further divided by the horizontal (minor) ﬁssure. Anteriorly, this ﬁs-
sure runs close to the 4th rib and meets the oblique ﬁssure in the midaxillary line 
near the 5th rib. The right lung is thus divided into upper, middle, and lower lobes 
(RUL, RML, and RLL). The left lung has only two lobes, upper and lower (LUL, LLL) 
(Fig. 8-10). Each lung receives deoxygenated blood from its pulmonary artery. 
Oxygenated blood returns from each lung to the left atrium via the pulmonary 
veins.
RUL
RML
RLL
F I G U R E  8 - 9 .  Right lung lobes 
and ﬁssures.
LUL
LLL
Left oblique
fissure
F I G U R E  8 - 1 0 .  Left lung lobes and ﬁssures.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
308 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Locations on the Chest. Learn the general anatomical terms used to locate 
chest ﬁndings.
Anatomic Descriptors of the Chest
Supraclavicular—above the clavicles
Infraclavicular—below the clavicles
Interscapular—between the scapulae
Infrascapular—below the scapulae
Bases of the lungs—the lowermost portions
Upper, middle, and lower lung ﬁelds
Usually, physical examination ﬁndings correlate with the underlying lobes. Signs 
in the right upper lung ﬁeld, for example, almost certainly originate in the right 
upper lobe. However, signs found laterally in the right middle lung ﬁeld could 
come from any of the three different lobes.
The Trachea and Major Bronchi (the Tracheobronchial Tree). Breath 
sounds over the trachea and bronchi have a harsher quality than those over the 
denser lung parenchyma. Learn the locations of these structures. The trachea 
bifurcates into its mainstem bronchi at the levels of the sternal angle anteriorly 
and the T4 spinous process posteriorly (Figs. 8-11 and 8-12). The right main 
bronchus is wider, shorter, and more vertical than the left main bronchus and 
directly enters the hilum of the lung. The left main bronchus extends inferolater-
ally from below the aortic arch and anterior to the esophagus and thoracic aorta 
and then enters the lung hilum. Each main bronchus then divides into lobar then 
into segmental bronchi and bronchioles, terminating in the sac-like pulmonary alve-
oli, where gas exchange occurs.
Trachea
Left main
bronchus
Right main
bronchus
F I G U R E  8 - 1 1 .  Trachea and mainstem 
bronchi, anterior view.
Trachea
Left main
bronchus
Right main
bronchus
F I G U R E  8 - 1 2 .  Trachea and mainstem 
bronchi, posterior view.
The Pleurae. Two continuous pleural surfaces, or serous membranes, sepa-
rate the lungs from the chest wall. The visceral pleura covers the outer surface 
of the lungs. The parietal pleura lines the pleural cavity along the inner rib cage 
and the upper surface of the diaphragm. Between the visceral and parietal 
pleura is the pleural space, containing serous pleural ﬂuid. The surface tension 
of the pleural ﬂuid keeps the lung in contact with the thoracic wall, allowing 
the lung to expand and contract during respiration. The visceral pleura lacks 
Aspiration pneumonia is more common 
in the right middle and lower lobe 
because the right main bronchus is 
more vertical.
Accumulations of pleural fluid, or pleu-
ral effusions, may be transudates, seen 
in heart failure, cirrhosis, and nephrotic 
syndrome, or exudates, seen in numer-
ous conditions including pneumonia, 
malignancy, pulmonary embolism, 
tuberculosis, and pancreatitis.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  8 |
 
The Thorax and Lungs 
309
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
sensory nerves, but the parietal pleura is richly innervated by the intercostal 
and phrenic nerves.
Breathing. Breathing is primarily automatic, controlled by respiratory cen-
ters in the brainstem that generate the neuronal drive for the muscles of res-
piration. The principal muscle of inspiration is the diaphragm. During 
inspiration, the diaphragm contracts, descends in the chest, and expands the 
thoracic cavity, compressing the abdominal contents and pushing out the 
abdominal wall. The muscles in the rib cage also expand the thorax, especially 
the scalenes, which run from the cervical vertebrae to the ﬁrst two ribs, and 
the parasternal intercostal muscles, or parasternals, which cross obliquely 
from the sternum to the ribs. As the thorax expands, intrathoracic pressure 
decreases, drawing air through the tracheobronchial tree into the alveoli, or 
distal air sacs, ﬁlling the expanding lungs. Oxygen diffuses into the adjacent 
pulmonary capillaries as carbon dioxide exchanges from the blood into the 
alveoli.
During expiration, the chest wall and lungs recoil and the diaphragm relaxes 
and rises passively. Abdominal muscles assist in expiration. As air ﬂows out-
ward, the chest and abdomen return to their resting positions.
Normal breathing is quiet and easy—barely audible near the open mouth as 
a faint whish. When a healthy person lies supine, the breathing movements 
of the thorax are relatively slight. By contrast, the abdominal movements are 
usually easy to see. In the sitting position, movements of the thorax become 
more prominent.
During exercise and in certain diseases, extra work is required to breathe, and 
accessory muscles are recruited; the sternocleidomastoids (SCM) and the sca-
lenes may become visible (Fig. 8-13). 
Irritation of the parietal pleura pro-
duces pleuritic pain with deep inspira-
tion in viral pleurisy, pneumonia, 
pulmonary embolism, pericarditis, and 
collagen vascular diseases.
Sternal
head
Clavicular
head
of the sternocleidomastoid
muscle
Scalene muscles
F I G U R E  8 - 1 3 .  Accessory muscles in the neck.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
310 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Common or Concerning Symptoms
● Chest pain
● Shortness of breath (dyspnea)
● Wheezing
● Cough
● Blood-streaked sputum (hemoptysis)
● Daytime sleepiness or snoring and disordered sleep
Chest Pain. Complaints of chest pain or chest discomfort raise concerns about 
the heart but often arise from other structures in the thorax and lungs. To assess 
this symptom, you must pursue a dual investigation of both thoracic and car-
diac causes. Sources of chest pain are listed below. For this important symptom, 
keep all of these possibilities in mind.
See Table 8-1, Chest Pain,  
pp. 330–331.
Sources of Chest Pain and Related Causes
The myocardium
Angina pectoris, myocardial infarction, 
myocarditis
The pericardium
Pericarditis
The aorta
Aortic dissection
The trachea and large bronchi
Bronchitis
The parietal pleura
Pericarditis, pneumonia, pneumothorax, 
pleural eﬀusion, pulmonary embolus
The chest wall, including the muscu-
loskeletal and neurologic systems
Costochondritis, herpes zoster
The esophagus
Gastroesophageal reﬂux disease, esopha-
geal spasm, esophageal tear
Extrathoracic structures such as the 
neck, gallbladder, and stomach
Cervical arthritis, biliary colic, gastritis
This section focuses on pulmonary complaints, including chest wall symptoms, 
difﬁculty breathing (dyspnea), wheezing, cough, coughing up blood (hemoptysis), 
and daytime sleepiness or snoring and disordered sleep. For symptoms of exer-
tional chest pain, palpitations, shortness of breath when supine (orthopnea) or at 
night relieved by sitting upright (paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea), and edema, see 
Chapter 9, The Cardiovascular System (see pp. 355–358).
Your initial questions should be as open-ended as possible. “Do you have any 
discomfort or unpleasant feelings in your chest?” Ask the patient to point to the 
location of the pain in the chest. Watch for any gestures as the patient describes 
the pain. Elicit all seven attributes of chest pain to distinguish among its various 
causes (see p. 79).
Chest pain is reported in one in four 
patients with panic and anxiety  
disorders.1–3
A clenched fist over the sternum sug-
gests angina pectoris; a finger point-
ing to a tender spot on the chest wall 
suggests musculoskeletal pain; a hand 
moving from the neck to the epigas-
trium suggests heartburn.
The Health History
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  8 |
 
The Thorax and Lungs 
311
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Lung tissue has no pain ﬁbers. Pain in conditions such as pneumonia or pulmo-
nary infarction usually arises from inﬂammation of the adjacent parietal pleura. 
Muscle strain from prolonged recurrent coughing or costochondral inﬂamma-
tion may also be responsible. The pericardium also has few pain ﬁbers. The pain 
of pericarditis stems from inﬂammation of the adjacent parietal pleura. Extrapul-
monary sources of chest pain include gastroesophageal reﬂux disease and anxi-
ety, but the mechanism remains obscure.1–4
Shortness of Breath (Dyspnea) and Wheezing. Shortness of breath, or dys-
pnea, is a painless but uncomfortable awareness of breathing that is inappropri-
ate to the level of exertion.5 Thoroughly assess this telltale symptom of cardiac 
and pulmonary disease.
Ask, “Have you had any difﬁculty breathing?” Find out if the symptom occurs at 
rest or with exertion, and how much exertion produces onset. Because of varia-
tions in age, body weight, and physical ﬁtness, there is no absolute scale for 
quantifying shortness of breath. Instead, make every effort to determine its 
severity based on the patient’s daily activities. How many steps or ﬂights of stairs 
can the patient climb before pausing for breath? What about carrying bags of 
groceries, vacuuming, or making the bed? Has shortness of breath altered the 
patient’s lifestyle and daily activities? How? Carefully elicit the timing and set-
ting, any associated symptoms, and relieving or aggravating factors.
Most patients relate shortness of breath to their level of activity. Anxious patients 
present a different picture. They may describe difﬁculty taking a deep enough 
breath, a smothering sensation with inability to get enough air, and paresthesias, 
which are sensations of tingling or “pins and needles” around the lips or in the 
extremities.
Wheezes are musical respiratory sounds that may be audible to the patient and 
to others.
Cough. Cough is a common symptom that ranges in signiﬁcance from trivial 
to ominous. Typically, cough is a reﬂex response to stimuli that irritate receptors 
in the larynx, trachea, or large bronchi. These stimuli include mucus, pus, blood, 
as well as external agents such as allergens, dust, foreign bodies, or even extremely 
hot or cold air. Other causes include inﬂammation of the respiratory mucosa, 
pneumonia, pulmonary edema, and compression of the bronchi or bronchioles 
from a tumor or enlarged peribronchial lymph nodes. Cough may also be car-
diovascular in origin.
The degree of dyspnea, combined 
with spirometry, is a key component 
of important chronic obstructive  
pulmonary disease (COPD) classifica-
tion systems that guide patient  
management.6–8
See Table 8-2, Dyspnea, pp. 332–333.
Anxious patients may have episodic 
dyspnea during both rest and exercise 
and also hyperventilation, or rapid 
shallow breathing.
Wheezing occurs in partial lower air-
way obstruction from secretions and 
tissue inflammation in asthma, or from 
a foreign body.9
See Table 8-3, Cough and Hemoptysis, 
p. 334.
Cough can signal left-sided heart  
failure.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
312 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
For complaints of cough, pursue a thorough assessment. Establish the duration. 
Is the cough acute, lasting less than 3 weeks; subacute, lasting 3 to 8 weeks; or 
chronic, more than 8 weeks?
Ask whether the cough is dry or produces sputum, or phlegm.
Ask the patient to describe the volume of any sputum and its color, odor, and 
consistency.
To help patients quantify volume, try a multiple-choice question. “How much do 
you think you cough up in 24 hours: a teaspoon, tablespoon, quarter cup, half 
cup, cupful?” If possible, ask the patient to cough into a tissue; inspect the 
phlegm, and note its characteristics. The symptoms associated with a cough 
often lead to its cause.
Hemoptysis. Hemoptysis refers to blood coughed up from the lower respira-
tory tract; it may vary from blood-streaked sputum to frank blood. For patients 
reporting hemoptysis, quantify the volume of blood produced, the setting and 
activity, and any associated symptoms. Hemoptysis is rare in infants, children, 
and adolescents.
Before using the term “hemoptysis,” try to conﬁrm the source of the bleeding. 
Blood or blood-streaked material may originate in the nose, mouth, pharynx, or 
gastrointestinal tract and is easily mislabeled. If vomited, it probably originates 
in the gastrointestinal tract. Occasionally, however, blood from the nasopharynx 
or the gastrointestinal tract is aspirated and then coughed out.
The most common cause of acute 
cough is viral upper respiratory infec-
tions. Also consider acute bronchitis, 
pneumonia, left-sided heart failure, 
asthma, foreign body, smoking, and 
ace-inhibitor therapy. Postinfectious 
cough, pertussis, acid reflux, bacterial 
sinusitis, and asthma can cause sub-
acute cough. Chronic cough is seen in 
postnasal drip, asthma, gastroesopha-
geal reflux, chronic bronchitis, and 
bronchiectasis.10–17
Mucoid sputum is translucent, white, 
or gray and seen in viral infections 
and cystic fibrosis; purulent sputum—
yellow or green—often accompanies 
bacterial pneumonia.
Foul-smelling sputum is present in 
anaerobic lung abscess, thick tena-
cious sputum in cystic fibrosis.
Large volumes of purulent sputum 
are present in bronchiectasis and lung 
abscess.
Diagnostically helpful symptoms 
include fever and productive cough in 
pneumonia; wheezing in asthma; and 
chest pain, dyspnea, and orthopnea 
in acute coronary syndromes.
See Table 8-3, Cough and Hemopty-
sis, p. 334. Causes include bronchitis; 
malignancy; and cystic fibrosis and, 
less commonly, bronchiectasis, mitral  
stenosis, Goodpasture syndrome, and 
Wegener granulomatosis. Massive 
hemoptysis (>200 cm3) may be  
life-threatening.18
Blood originating in the stomach is 
usually darker than blood from the 
respiratory tract and may be mixed 
with food particles.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  8 |
 
The Thorax and Lungs 
313
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Daytime Sleepiness or Snoring and Disordered Sleep. Patients may 
report excessive daytime sleepiness and fatigue. Ask about problems with snor-
ing, witnessed apneas (deﬁned as breathing cessation for ≥10 seconds), awaken-
ing with a choking sensation, or morning headache.
These symptoms, especially daytime 
sleepiness and snoring, are hallmarks 
of obstructive sleep apnea, commonly 
seen in patients with obesity, posterior 
malocclusion of the jaw (retrognathia), 
treatment-resistant hypertension, 
heart failure, atrial fibrillation, stroke, 
and type 2 diabetes. Mechanisms 
include instability of the brainstem 
respiratory center, disordered sleep 
arousal, disordered contraction of 
upper airway muscles (genioglossus 
malfunction), and anatomic changes 
contributing to airway collapse such as 
obesity, among others.19,20
Important Topics for Health Promotion  
and Counseling
● Tobacco cessation
● Lung cancer
● Immunizations—inﬂuenza and streptococcal pneumonia vaccines
Tobacco Cessation.
Despite declining smoking rates over the past several 
decades, 19% of U.S. adults continue to smoke, although the proportion of heavy 
smokers (>30 cigarettes per day) has dropped from about 13% to 8%.21 Nearly 
90% of smokers ﬁrst tried cigarettes by age 18 years.22 About 23% of high-school 
students and 7% of middle-school students use tobacco products, most often 
cigarettes or cigars, and use is higher among males than females. Smokers are 
more likely than nonsmokers to develop cardiovascular disease, emphysema, and 
lung cancer. Tobacco use is the leading preventable cause of premature death in 
the United States, accounting for one in ﬁve deaths each year.23 Half of all long-
term smokers die of smoking-related diseases, losing an average of 10 years of life.
Quitting smoking signiﬁcantly reduces disease risk. The facts below can be 
motivating when counseling smokers.
■ Quitting tobacco reduces the cardiovascular risk of heart attack and death 
from coronary heart disease by half after just 1 year.
■ Stroke risk is reduced within 2 to 5 years to the same level as a nonsmoker.
■ Lung cancer risk is cut in half after 10 years.
The United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) has given a grade A 
recommendation to screening all adults, particularly pregnant women, for tobacco 
use and providing tobacco cessation interventions to all who are using tobacco.24
Health Promotion and 
Counseling: Evidence and 
Recommendations
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
314 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
In addition to respiratory tract cancers, smoking contributes to cancers of the 
bladder, cervix, colon and rectum, kidney, oropharynx, larynx, esophagus, stom-
ach, liver, and pancreas as well as acute myeloid leukemia.25 Smoking increases 
risk of infertility, preterm birth, low birth weight, and sudden infant death syn-
drome. Smoking is associated with developing diabetes, cataracts, and rheuma-
toid arthritis. Nonsmokers exposed to smoke also have increased risk of lung 
cancer, ear and respiratory infections, and asthma.
Clinicians should focus on prevention and cessation, especially in teenagers and 
pregnant women.26 Because most smokers see a health care provider each year 
and nearly 70% of smokers express interest in quitting, clinicians have an impor-
tant opportunity to identify and treat tobacco dependence.27,28 Behavioral sup-
port and pharmacotherapy are both effective strategies. Combining these 
strategies is more effective than either strategy alone as it addresses withdrawal 
symptom and cravings as well as enhances motivation and skills for quitting. The 
beneﬁts of even brief counseling interventions are considerable—advising smok-
ers to quit during every visit raises quit rates by 30%.29 Use the “5 As” frame-
work or the Stages of Change model to assess readiness to quit.24,30 Motivational 
interviewing techniques are also helpful for patients who are not yet ready to quit 
smoking.27,28
Adverse Effects of Smoking on  
Health and Disease
Condition
Increased Risk Compared  
with Nonsmokers
● Coronary artery disease
● Stroke
● Peripheral vascular disease
● COPD mortality
● Lung cancer
2–4 times higher
2–4 times higher
10 times higher
12–13 times higher
23 times higher mortality in men
13 times higher mortality in women
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, DHHS. Smoking and tobacco use. Fact sheet. 
Health eﬀects of cigarette smoking. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/fact_
sheets/health_eﬀects/eﬀects_cig_smoking/index.htm. Accessed March 31, 2015.
Assessing Readiness to Quit Smoking:  
Brief Interventions Models
5 As Model
Stages of Change Model
● Ask about tobacco use
● Advise to quit
● Assess willingness to make a 
quit attempt
● Assist in quit attempt
● Arrange follow-up
● Precontemplation—“I don’t want to quit.”
● Contemplation—“I am concerned but 
not ready to quit now.”
● Preparation—“I am ready to quit.”
● Action—“I just quit.”
● Maintenance—“I quit 6 months ago.”
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  8 |
 
The Thorax and Lungs 
315
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Nicotine is highly addicting, comparable to heroin and cocaine, and quitting is 
difﬁcult. More than 80% of smokers who try to quit on their own resume smoking 
within 30 days and only 3% of smokers quit successfully each year.31 Stimulation 
of the nicotinic cholinergic receptors in the brain increases release of dopamine, 
which enhances pleasure and modulates mood. Daily smokers inhale enough nico-
tine to achieve almost complete receptor saturation. The inhaled nicotine reaches the 
brain in seconds, causing a powerful and reinforcing rush effect. Use cognitive ther-
apy techniques to help smokers recognize and design strategies to combat the 
features of addiction: craving, triggers such as stress or environmental cues, and 
signs of withdrawal like irritability, poor concentration, anxiety, and depressed 
mood. Quit rates roughly double when counseling is combined with pharmaco-
therapies such as nicotine replacement, bupropion, and varenicline.32
Lung Cancer
Epidemiology. Lung cancer is the second most frequently diagnosed can-
cer in the United States and the leading cause of cancer death for both men and 
women.33 Over 200,000 new cases and nearly 160,000 deaths (accounting for 
about 27% of all cancer deaths) were expected in 2014. Incidence rates and 
death rates have been decreasing since 2006.
Risk Factors. Cigarette smoking is by far the leading risk factor for lung 
cancer, accounting for about 90% of lung cancer deaths.22 Longer smoking his-
tories and higher numbers of cigarettes smoked are associated with higher risk. 
Radon, an invisible, odorless, radioactive gas released from soil and rocks in the 
ground, is the second leading cause of lung cancer in the United States. Other 
environmental and occupational exposures include second-hand smoke, asbes-
tos, heavy metals, organic chemicals, ionizing radiation, and air pollution. Lung 
cancer also has a familial risk.
Prevention. The most important strategies aim to prevent people from 
ever using tobacco products and getting tobacco users to quit. The previous sec-
tion highlights smoking cessation strategies. Avoiding environmental and occu-
pational exposures can also reduce lung cancer risk.
Screening. Another strategy for addressing the burden of cancer is screening, 
also known as secondary prevention, which targets ﬁnding and treating early-stage 
cancers. This is particularly important for lung cancer; cancers diagnosed at an early 
stage (before metastasis) have a 54% 5-year relative survival.34 Meanwhile, the 5-year 
relative survival is a dismal 4% for cancers diagnosed at later stages (metastatic). 
Unfortunately, only 15% of lung cancers are diagnosed at an early stage.
Screening Tests and Evidence. Numerous studies conducted over many 
years have shown that lung cancer screening with chest x-ray or sputum cytology 
is not effective. Recently, however, the National Lung Screening Trial (NLST) 
showed that screening with low-dose computed tomography (LDCT) reduced the 
risk of dying from lung cancer compared to chest x-ray screening.35 The NLST 
was a randomized trial that enrolled more than 53,000 adults aged 55 to 74 years 
at risk for lung cancer due to at least a 30-pack-year smoking history or current 
smoking or having quit within the past 15 years. Subjects received three annual 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
316 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
screenings with LDCT or chest x-rays. After nearly 7 years of follow-up, lung 
cancer deaths were reduced by 20% with LDCT compared to chest x-ray. How-
ever, the absolute beneﬁt was small; >320 subjects needed screening to prevent 
one lung cancer death. Although about 40% of study subjects had an abnormal 
LDCT, over 95% of these results were false positives. Screening can lead to harms, 
including anxiety over false-positive tests, complications from invasive diagnostic 
procedures, and cancer risks from radiation exposure.
Screening Guidelines from Major Organizations. The USPSTF has 
given lung cancer screening with LDCT a B rating, meaning that there is a net 
beneﬁt to offering screening.36 Annual LDCT screening is recommended for cur-
rent smokers (or those who have quit within the last 15 years) aged 55 to 
79 years. The American Cancer Society also recommends annual screening, 
although only until age 74 years.37 Both organizations agree that all current smok-
ers should receive counseling about smoking cessation and should be offered ces-
sation interventions. Before offering screening, clinicians should engage patients in 
discussions about the potential beneﬁts, limitations, and harms of screening—and 
emphasize that screening is not a substitute for smoking cessation.
Immunizations (Adults)
Inﬂuenza. Inﬂuenza can cause substantial morbidity and mortality, espe-
cially during the late fall and winter, peaking in February.38 The number of annual 
deaths related to inﬂuenza varies depending on the virus type and subtype, rang-
ing from a few thousand to nearly 50,000 deaths. The Centers for Disease Control 
(CDC) Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) updates its rec-
ommendations for vaccination annually. Two types of vaccine are available: the 
“ﬂu shot,” an inactivated vaccine containing killed virus, and a nasal-spray vac-
cine containing attenuated live viruses, approved only for healthy people between 
the ages of 2 and 49 years.39 Because inﬂuenza viruses mutate from year to year, 
each vaccine contains three to four vaccine strains and is modiﬁed yearly. Note 
that annual vaccination is recommended for everyone aged ≥6 months.
Summary of 2015-2016 CDC Inﬂuenza Vaccine 
Recommendations—Adults
Annual vaccination is recommended for all people aged 6 months and older, 
especially the groups listed below.40
● Adults with chronic pulmonary and cardiovascular conditions (except hyperten-
sion) and renal, hepatic, neurologic, hematologic, or metabolic disorders (includ-
ing diabetes mellitus); adults who are immunosuppressed or morbidly obese
● Adults ≥50 years of age
● Pregnant women and women up to 2 weeks postpartum
● Residents of nursing homes and long-term care facilities
● American Indians and Alaska natives
● Health care personnel
● Household contacts and caregivers of children ≤5 years of age (especially 
infants ≤age 6 months) and of adults ≥50 years of age with clinical conditions 
placing them at higher risk for complications of inﬂuenza
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  8 |
 
The Thorax and Lungs 
317
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Streptococcal Pneumonia. Streptococcal pneumonia causes pneumonia, 
bacteremia, and meningitis. In 2009, invasive pneumococcal disease accounted 
for 43,500 cases and 5,000 deaths.41 However, the introduction of the 7-valent 
pneumococcal vaccination for infants and children in 2000 has directly and 
indirectly (through herd immunity) reduced pneumococcal infections among 
children and adults.42 Since 2010, infants younger than age 2 years have rou-
tinely been vaccinated with the 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine 
(PCV13). In 2014, the ACIP recommended vaccinating adults aged ≥65 years 
using the PCV13 along with the 23-valent inactivated pneumococcal polysac-
charide vaccine (PPSV23). The vaccines should not be coadministered. Adults 
in this age range who never received the PPSV23 should ﬁrst receive the PCV13 
followed 6 to 12 months later by the PPSV23. Adults aged ≥65 years previously 
vaccinated with PPSV23 should receive a dose of PCV13 no earlier than 1 year 
following the most recent PPSV23 vaccination. The ACIP recommends using 
PCV13 and PPSV23 for the high-risk groups listed below.
Summary of 2015 CDC Pneumococcal Vaccine 
Recommendations
● Adults ≥65 years
● Children and adults from ages 2 to 64 years with chronic illnesses speciﬁcally 
associated with increased risk of pneumococcal infection (sickle cell disease, 
cardiovascular and pulmonary disease, diabetes, alcoholism, cirrhosis, 
cochlear implants, and leaks of cerebrospinal ﬂuid)
● Any adult aged 19 to 64 years who is a smoker or has asthma
● Adults and children older than age 2 years who are immunocompromised 
(including from HIV infection, AIDS, long-term steroids, Hodgkin disease, 
lymphoma or leukemia, kidney failure, multiple myeloma, nephrotic  
syndrome, organ transplant, damaged spleen or no spleen, radiation, or 
chemotherapy)
● Residents of nursing homes or long-term care facilities
For best results, examine the posterior thorax and lungs while the patient is sit-
ting, and the anterior thorax and lungs with the patient supine. Be considerate 
when draping the patient’s gown. For men, arrange the gown so that you can see 
the full chest. For women, cover the anterior chest when you examine the back; 
for the anterior examination, drape the gown over each half of the chest as you 
examine the other half. Begin with inspection, then palpate, percuss, and aus-
cultate. Try to visualize the underlying lobes and compare the right lung ﬁeld 
with the left, carefully noting any asymmetries.
■ With the patient sitting, examine the posterior thorax and lungs. The patient’s 
arms should be folded across the chest with hands resting, if possible, on the 
opposite shoulders. This position swings the scapulae laterally and increases 
access to the lung ﬁelds. Then ask the patient to lie down.
Techniques of Examination
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
318 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ With the patient supine, examine the anterior thorax and lungs. For women, 
this position allows the breasts to be gently displaced. Some clinicians exam-
ine both the posterior and anterior chest with the patient sitting, which is 
also satisfactory.
■ For patients who cannot sit up, ask for assistance so that you can examine the 
posterior chest in the sitting position. If this is not possible, roll the patient 
to one side and then to the other. Percuss and auscultate both lungs in each 
position. Because ventilation is relatively greater in the dependent lung, you 
are more likely to hear abnormal wheezes or crackles on the dependent side 
(see p. 325).
Initial Survey of Respiration and the Thorax
Even though the respiratory rate might already be recorded, again carefully 
observe the rate, rhythm, depth, and effort of breathing. A healthy resting adult 
breathes quietly and regularly about 20 times a minute. Note whether expiration 
lasts longer than usual.
Begin by observing the patient for signs of respiratory distress.
Signs of Respiratory Distress
■ Assess the respiratory rate for tachypnea (>25 breaths/minute).
■ Inspect the patient’s color for cyanosis or pallor. Recall earlier relevant ﬁnd-
ings, such as the shape and color of the ﬁngernails.
■ Listen for audible sounds of breathing. Is there audible whistling during inspi-
ration over the neck or lungs?
■ Inspect the neck. During inspiration, is there contraction of the accessory mus-
cles, namely the SCM and scalene muscles, or supraclavicular retraction? 
During expiration, is there contraction of the intercostal or abdominal 
oblique muscles? Is the trachea midline?
Also observe the shape of the chest, which is normally wider than it is deep. The 
ratio of the anteroposterior (AP) diameter to the lateral chest diameter is usually 
0.7 to 0.75 up to 0.9 and increases with aging.43
See Table 8-4, Abnormalities in Rate 
and Rhythm of Breathing, p. 335, 
including bradypnea, tachypnea, 
hyperventilation, Cheyne–Stokes 
breathing, and ataxic breathing. 
Delayed expiration occurs in COPD.
Tachypnea increases the likelihood of 
pneumonia and cardiac disease.
Cyanosis in the lips, tongue, and oral 
mucosa signals hypoxia. Pallor and 
sweating (diaphoresis) are common in 
heart failure. Clubbing of the nails (see 
p. 211) occurs in bronchiectasis, congeni-
tal heart disease, pulmonary fibrosis, cys-
tic fibrosis, lung abscess, and malignancy.
Audible high-pitched inspiratory whis-
tling, or stridor, is an ominous sign of 
upper airway obstruction in the larynx 
or trachea that requires urgent airway 
evaluation. Wheezing is either expira-
tory or continuous. 
Accessory muscle use signals difficulty 
breathing from COPD or respiratory 
muscle fatigue. Lateral displacement 
of the trachea occurs in pneumotho-
rax, pleural effusion, and atelectasis.
This ratio may exceed 0.9 in COPD, 
producing a barrel-chest appearance, 
although evidence of this correlation 
is conflicting.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  8 |
 
The Thorax and Lungs 
319
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Examination of the Posterior Chest
Inspection. Standing in a midline position behind the patient, note the shape 
of the chest and how the chest moves, including the following:
■ Deformities or asymmetry in chest expansion
■ Abnormal muscle retraction of the intercostal spaces during inspiration, 
most visible in the lower intercostal spaces.
■ Impaired respiratory movement on one or both sides or a unilateral lag (or 
delay) in movement.
Palpation. As you palpate the chest, focus on areas of tenderness or bruising, 
respiratory expansion, and fremitus.
■ Identify tender areas. Carefully palpate any area where the patient reports pain 
or has visible lesions or bruises. Note any palpable crepitus, deﬁned as a 
crackling or grinding sound over bones, joints, or skin, with or without pain, 
due to air in the subcutaneous tissue.
■ Assess any skin abnormalities such as masses or sinus tracts (blind, inﬂamma-
tory, tube-like structures opening onto the skin).
■ Test chest expansion. Place your 
thumbs at about the level of the 
10th ribs, with your ﬁngers loosely 
grasping and parallel to the lateral 
rib cage (Fig. 8-14). As you position 
your hands, slide them medially just 
enough to raise a loose fold of skin 
between your thumbs over the 
spine. Ask the patient to inhale 
deeply. Watch the distance between 
your thumbs as they move apart 
during inspiration, and feel for the 
range and symmetry of the rib cage 
as it expands and contracts. This 
movement is sometimes called lung 
excursion.
See Table 8-5, Deformities of the  
Thorax, p. 336.
Asymmetric expansion occurs in large 
pleural effusions.
Retraction occurs in severe asthma, 
COPD, or upper airway obstruction.
Unilateral impairment or lagging sug-
gests pleural disease from asbestosis 
or silicosis; it is also seen in phrenic 
nerve damage or trauma.
Intercostal tenderness can develop 
over inflamed pleurae, costal cartilage 
tenderness in costochondritis. 
Tenderness, bruising, and bony “step-
offs” are common over a fractured rib. 
Crepitus may be palpable in overt 
fractures and arthritic joints; crepitus 
and chest wall edema are seen in 
mediastinitis.
Although rare, sinus tracts suggest 
infection of the underlying pleura 
and lung (as in tuberculosis or actino-
mycosis).
Unilateral decrease or delay in chest 
expansion occurs in chronic fibrosis of 
the underlying lung or pleura, pleural 
effusion, lobar pneumonia, pleural 
pain with associated splinting, unilat-
eral bronchial obstruction, and paral-
ysis of the hemidiaphragm.
F I G U R E  8 - 1 4 .  Assess lung 
expansion.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
320 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Palpate both lungs for symmetric tac-
tile fremitus (Fig. 8-15). Fremitus 
refers to the palpable vibrations 
that are transmitted through the 
bronchopulmonary tree to the 
chest wall as the patient is speaking 
and is normally symmetric. Fremi-
tus is typically more prominent in 
the interscapular area than in the 
lower lung ﬁelds and easier to de-
tect over the right lung than the left. 
It disappears below the diaphragm.
To detect fremitus, use either the 
ball (the bony part of the palm at 
the base of the ﬁngers) or the ulnar 
surface of your hand to optimize the vibratory sensitivity of the bones in 
your hand. Ask the patient to repeat the words “ninety-nine” or “one-one-
one.” Initially practice with one hand until you feel the transmitted vibra-
tions. Use both hands to palpate and compare symmetric areas of the lungs in 
the pattern shown in the photograph. Identify and locate any areas of 
increased, decreased, or absent fremitus. If fremitus is faint, ask the patient 
to speak more loudly or in a deeper voice.
Tactile fremitus is a somewhat imprecise assessment technique, but does 
direct your attention to possible asymmetries. Conﬁrm any disparities by 
listening for underlying breath sounds, voice sounds, and whispered voice 
sounds. All these attributes should increase or decrease together.
Percussion. Percussion is one of the most important techniques of physical 
examination. Percussion sets the chest wall and underlying tissues in motion, 
producing audible sound and palpable vibrations. Percussion helps you estab-
lish whether the underlying tissues are air-ﬁlled, ﬂuid-ﬁlled, or consolidated. 
The percussion blow penetrates only 5 to 7 cm into the chest, however, and will 
not aid in detection of deep-seated lesions.
The technique of percussion can be practiced on any surface. As you practice, 
listen for changes in percussion notes over different types of materials or different 
parts of the body. The key points for good technique, described for a right-
handed person, are detailed below:
■ Hyperextend the middle ﬁnger of 
your left hand, known as the plexim-
eter ﬁnger. Press its distal interpha-
langeal joint ﬁrmly on the lung 
surface to be percussed (Fig. 8-16). 
Avoid surface contact by any other part 
of the hand because this dampens out 
vibrations. Note that the thumb and 
second, fourth, and ﬁfth ﬁngers are 
not touching the chest wall.
Fremitus is decreased or absent when 
the voice is higher pitched or soft or 
when the transmission of vibrations 
from the larynx to the surface of the 
chest is impeded by a thick chest wall, 
an obstructed bronchus, COPD, or 
pleural effusion, fibrosis, air (pneumo-
thorax), or an infiltrating tumor.
1
2
3
1
2
3
4
4
F I G U R E  8 - 1 5 .  Locations for 
palpating fremitus.
Asymmetric decreased fremitus raises 
the likelihood of unilateral pleural 
effusion, pneumothorax, or neoplasm, 
which decreases transmission of low-
frequency sounds; asymmetric 
increased fremitus occurs in unilateral 
pneumonia which increases transmis-
sion through consolidated tissue.44
F I G U R E  8 - 1 6 .  Press the pleximeter 
ﬁnger ﬁrmly on the chest wall.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  8 |
 
The Thorax and Lungs 
321
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Position your right forearm quite close to the surface, with the hand cocked 
upward. The middle ﬁnger should be partially ﬂexed, relaxed, and poised to 
strike.
■ With a quick, sharp but relaxed wrist 
motion, strike the pleximeter ﬁnger 
with the right middle ﬁnger, called 
the plexor ﬁnger (Fig. 8-17). Aim at 
your distal interphalangeal joint. 
Your goal is to transmit vibrations 
through the bones of this joint to the 
underlying chest wall. Use the same 
force for each percussion strike and 
the same pleximeter pressure to 
avoid changes in the percussion note 
due to your technique rather than 
underlying ﬁndings.
■ Strike using the tip of the plexor ﬁn-
ger, not the ﬁnger pad. The striking 
ﬁnger should be almost at right 
angles to the pleximeter. A short 
fingernail is recommended to 
avoid injuring your knuckle.
■ Withdraw your striking finger 
quickly to avoid damping the vibra-
tions you have created (Fig. 8-18).
In summary, the movement is at the wrist. It is directed, brisk, yet relaxed and 
slightly bouncy.
Percussion Notes. With your plexor or striking ﬁnger, use the lightest 
percussion that produces a clear note. A thick chest wall requires a more forceful 
percussion blow than a thin one. However, if a louder note is needed, apply 
more pressure with the pleximeter ﬁnger.
When percussing the lower posterior chest, stand somewhat to the side rather 
than directly behind the patient. In this position it is easier to place your plex-
imeter ﬁnger more ﬁrmly on the chest, making your plexor strike more effective 
by creating a better percussion note.
■ When comparing two areas, use the same percussion technique in both areas. 
Percuss or strike twice in each location and listen for differences in the per-
cussion notes at the two locations.
■ Learn to identify ﬁve percussion notes. You can practice four of them on your-
self. These notes differ in their basic qualities of sound, intensity, pitch, and 
duration. Train your ear by concentrating on one quality at a time as you 
F I G U R E  8 - 1 7 .  Strike the plexime-
ter ﬁnger with the right middle ﬁnger.
F I G U R E  8 - 1 8 .  Withdraw the 
striking ﬁnger quickly.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
322 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
percuss ﬁrst in one location, then in another. Review the description of per-
cussion notes on p. 323. Healthy lungs are resonant.
 
While the patient keeps both arms crossed in front of the chest, percuss the 
thorax in symmetric locations on each side from the apex to the base.
■ Percuss one side of the chest and then 
the other at each level in a ladder-like 
pattern, as shown in Figure 8-19. 
Omit the areas over the scapulae—
the thickness of muscle and bone 
alters the percussion notes over the 
lungs. Identify and locate the area 
and quality of any abnormal per-
cussion note.
■ Identify the descent of the diaphragm, or diaphragmatic excursion. First, deter-
mine the level of diaphragmatic dullness during quiet respiration. Holding the 
pleximeter ﬁnger above and parallel to the expected level of dullness, percuss 
downward in progressive steps until dullness clearly replaces resonance. 
Conﬁrm this level of change by percussing downward from adjacent areas 
both medially and laterally (Fig. 8-20).
Dullness replaces resonance when fluid 
or solid tissue replaces air-containing 
lung or occupies the pleural space 
beneath your percussing fingers. 
Examples include: lobar pneumonia, in 
which the alveoli are filled with fluid 
and blood cells; and pleural accumula-
tions of serous fluid (pleural effusion), 
blood (hemothorax), pus (empyema), 
fibrous tissue, or tumor. Dullness 
makes pneumonic and pleural  
effusion three to four times more 
likely, respectively.45
Generalized hyperresonance is com-
mon over the hyperinflated lungs of 
COPD or asthma. Unilateral hyperreso-
nance suggests a large pneumothorax 
or an air-filled bulla.
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
6
6
7
7
F I G U R E  8 - 1 9 .  Percuss and 
auscultate in a “ladder” pattern.
Resonant
Level of
diaphragm
Dull
Location
and sequence
of percussion
F I G U R E  8 - 2 0 .  Identify the extent of diaphragmatic excursion.
This technique tends to overestimate 
actual movements of the diaphragm.45
Dull
F I G U R E  8 - 2 1 .  Absent descent 
of the diaphragm can indicate pleural 
effusion.
An abnormally high level suggests a 
pleural effusion or an elevated hemidi-
aphragm from atelectasis or phrenic 
nerve paralysis (Fig. 8-21).
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  8 |
 
The Thorax and Lungs 
323
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Note that with this technique, you are identifying the boundary between the 
resonant lung tissue and the duller structures below the diaphragm. You are not 
percussing the diaphragm itself. You can infer the probable location of the dia-
phragm from the level of dullness.
Now, estimate the extent of diaphragmatic excursion by determining the distance 
between the level of dullness on full expiration and the level of dullness on full 
inspiration, normally about 3 to 5.5 cm.46
Auscultation. Auscultation is the most important examination technique for 
assessing air ﬂow through the tracheobronchial tree. Auscultation involves 
(1) listening to the sounds generated by breathing, (2) listening for any adventitious 
(added) sounds, and (3) if abnormalities are suspected, listening to the sounds of 
the patient’s spoken or whispered voice as they are transmitted through the chest 
wall. Before beginning auscultation, ask the patient to cough once or twice to clear 
mild atelectasis or airway mucus that can produce unimportant extra sounds.
Listen to the breath sounds with the diaphragm of your stethoscope after 
instructing the patient to breathe deeply through an open mouth. Always 
place the stethoscope directly on the skin. Clothing alters the characteristics 
of the breath sounds and can introduce friction and added sounds.
Use the ladder pattern suggested for percussion, moving from one side to the 
other and comparing symmetric areas of the lungs. Listen to at least one full 
breath in each location. If you hear or suspect abnormal sounds, auscultate adja-
cent areas to assess the extent of any abnormality. If the patient becomes light-
headed from hyperventilation, allow the patient to take a few normal breaths.
Note the intensity of the breath sounds, which reﬂects the air ﬂow rate at the 
mouth, and may vary from one area to another. Breath sounds are usually louder 
in the lower posterior lung ﬁelds. If the breath sounds seem faint, ask the patient 
to breathe more deeply. Shallow breathing or a thick chest wall can both alter 
breath sound intensity.
Pathologic Examples
Large pleural effusion
Lobar pneumonia
Simple chronic bronchitis
COPD, pneumothorax
Large pneumothorax
Bedclothes, paper gowns, and even 
chest hair can generate confusing 
crackling sounds that interfere with 
auscultation. For chest hair, press 
harder or moisten the hair.
Air movement through a partially 
obstructed nose or nasopharynx can 
also introduce abnormal sounds.
Breath sounds may be decreased when 
air flow is decreased (as in obstructive 
lung disease or respiratory muscle 
weakness) or when the transmission of 
sound is poor (as in pleural effusion, 
pneumothorax, or COPD).
Percussion Notes and Their Characteristics
Relative 
Intensity
Relative 
Pitch
Relative 
Duration
Example of 
Location
Flat
Dull
Resonant
Hyperresonant
Tympanitic
Soft
Medium
Loud
Very loud
Loud
High
Medium
Low
Lower
Higha
Short
Medium
Long
Longer
Longer
Thigh
Liver
Healthy lung
Usually none
Gastric air bubble 
or puﬀed-out 
cheek
aDistinguished mainly by its musical timbre.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
324 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Is there a silent gap between the inspiratory and expiratory sounds?
Listen for the pitch, intensity, and duration of the inspiratory and expiratory sounds. 
Are vesicular breath sounds distributed normally over the chest wall? Are breath 
sounds diminished, or are there bronchovesicular or bronchial breath sounds in 
unexpected places? If so, in what distribution?
Breath Sounds (Lung Sounds). Learn to identify breath sounds by their 
intensity, their pitch, and the relative duration of their inspiratory and expiratory 
phases. Normal breath sounds are:
■ Vesicular, or soft and low pitched. They are heard throughout inspiration, 
continue without pause through expiration, and then fade away about one 
third of the way through expiration.
■ Bronchovesicular, with inspiratory and expiratory sounds about equal in 
length, at times separated by a silent interval. Detecting differences in pitch 
and intensity is often easier during expiration.
■ Bronchial, or louder, harsher and higher in pitch, with a short silence be-
tween inspiratory and expiratory sounds. Expiratory sounds last longer than 
inspiratory sounds.
■ Tracheal, or loud harsh sounds heard over the trachea in the neck.
The characteristics of these four kinds of breath sounds are summarized below.
A gap suggests bronchial breath 
sounds.
In cold or tense patients, watch for 
muscle contraction sounds—muffled, 
low-pitched rumbling, or roaring 
noises. Changing the patient’s posi-
tion may eliminate this noise. To 
reproduce these sounds on yourself, 
do a Valsalva maneuver (straining 
down) as you listen to your own chest.
Characteristics of Breath Sounds
Duration of 
Sounds
Intensity 
of 
Expiratory 
Sound
Pitch of 
Expiratory 
Sound
Locations 
Where 
Heard 
Normally
Vesiculara 
Inspiratory sounds 
last longer than 
expiratory 
sounds.
Soft
Relatively low Over most of 
both lungs
Broncho-
vesicular 
Inspiratory and 
expiratory 
sounds are 
almost equal.
Intermediate
Intermediate
Often in the 1st 
and 2nd 
interspaces 
anteriorly 
and between 
the scapulae
Bronchial 
Expiratory  
sounds last  
longer than 
inspiratory ones.
Loud
Relatively 
high
Over the 
manubrium, 
(larger proxi-
mal airways)
(continued )
If bronchovesicular or bronchial 
breath sounds are heard in locations 
distant from those listed, suspect 
replacement of air-filled lung by fluid-
filled or consolidated lung tissue.
See Table 8-6, Normal and Altered 
Breath and Voice Sounds, p. 337.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  8 |
 
The Thorax and Lungs 
325
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Adventitious (Added) Sounds. Listen for any added, or adventitious, 
sounds that are superimposed on the usual breath sounds. Detection of adventi-
tious sounds—crackles (sometimes called rales), wheezes, and rhonchi—is an 
important focus of your examination, often leading to diagnosis of cardiac and 
pulmonary conditions. The most common adventitious sounds are described 
below. Note that the American Thoracic Society describes rhonchi as a low-
pitched wheeze (unrelated to airway secretions), so some recommend not using 
the term “rhonchi.”47,48
Characteristics of Breath Sounds (continued )
Duration of 
Sounds
Intensity 
of 
Expiratory 
Sound
Pitch of 
Expiratory 
Sound
Locations 
Where 
Heard 
Normally
Tracheal 
Inspiratory and 
expiratory 
sounds are 
almost equal.
Very loud
Relatively 
high
Over the tra-
chea in the 
neck
aThe thickness of the bars indicates intensity; the steeper their incline, the higher the pitch.
Sources: Loudon R and Murphy LH. Lungs sounds. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1994;130:663; Bohadana A, 
Izbicki G, Kraman SS. Fundamentals of lung auscultation. N Engl J Med. 2014;370:744; Wilkins RL, 
Dexter JR, Murphy RLH, et al. Lung sound nomenclature survey, Chest. 1990;98:886; Schreur HJW, 
Sterk PJ, Vanderschoot JW, et al. Lung sound intensity in patients with emphysema and in normal 
subjects at standardised airﬂows. Thorax. 1992;47:674; Bettancourt PE, DelBono EA, Speigelman D, 
et al. Clinical utility of chest auscultation in common pulmonary disease. Am J Resp Crit Care Med. 
1994;150:1921.
For further discussion and other 
added sounds, see Table 8-7, Adventi-
tious (Added) Lung Sounds: Causes 
and Qualities, p. 338.
Adventitious or Added Breath Sounds
Crackles (or Rales)
Wheezes and Rhonchi
Discontinuous
Continuous
● Intermittent, nonmusical, and  
brief
● Sinusoidal, musical, prolonged (but not 
necessarily persisting throughout the 
respiratory cycle)
● Like dots in time
● Like dashes in time
● Fine crackles: soft, high-pitched 
(∼650 Hz), very brief (5–10 ms)
● Wheezes: relatively high-pitched (≥400 
Hz) with hissing or shrill quality (>80 ms)
● Coarse crackles: somewhat 
louder, lower in pitch (∼350 Hz), 
brief (15–30 ms)
● Rhonchi: relatively low-pitched (150–200 
Hz) with snoring quality (>80 ms)
Source: Loudon R, Murphy LH. Lungs sounds. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1994;130:663; Bohadana A, Izbicki G, 
Kraman SS. Fundamentals of lung auscultation. N Engl J Med. 2014;370:744.
Crackles can arise from abnormalities 
of the lung parenchyma (pneumonia, 
interstitial lung disease, pulmonary 
fibrosis, atelectasis, heart failure) or of 
the airways (bronchitis, bronchiectasis).
Wheezes arise in the narrowed air-
ways of asthma, COPD, and bronchitis.
Many clinicians use the term “rhonchi” 
to describe sounds from secretions in 
large airways that may change with 
coughing.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
326 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
If you hear crackles, especially those that do not clear after coughing, listen care-
fully for the following characteristics.47,49–52 These are clues to the underlying 
condition:
■ Loudness, pitch, and duration, summarized as ﬁne or coarse crackles
■ Number, few to many
■ Timing in the respiratory cycle
■ Location on the chest wall
■ Persistence of their pattern from breath to breath
■ Any change after a cough or change in the patient’s position
In some normal people, crackles may be heard at the anterior lung bases after 
maximal expiration. Crackles in dependent portions of the lungs may also occur 
after prolonged recumbency.
If you hear wheezes or rhonchi, note their timing and location. Do they change 
with deep breathing or coughing? Beware of the silent chest, in which air move-
ment is minimal.
Note that tracheal sounds originating in the neck such as stridor and vocal cord 
dysfunction can be transmitted to the chest and mistaken for wheezing, leading 
to inappropriate or delayed treatment.
Note any pleural rubs, which are coarse, grating biphasic sounds heard primarily 
during expiration.
Transmitted Voice Sounds. If you hear abnormally located broncho-
vesicular or bronchial breath sounds, assess transmitted voice sounds using three 
techniques below. With diaphragm of your stethoscope, listen in symmetric 
areas over the chest wall for abnormal vocal resonances suspicious for pneumo-
nia or pleural effusion.
Fine late inspiratory crackles that per-
sist from breath to breath suggest 
abnormal lung tissue.
The crackles of heart failure are usu-
ally best heard in the posterior infe-
rior lung fields.
Clearing of crackles, wheezes, or rhon-
chi after coughing or position change 
suggests inspissated secretions, seen 
in bronchitis or atelectasis.
In the advanced airway obstruction of 
severe asthma, wheezes and breath 
sounds may be absent due to low 
respiratory airflow (the “silent chest”), 
a clinical emergency.
Findings predictive of COPD include 
combinations of symptoms and signs, 
especially dyspnea and wheezing by 
self-report or examination, plus >70 
pack-years of smoking, history of 
bronchitis or emphysema, and 
decreased breath sounds. Diagnosis 
requires spirometry and, often, further 
pulmonary testing.6,53–58
Stridor and laryngeal sounds are 
loudest over the neck, whereas true 
wheezes and rhonchi are faint or 
absent over the neck.47
Pleural rubs may be heard in pleurisy, 
pneumonia, and pulmonary embolism.
Increased transmission of voice sounds 
suggests that embedded airways are 
blocked by inflammation or secre-
tions.47 See Table 8-6, Normal and 
Altered Breath and Voice Sounds, p. 337.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  8 |
 
The Thorax and Lungs 
327
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Egophony. Ask the patient to say “ee.” You will normally hear a mufﬂed long 
E sound.
■ Bronchophony. Ask the patient to say “ninety-nine.” Normally the sounds 
transmitted through the chest wall are mufﬂed and indistinct. Louder voice 
sounds are called bronchophony.
■ Whispered pectoriloquy. Ask the patient to whisper “ninety-nine” or “one-
two-three.” The whispered voice is normally heard faintly and indistinctly, 
if at all.
Examination of the Anterior Chest
When examined in the supine position, the patient should lie comfortably with 
arms somewhat abducted. If the patient is having difﬁculty breathing, raise the 
head of the examining table or the bed to increase respiratory excursion and ease 
of breathing.
Inspection. Observe the shape of the patient’s chest and the movement of the 
chest wall. Note:
■ Deformities or asymmetry of the thorax
■ Abnormal retraction of the lower intercostal spaces during inspiration, or 
any supraclavicular retraction
■ Local lag or impairment in respiratory movement
Palpation. Palpate the anterior chest wall for the following purposes:
■ Identiﬁcation of tender areas
■ Assessment of bruising, sinus tracts, or other skin changes
■ Assessment of chest expansion. 
Place your thumbs along each 
costal margin, your hands along 
the lateral rib cage (Fig. 8-22). As 
you position your hands, slide 
them medially a bit to raise loose 
skin folds between your thumbs. 
Ask the patient to inhale deeply. 
Observe how far your thumbs 
diverge as the thorax expands, 
and feel for the extent and sym-
metry of respiratory movement.
If “ee” sounds like “A” and has a nasal 
bleating quality, an E-to-A change, or 
egophony, is present.
Localized bronchophony and egoph-
ony are seen in lobar consolidation 
from pneumonia. In patients with 
fever and cough, the presence of 
bronchial breath sounds and egoph-
ony more than triples the likelihood 
of pneumonia.59
Louder, clearer whispered sounds are 
called whispered pectoriloquy.
Persons with severe COPD may prefer 
to sit leaning forward, with lips 
pursed during exhalation and arms 
supported on their knees or a table.
See Table 8-5, Deformities of the  
Thorax, p. 336.
Abnormal retraction occurs in severe 
asthma, COPD, or upper airway 
obstruction.
Lag occurs in underlying diseases of 
the lung or pleura.
Tender pectoral muscles or costal car-
tilages suggest, but do not prove, that 
chest pain has a localized musculo-
skeletal origin.
F I G U R E  8 - 2 2 .  Assess chest expansion.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
328 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Assessment of tactile fremitus. If 
needed, compare both sides of the 
chest, using the ball or ulnar sur-
face of your hand. Fremitus is usu-
ally decreased or absent over the 
precordium. When examining a 
woman, gently displace the breasts 
as necessary (Fig. 8-23).
Percussion. As needed, percuss the 
anterior and lateral chest, again com-
paring both sides (Fig. 8-24). The 
heart normally produces an area of 
dullness to the left of the sternum from 
the 3rd to the 5th interspaces. 
In a woman, to enhance percussion, 
gently displace the breast with your 
left hand while percussing with the 
right, or ask the patient to move the 
breast for you.
Identify and locate any area with an abnormal percussion note.
Percuss for liver dullness and gastric tym-
pany. With your pleximeter ﬁnger above 
and parallel to the expected upper bor-
der of liver dullness, percuss in progres-
sive steps downward in the right 
midclavicular line (Fig. 8-25). Identify 
the upper border of liver dullness. Later, 
during the abdominal examination, you 
will use this method to estimate the size 
of the liver. As you percuss down the 
chest on the left, the resonance of nor-
mal lung usually changes to the tym-
pany of the gastric air bubble.
Auscultation. Listen to the chest anteriorly and laterally as the patient 
breathes with mouth open, and somewhat more deeply than normal. Compare 
symmetric areas of the lungs, using the pattern suggested for percussion and 
extending it to adjacent areas, if indicated.
1
1
2
2
3
3
F I G U R E  8 - 2 3 .  Locations for 
palpating fremitus.
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
6
6
F I G U R E  8 - 2 4 .  Palate and percuss 
in a “ladder” pattern.
Dullness represents airway obstruc-
tion from inflammation or secretions. 
Because pleural fluid usually sinks to 
the lowest part of the pleural space 
(posteriorly in a supine patient), only 
a very large effusion can be detected 
anteriorly.
The hyperresonance of COPD may 
obscure dullness over the heart.
The dullness of right middle lobe pneu-
monia typically occurs behind the 
right breast. Unless you displace the 
breast, you may miss the abnormal 
percussion note.
The hyperinflated lung of COPD often 
displaces the upper border of the liver 
downward and lowers the level of dia-
phragmatic dullness posteriorly.
F I G U R E  8 - 2 5 .  Percuss for liver 
dullness and gastric tympany.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  8 |
 
The Thorax and Lungs 
329
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
■ Listen to the breath sounds, noting their intensity and identifying any varia-
tions from normal vesicular breathing. Breath sounds are usually louder in 
the upper anterior lung ﬁelds. Bronchovesicular breath sounds may be heard 
over the large airways, especially on the right.
■ Identify any adventitious sounds, time them in the respiratory cycle, and locate 
them on the chest wall. Do they clear with deep breathing?
■ If indicated, listen for transmitted voice sounds.
Special Techniques
Clinical Assessment of Pulmonary Function. Walk tests are practical, 
simple ways to assess cardiopulmonary function commonly used in rehabilita-
tion and pre- and postoperative settings. The 2002 American Thoracic Society 
guidelines that standardize the 6-minute walk test continue to predict clinical 
outcomes in most patients with COPD.60,61 The test is easy to administer and 
requires only a 100-foot hallway. It measures “the distance that a patient can 
quickly walk on a ﬂat, hard surface in a period of 6 minutes” and provides a 
global evaluation of the pulmonary and cardiovascular systems, neuromuscu-
lar units, and muscle metabolism. Review the speciﬁcs of testing, which should 
be done on two occasions and include taking the clinical history and vital 
signs. This test as well as shorter tests continue to be evaluated.58
Forced Expiratory Time. This test assesses the expiratory phase of breath-
ing, which is typically slowed in obstructive pulmonary disease. Ask the patient to 
take a deep breath in and then breathe out as quickly and completely as possible 
with mouth open. Listen over the trachea with the diaphragm of a stethoscope and 
time the audible expiration. Try to get three consistent readings, allowing a short 
rest between efforts, if necessary.
Identiﬁcation of a Fractured Rib. Local pain and tenderness of one or 
more ribs raise the question of fracture. By AP compression of the chest, you can 
help to distinguish a fracture from soft-tissue injury. With one hand on the sternum 
and the other on the thoracic spine, squeeze the chest. Is this painful, and where?
See Table 8-7, Adventitious (Added) 
Lung Sounds: Causes and Qualities, 
p. 338, and Table 8-8, Physical Find-
ings in Selected Chest Disorders,  
pp. 339–340.
Patients ≥age 60 years with a forced 
expiratory time of ≥9 seconds are four 
times more likely to have COPD.62
An increase in the local pain (distant 
from your hands) suggests rib fracture 
rather than just soft-tissue injury.
Recording Your Findings
Note that initially you may use sentences to describe your ﬁndings; later you will 
use phrases.
Recording the Physical Examination—The 
Thorax and Lungs
“Thorax is symmetric with good expansion. Lungs resonant. Breath sounds vesic-
ular; no crackles, wheezes, or rhonchi. Diaphragms descend 4 cm bilaterally.”
OR
“Thorax symmetric with moderate kyphosis and increased AP diameter, decreased 
expansion. Lungs are hyperresonant. Breath sounds distant with delayed expira-
tory phase and scattered expiratory wheezes. Fremitus decreased; no bronchoph-
ony, egophony, or whispered pectoriloquy. Diaphragms descend 2 cm bilaterally.”
These findings suggest COPD.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
330 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 8-1 Chest Pain
Problem
Process
Location
Quality
Severity
Cardiovascular
Angina  
Pectoris
Temporary myocardial 
ischemia, usually 
secondary to coronary 
atherosclerosis
Retrosternal or across 
the anterior chest, often 
radiates to the shoulders, 
arms, neck, lower jaw, or 
upper abdomen
Pressing, squeezing, 
tight, heavy, 
occasionally burning
Mild to moderate, 
sometimes perceived 
as discomfort rather 
than pain
Myocardial  
Infarction
Prolonged myocardial 
ischemia, resulting in 
irreversible muscle 
damage or necrosis
Same as in angina
Same as in angina
Often, but not 
always, a severe pain
Pericarditis
Irritation of parietal 
pleura adjacent to the 
pericardium
Retrosternal or left 
precordial, may radiate 
to the tip of left shoulder
Sharp, knifelike
Often severe
Aortic Dissection
A splitting within the 
layers of the aortic wall, 
allowing passage of 
blood to dissect a 
channel
Anterior or posterior 
chest, radiating to the 
neck, back, or abdomen
Ripping, tearing
Very severe
Pulmonary
Pleuritic Pain
Inﬂammation of the 
parietal pleura, as in 
pleurisy, pneumonia, 
pulmonary infarction, or 
neoplasm; rarely, 
subdiaphragmatic 
abscess
Chest wall overlying the 
process
Sharp, knifelike
Often severe
Gastrointestinal and Other
Gastrointestinal  
Reﬂux Disease
Irritation or 
inﬂammation of the 
esophageal mucosa due 
to reﬂux of gastric acid 
from lowered esophageal 
sphincter tone
Retrosternal, may radiate 
to the back
Burning, may be 
squeezing
Mild to severe
Diffuse Esophageal 
Spasm
Motor dysfunction of the 
esophageal muscle
Retrosternal, may radiate 
to the back, arms, and 
jaw
Usually squeezing
Mild to severe
Chest Wall Pain, 
Costochondritis
Variable, including 
trauma, inﬂammation  
of costal cartilage
Often below the left 
breast or along the costal 
cartilages
Stabbing, sticking, 
or dull, aching
Variable
Anxiety, Panic  
Disorder
Unclear
Precordial, below the left 
breast, or across the 
anterior chest
Stabbing, sticking, 
or dull, aching
Variable
Note: Chest pain may be referred from extrathoracic structures in the neck (arthritis) and abdomen (biliary colic, acute cholecystitis).
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  8 |
 
The Thorax and Lungs 
331
Timing
Factors That Aggravate
Factors That Relieve
Associated Symptoms
Usually 1–3 min but up 
to 10 min. Prolonged 
episodes up to 20 min
Often exertion, especially in the 
cold; meals; emotional stress. 
May occur at rest
Often, but not always, rest, 
nitroglycerin
Sometimes dyspnea, nausea, 
sweating
20 min to several hours
Not always triggered by exertion
Not relieved by rest
Dyspnea, nausea, vomiting, 
sweating, weakness
Persistent
Breathing, changing position, 
coughing, lying down, 
sometimes swallowing
Sitting forward may relieve 
it
Seen in autoimmune disorders, 
postmyocardial infarction, viral 
infection, chest irradiation
Abrupt onset, early peak, 
persistent for hours or 
more
Hypertension
If thoracic, hoarseness, 
dysphagia; also syncope, 
hemiplegia, paraplegia
Persistent
Deep inspiration, coughing, 
movements of the trunk
Of the underlying illness
Variable
Large meal; bending over, lying 
down
Antacids, sometimes 
belching
Sometimes regurgitation, 
dysphagia; also cough, 
laryngitis, asthma
Variable
Swallowing of food or cold 
liquid; emotional stress
Sometimes nitroglycerin
Dysphagia
Fleeting to hours or days
Coughing; movement of chest, 
trunk, arms
Often local tenderness
Fleeting to hours or days
May follow effort, emotional 
stress
Breathlessness, palpitations, 
weakness, anxiety
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
332 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 8-2 Dyspnea
Problem
Process
Timing
Left-Sided Heart Failure  
(Left Ventricular Failure or  
Mitral Stenosis)
Elevated pressure in pulmonary capillary bed with 
transudation of ﬂuid into interstitial spaces and alveoli, 
decreased compliance (increased stiffness) of the lungs, 
increased work of breathing
Dyspnea may progress 
slowly, or suddenly as in 
acute pulmonary edema
Chronic Bronchitis
Excessive mucus production in bronchi, followed by 
chronic obstruction of airways
Chronic productive cough 
followed by slowly 
progressive dyspnea
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease (COPD)
Overdistention of air spaces distal to terminal 
bronchioles, with destruction of alveolar septa, alveolar 
enlargement, and limitation of expiratory air ﬂow
Slowly progressive 
dyspnea; relatively mild 
cough later
Asthma
Reversible bronchial hyperresponsiveness involving 
release of inﬂammatory mediators, increased airway 
secretions, and bronchoconstriction
Acute episodes, separated 
by symptom-free periods. 
Nocturnal episodes 
common
Diffuse Interstitial Lung Diseases 
(e.g., Sarcoidosis, Widespread Neoplasms,  
Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis, and Asbestosis)
Abnormal and widespread inﬁltration of cells, ﬂuid, 
and collagen into interstitial spaces between alveoli; 
many causes
Progressive dyspnea, 
which varies in its rate of 
development with the 
cause
Pneumonia
Infection of lung parenchyma from the respiratory 
bronchioles to the alveoli
An acute illness, timing 
varies with the causative 
agent
Spontaneous Pneumothorax
Leakage of air into pleural space through blebs on 
visceral pleura, with resulting partial or complete 
collapse of the lung
Sudden onset of dyspnea
Acute Pulmonary Embolism
Sudden occlusion of part of pulmonary arterial tree by a 
blood clot that usually originates in deep veins of legs 
or pelvis
Sudden onset of 
tachypnea, dyspnea
Anxiety with Hyperventilation
Overbreathing, with resultant respiratory alkalosis and 
fall in arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2)
Episodic, often recurrent
Sources: Parshall MB, Schwartzstein RM, Adams L, et al; American Thoracic Society Committee on Dyspnea. An ofﬁcial American Thoracic Society 
statement: update on the mechanisms, assessment, and management of dyspnea. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2012;185:435; Wenzel RP, Fowler AA. Acute 
bronchitis. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:2125; Badgett RG, Tanaka DJ, Hunt DK, et al. Can moderate chronic obstructive pulmonary disease be diagnosed by 
historical and physical ﬁndings alone? Am J Med. 1993;94:188; Holleman DR, Simel DL. Does the clinical examination predict airﬂow limitation? JAMA. 
1995;273:63; Straus SE, McAlister FA, Sackett DL, et al. The accuracy of patient history, wheezing, and laryngeal measurements in diagnosing obstructive 
airway disease. JAMA. 2000;283:1853; Panettieri RA. In the clinic: asthma. Ann Intern Med. 2007;146:ITC6–1; Littner M. In the clinic: chronic obstructive 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  8 |
 
The Thorax and Lungs 
333
Factors That  
Aggravate
Factors That  
Relieve
Associated  
Symptoms
Setting
Exertion, lying down
Rest, sitting up, though 
dyspnea may become 
persistent
Often cough, orthopnea, 
paroxysmal nocturnal 
dyspnea; sometimes 
wheezing
History of heart disease or its 
predisposing factors
Exertion, inhaled irritants, 
respiratory infections
Expectoration; rest, 
though dyspnea may 
become persistent
Chronic productive cough, 
recurrent respiratory infec-
tions; wheezing may develop
History of smoking, air pollutants, 
recurrent respiratory infections; often 
present with COPD
Exertion
Rest, though dyspnea 
may become persistent
Cough, with scant mucoid 
sputum
History of smoking, air pollutants, 
sometimes a familial deﬁciency in α1-
antitrypsin
Variable, including 
allergens, irritants, 
respiratory infections, 
exercise, cold, and emotion
Separation from 
aggravating factors
Wheezing, cough, tightness 
in chest
Environmental conditions
Exertion
Rest, though dyspnea 
may become persistent
Often weakness, fatigue; 
cough less common than in 
other lung diseases
Varied; exposure to trigger substances
Exertion, smoking
Rest, though dyspnea 
may become persistent
Pleuritic pain, cough, 
sputum, fever, though not 
necessarily present
Varied
Pleuritic pain, cough
Often a previously healthy young adult 
or adult with emphysema
Exertion
Rest, though dyspnea 
may become persistent
Often none; retrosternal 
oppressive pain if massive 
occlusion; pleuritic pain, 
cough, syncope, hemoptysis, 
and/or unilateral leg swelling 
and pain from instigating 
deep vein thrombosis; 
anxiety (see below)
Postpartum or postoperative periods; 
prolonged bed rest; heart failure, chronic 
lung disease, and fractures of hip or leg; 
deep venous thrombosis (often not clini-
cally apparent); also hypercoagulability, 
hereditary (i.e., protein C, S, factor V 
Leiden deﬁciency) or acquired (e.g.,  
cancer, hormonal therapy)
Often occurs at rest; an 
upsetting event may not be 
evident
Breathing in and out of 
a paper or plastic bag 
may help
Sighing, lightheadedness, 
numbness or tingling of the 
hands and feet, palpitations, 
chest pain
Other manifestations of anxiety may be 
present, such as chest pain diaphoresis, 
palpitations
pulmonary disease. Ann Intern Med. 2011;154:ITC4–1; Neiwoehner DR. Outpatient management of severe COPD. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1407; Global 
Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease. Global strategy for the diagnosis, management, and prevention of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
Updated 2015. Available at http://www.goldcopd.org/uploads/users/ﬁles/GOLD_Report_2015_Feb18.pdf. Accessed April 6, 2015; Neiderman M. In the 
clinic: community-acquired pneumonia. Ann Intern Med. 2009;151:ITC4–1–ITC4–16; Agnelli G, Becattini C. Acute pulmonary embolism. N Engl J Med. 
2010;363:266; Katerndahl DA. Chest pain and its importance in patients with panic disorder: an updated literature review. Prim Care Companion J Clin 
Psychiatry. 2008;10:376.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
334 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 8-3 Cough and Hemoptysis
Problem
Cough and Sputum
Associated Symptoms and Setting
Acute Inﬂammation
Laryngitis
Dry cough, may become productive of 
variable amounts of sputum
Acute fairly minor illness with hoarseness. Often associated 
with viral rhinosinusitis.
Acute Bronchitis
Cough, may be dry or productive
Acute, often viral, illness generally without fever or 
dyspnea; at times with burning retrosternal discomfort.
Mycoplasma and 
Viral Pneumonias
Dry hacking cough, may become 
productive of mucoid sputum
Acute febrile illness, often with malaise, headache, and 
possibly dyspnea.
Bacterial  
Pneumonias
Sputum is mucoid or purulent; may be 
blood-streaked, diffusely pinkish, or 
rusty
Acute illness with chills, often high fever, dyspnea, and 
chest pain. Commonly from Streptococcus pneumonia, 
Haemophilus inﬂuenza, Moraxella catarrhalis; Klebsiella in 
alcoholism, especially if underlying smoking, chronic 
bronchitis and COPD, cardiovascular disease, diabetes.
Chronic Inﬂammation
Postnasal Drip
Chronic cough; sputum mucoid or 
mucopurulent
Postnasal discharge may be seen in posterior pharynx. 
Associated with allergic rhinitis, with or without sinusitis.
Chronic Bronchitis
Chronic cough; sputum mucoid to purulent, 
may be blood-streaked or even bloody
Often with recurrent wheezing and dyspnea, and 
prolonged history of tobacco abuse.
Bronchiectasis
Chronic cough; sputum purulent, often 
copious and foul-smelling; may be blood-
streaked or bloody
Recurrent bronchopulmonary infections common; sinusitis 
may coexist.
Pulmonary  
Tuberculosis
Cough, dry or with mucoid or purulent 
sputum; may be blood-streaked or bloody
Early, no symptoms. Later, anorexia, weight loss, fatigue, 
fever, and night sweats.
Lung Abscess
Sputum purulent and foul-smelling; may 
be bloody
Usually from aspiration pneumonia with fever and 
infection from oral anaerobes and poor dental hygiene; 
often with dysphagia or episode of impaired consciousness.
Asthma
Cough, at times with thick mucoid 
sputum, especially near end of an attack
Episodic wheezing and dyspnea, but cough may occur 
alone. Often with a history of allergies.
Gastroesophageal 
Reﬂux
Chronic cough, especially at night or early 
in the morning
Wheezing, especially at night (often mistaken for asthma), 
early morning hoarseness, and repeated attempts to clear 
the throat. Often with heartburn and regurgitation.
Neoplasm
Lung Cancer
Cough, dry to productive; sputum may be 
blood-streaked or bloody
Commonly with dyspnea, weight loss, and history of 
tobacco abuse.
Cardiovascular Disorders
Left Ventricular  
Failure or Mitral  
Stenosis
Often dry, especially on exertion or at night; 
may progress to the pink frothy sputum of 
pulmonary edema or to frank hemoptysis
Dyspnea, orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea.
Pulmonary  
Embolism
Dry cough, at times with hemoptysis
Tachypnea, chest or pleuritic pain, dyspnea, fever, syncope, 
anxiety; factors that predispose to deep venous thrombosis.
Irritating Particles, 
Chemicals, or Gases
Variable. There may be a latent period 
between exposure and symptoms.
Exposure to irritants. Eyes, nose, and throat may be 
affected.
Sources: Irwin RS, Madison JM. The diagnosis and treatment of cough. N Engl J Med. 2000;343:1715; Metlay JP, Kapoor WN, Fine MJ. Does this patient have 
community-acquired pneumonia? Diagnosing pneumonia by history and physical examination. JAMA. 1997;378:1440; Neiderman M. In the clinic: community-
acquired pneumonia. Ann Intern Med. 2009;151:ITC4–1; Barker A. Bronchiectasis. N Engl J Med. 2002;346:1383; Wenzel RP, Fowler AA. Acute bronchitis. N Engl J 
Med. 2006;355:2125; Kerlin MP. In the clinic. Asthma. Ann Intern Med. 2014;160:ITC3–1; Escalante P. In the clinic: tuberculosis. Ann Intern Med. 2009;150:ITC6–
1; Agnelli G, Becattini C. Acute pulmonary embolism. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:266.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  8 |
 
The Thorax and Lungs 
335
Table 8-4 Abnormalities in Rate and Rhythm of Breathing
When observing respiratory patterns, note the rate, depth, and regularity of the patient’s breathing. Traditional terms, such as 
tachypnea, are given below so that you will understand them, but simple descriptions are recommended.
Inspiration
Expiration
Normal
The respiratory rate is about 14–20 per 
min in normal adults and up to 44 per min 
in infants.
Slow Breathing (Bradypnea)
Slow breathing with or without an 
increase in tidal volume that maintains 
alveolar ventilation. Abnormal alveolar 
hypoventilation without increased tidal 
volume can arise from uremia, drug-
induced respiratory depression, and 
increased intracranial pressure.
Sighs
Sighing Respiration
Breathing punctuated by frequent 
sighs suggests hyperventilation 
syndrome—a common cause of 
dyspnea and dizziness. Occasional 
sighs are normal.
Rapid Shallow Breathing  
(Tachypnea)
Rapid shallow breathing has numerous 
causes, including salicylate intoxication, 
restrictive lung disease, pleuritic chest 
pain, and an elevated diaphragm.
Hyperpnea
Apnea
Cheyne–Stokes Breathing
Periods of deep breathing alternate with 
periods of apnea (no breathing). This 
pattern is normal in children and older 
adults during sleep. Causes include heart 
failure, uremia, drug-induced respiratory 
depression, and brain injury (typically 
bihemispheric).
Prolonged expiration
Obstructive Breathing
In obstructive lung disease, 
expiration is prolonged due to 
narrowed airways increase the 
resistance to air ﬂow. Causes include 
asthma, chronic bronchitis, and 
COPD.
Rapid Deep Breathing (Hyperpnea, 
Hyperventilation)
In hyperpnea, rapid deep breathing occurs 
in response to metabolic demand from 
causes such as exercise, high altitude, 
sepsis, and anemia. In hyperventilation, this 
pattern is independent of metabolic 
demand, except in respiratory acidosis. 
Light-headedness and tingling may arise 
from decreased CO2 concentration. In the 
comatose patient, consider hypoxia, or 
hypoglycemia affecting the midbrain or 
pons. Kussmaul breathing is compensatory 
overbreathing due to systemic acidosis. The 
breathing rate may be fast, normal, or slow.
Ataxic Breathing (Biot Breathing)
Breathing is irregular—periods of apnea 
alternate with regular deep breaths 
which stop suddenly for short intervals. 
Causes include meningitis, respiratory 
depression, and brain injury, typically at 
the medullary level.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
336 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 8-5 Deformities of the Thorax
Normal Adult
The lateral diameter of the thorax in the normal adult is greater 
than its AP diameter. The ratio of its AP diameter to the lateral 
diameter is normally ∼0.7 up to 0.9 and increases with aging.43
Funnel Chest (Pectus Excavatum)
Note depression in the lower portion of the sternum. 
Compression of the heart and great vessels may cause 
murmurs.
Barrel Chest
There is an increased AP diameter. This shape is normal during 
infancy, and often accompanies aging and chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.
Depressed 
costal cartilages
Anteriorly 
displaced sternum
Pigeon Chest (Pectus Carinatum)
The sternum is displaced anteriorly, increasing the AP 
diameter. The costal cartilages adjacent to the protruding 
sternum are depressed.
 
 
 
 
 
Expiration
Inspiration
Traumatic Flail Chest
Multiple rib fractures may result in paradoxical movements of 
the thorax. As descent of the diaphragm decreases intrathoracic 
pressure, on inspiration, the injured area caves inward; on 
expiration, it moves outward.
Spinal convexity to the right
(patient bending forward)
Ribs 
widely
separated
Ribs close
together
Thoracic Kyphoscoliosis
Abnormal spinal curvatures and vertebral rotation deform the 
chest. Distortion of the underlying lungs may make 
interpretation of lung ﬁndings very difﬁcult.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  8 |
 
The Thorax and Lungs 
337
Table 8-6 Normal and Altered Breath and Voice Sounds
The origins of breath sounds continue to be investigated.47 Acoustic studies indicate that turbulent air ﬂow in the pharynx, 
glottis, and subglottic region produce tracheal breath sounds, which are similar to bronchial sounds. The inspiratory component 
of vesicular breath sounds seems to arise in the lobar and segmental airways; the expiratory component arises in the more 
central larger airways. Normally, tracheal and bronchial sounds may be heard over the trachea and mainstem bronchi; vesicular 
breath sounds predominate throughout most of the lungs. When lung tissue loses airﬂow, there is increased transmission of 
high-pitched sounds. If the tracheobronchial tree is open, bronchial breath sounds may replace the normal vesicular sounds over 
airless areas of the lung. This change occurs in lobar pneumonia when the alveoli get ﬁlled with ﬂuid and cellular debris—a 
process called consolidation. Other causes include pulmonary edema or, rarely, hemorrhage. Bronchial breath sounds usually 
correlate with an increase in tactile fremitus and transmitted voice sounds. These ﬁndings are summarized below.
Normal Air-Filled Lung
Consolidated Airless Lung (Lobar 
Pneumonia)
Breath Sounds
Predominantly vesicular
Bronchial or bronchovesicular over the involved 
area
Transmitted Voice 
Sounds
Spoken words mufﬂed and indistinct
Spoken “ee” heard as “ee”
Whispered words faint and indistinct, if heard  
at all
Spoken “ee” heard as “ay” (egophony)
Spoken words louder (bronchophony)
Whispered words louder, clearer (whispered 
pectoriloquy)
Tactile Fremitus
Normal
Increased
NOTE: In the hyperinﬂated lung of COPD, 
breath sounds are decreased (mufﬂed to distant) 
to absent and transmitted voice sounds and 
fremitus are decreased.
NOTE: In the dull lung of pleural effusion, breath 
sounds are decreased to absent (bronchial sounds 
possible at upper margin of effusion). Transmitted 
voice sounds are decreased to absent (but may be 
increased at upper margin of effusion). Fremitus 
is decreased.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
338 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 8-7  Adventitious (Added) Lung Sounds:  
Causes and Qualities
Sound
Causes and Qualities
Crackles
Crackles are discontinuous nonmusical sounds that can be early inspiratory (as in 
COPD), late inspiratory (as in pulmonary ﬁbrosis), or biphasic (as in pneumonia). They are 
currently considered to result from a series of tiny explosions when small distal airways, 
deﬂated during expiration, pop open during inspiration. With few exceptions, recent 
acoustic studies indicate that the role of secretions as a cause of crackles is less likely.47,48
Fine crackles are softer, higher pitched, and more frequent per breath than coarse 
crackles. They are heard from mid to late inspiration, especially in the dependent areas of 
the lung, and change according to body position. They have a shorter duration and 
higher frequency than coarse crackles. Fine crackles appear to be generated by the 
“sudden inspiratory opening of small airways held closed by surface forces during the 
previous expiration.”47
Examples include pulmonary ﬁbrosis (known for “Velcro rales”) and interstitial lung 
diseases such as interstitial ﬁbrosis and interstitial pneumonitis.
Coarse crackles appear in early inspiration and last throughout expiration (biphasic), have 
a popping sound, are heard over any lung region, and do not vary with body position. 
They have a longer duration and lower frequency than ﬁne crackles, change or disappear 
with coughing, and are transmitted to the mouth. Coarse crackles appear to result from 
“boluses of gas passing through airways as they open and close intermittently.”47
Examples include COPD, asthma, bronchiectasis, pneumonia (crackles may become ﬁner 
and change from mid to late inspiratory during recovery), and heart failure.
Wheezes and Rhonchi
Wheezes are continuous musical sounds that occur during rapid airﬂow when bronchial 
airways are narrowed almost to the point of closure. Wheezes can be inspiratory, 
expiratory, or biphasic. They may be localized, due to a foreign body, mucous plug, or 
tumor, or heard throughout the lung. Although wheezes are typical of asthma, they can 
occur in a number of pulmonary diseases. Recent studies suggest that as the airways 
become more narrowed, wheezes become less audible, culminating ﬁnally in “the silent 
chest” of severe asthma requiring immediate intervention.
Rhonchi are considered by some to be a variant of wheezes, arising from the same 
mechanism, but lower in pitch. Unlike wheezes, rhonchi may disappear with coughing, 
so secretions may be involved.47
Stridor
Stridor is a continuous, high-frequency, high-pitched musical sound produced during 
airﬂow through a narrowing in the upper respiratory tract. Stridor is best heard over the 
neck during inspiration, but can be biphasic. Causes of the underlying airway obstruction 
include tracheal stenosis from intubation, airway edema after device removal, epiglottitis, 
foreign body, and anaphylaxis. Immediate intervention is warranted.
Pleural Rub
A pleural rub is a discontinuous, low-frequency, grating sound that arises from 
inﬂammation and roughening of the visceral pleura as it slides against the parietal pleura. 
This nonmusical sound is biphasic, heard during inspiration and expiration, and often 
best heard in the axilla and base of the lungs.
Mediastinal Crunch  
(Hamman Sign)
A mediastinal crunch is a series of precordial crackles synchronous with the heartbeat, 
not with respiration. Best heard in the left lateral position, it arises from air entry into the 
mediastinum causing mediastinal emphysema (pneumomediastinum). It usually produces 
severe central chest pain and may be spontaneous. It has been reported in cases of 
tracheobronchial injury, blunt trauma, pulmonary disease, use of recreational drugs, 
childbirth, and rapid ascent from scuba diving.63
Sources: Bohadana A, Izbicki G, Kraman SS. Fundamentals of lung auscultation. N Engl J Med. 2014;370:744; McGee S. Evidence-based Physical Diagnosis, 3rd ed. 
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders, 2012; Loudon R, Murphy LH. Lungs sounds. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1994;130:663.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  8 |
 
The Thorax and Lungs 
339
Table 8-8 Physical Findings in Selected Chest Disorders
The red boxes in this table provide a framework for the clinical assessment of common chest disorders. Start with the three 
boxes under percussion. Note resonant, dull, and hyperresonant. Then move from each of these to other boxes that emphasize 
some of the key differences among various conditions. The changes described vary with the extent and severity of the disorder. 
Abnormalities deep in the chest usually produce fewer signs than superﬁcial ones, and may cause no signs at all. Use the table 
for the direction of typical changes, not for absolute distinctions.
Condition
Percussion 
Note
Trachea
Breath Sounds
Adventitious 
Sounds
Tactile Fremitus 
and Transmitted 
Voice Sounds
Normal
The tracheobronchial tree 
and alveoli are open; 
pleurae are thin and close 
together; mobility of the 
chest wall is unimpaired.
Resonant
Midline
Vesicular, except per-
haps bronchovesicular 
and bronchial sounds 
over the large bronchi 
and trachea, respectively
None, except a 
few transient 
inspiratory 
crackles at the 
bases of the lungs
Normal
Left-Sided Heart  
Failure
Increased pressure in the 
pulmonary veins causes 
congestion and interstitial 
edema (around the 
alveoli); bronchial mucosa 
may become edematous.
Resonant
Midline
Vesicular (normal)
Late inspiratory 
crackles in the 
dependent 
portions of the 
lungs; possibly 
wheezes
Normal
Chronic Bronchitis
The bronchi are 
chronically inﬂamed and 
a productive cough is 
present. Airway 
obstruction may develop.
Resonant
Midline
Vesicular (normal)
None; possible 
scattered coarse 
crackles in early 
inspiration and 
expiration; possible 
wheezes or rhonchi
Normal
Lobar Pneumonia  
(Consolidation)
Alveoli ﬁll with ﬂuid, as 
in pneumonia
Dull over the 
airless area
Midline
Bronchial over the 
involved area
Late inspiratory 
crackles over the 
involved area
Increased over the in-
volved area, with egoph-
ony, bronchophony, and 
whispered pectoriloquy
Partial Lobar  
Obstruction  
(Atelectasis)
When a plug (from 
mucus or a foreign 
object) obstructs 
bronchial air ﬂow, 
affected alveoli collapse 
and become airless
Dull over the 
airless area
May be shifted 
toward involved 
side
Usually absent when bron-
chial plug persists. Excep-
tions include right upper 
lobe atelectasis, where ad-
jacent tracheal sounds 
may be transmitted.
None
Usually absent when the 
bronchial plug persists. 
In right upper lobe 
atelectasis may be 
increased.
Pleural Effusion
Fluid accumulates in the 
pleural space and 
separates air-ﬁlled lung 
from the chest wall, 
blocking the transmission 
of breath sounds.
Dull to ﬂat  
over the ﬂuid
Shifted toward  
the unaffected  
side in a large 
effusion
Decreased to absent, but 
bronchial breath 
sounds may be heard 
near top of large 
effusion.
None, except a 
possible pleural rub
Decreased to absent, but 
may be increased toward 
the top of a large 
effusion
(continued)
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
340 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 8-8  Physical Findings in Selected Chest  
Disorders (Continued )
Condition
Percussion 
Note
Trachea
Breath Sounds
Adventitious 
Sounds
Tactile Fremitus 
and Transmitted 
Voice Sounds
Pneumothorax
When air leaks into the 
pleural space, usually 
unilaterally, the lung 
recoils away from the 
chest wall. Pleural air 
blocks transmission of 
sound.
Hyperresonant 
or tympanitic 
over the pleural 
air
Shifted toward 
the unaffected 
side if tension 
pneumothorax
Decreased to absent 
over the pleural air
None, except a 
possible pleural rub
Decreased to absent over 
the pleural air
Chronic Obstructive  
Pulmonary Disease  
(COPD)
Slowly progressive 
disorder in which the 
distal air spaces enlarge 
and lungs become 
hyperinﬂated. Chronic 
bronchitis may precede 
or follow the 
development of COPD.
Diffusely 
hyperresonant
Midline
Decreased to absent, 
with delayed 
expiration
None, or the 
crackles,  
wheezes, and 
rhonchi of 
associated  
chronic  
bronchitis
Decreased
Asthma
Widespread, usually 
reversible, airﬂow 
obstruction with 
bronchial 
hyperresponsiveness and 
underlying inﬂammation. 
During attacks, as air 
ﬂow decreases lungs 
hyperinﬂate.
Resonant to 
diffusely 
hyperresonant
Midline
Often obscured by 
wheezes
Wheezes,  
possibly  
crackles
Decreased
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  8 |
 
The Thorax and Lungs 
341
REFERENCES
References
 1. Huffman JC, Pollack MH, Stern TA. Panic disorder and chest pain: 
mechanisms, morbidity, and management. Prim Care Companion J 
Clin Psychiatry. 2002;4:54.
 2. Demiryoguran NS, Karcioglu O, Topacoglu H, et al. Anxiety disor-
der in patients with non-speciﬁc chest pain in the emergency set-
ting. Emerg Med J. 2006;23:99.
 3. Katerndahl DA. Chest pain and its importance in patients with 
panic disorder: an updated literature review. Prim Care Companion 
J Clin Psychiatry. 2008;10:376.
 4. McConaghy JR, Oza RS. Outpatient diagnosis of acute chest pain 
in adults. Am Fam Physician. 2013;87:177.
 5. Parshall MB, Schwartzstein RM, Adams L, et al; American Thoracic 
Society Committee on Dyspnea. An ofﬁcial American Thoracic 
Society statement: update on the mechanisms, assessment, and 
management of dyspnea. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2012;185:435.
 6. Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease. Global 
strategy for the diagnosis, management, and prevention of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease. Updated 2015. Available at http://
www.goldcopd.org/uploads/users/files/GOLD_Report_2015_
Feb18.pdf. Accessed March 14, 2015.
 7. Celli BR, Cote CG, Marin JM, et al. The body-mass index, airﬂow 
obstruction, dyspnea, and exercise capacity index in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:1005.
 8. Bestall JC, Paul EA, Garrod R, et al. Usefulness of the Medical 
Research Council (MRC) dyspnoea scale as a measure of disability 
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Thorax. 
1999;54:581.
 9. Kerlin MP. In the clinic. Asthma. Ann Intern Med. 2014;160: 
ITC3–1.
 10. Benich JJ 3rd, Carek PJ. Evaluation of the patient with chronic 
cough. Am Fam Physician. 2011;84:887.
 11. Canning BJ, Chang AB, Bolser DC, et al. Anatomy and neurophys-
iology of cough: CHEST Guideline and Expert Panel report. Chest. 
2014;146:1633.
 12. Musher DM, Thorner AR. Community acquired pneumonia. 
N Engl J Med. 2014;371:1619.
 13. Wunderink RG, Waterer GW. Clinical practice. Community-
acquired pneumonia. N Engl J Med. 2014;370:543.
 14. Bel EH. Clinical practice. Mild asthma. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:549.
 15. Braman SS. Chronic cough due to acute bronchitis: ACCP evi-
dence-based clinical practice guidelines. Chest. 2006;129(1 
Suppl):95S.
 16. Novosad SA, Barker AF. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
and bronchiectasis. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2013;19:133.
 17. Moulton BC, Barker AF. Pathogenesis of bronchiectasis. Clin Chest 
Med. 2012;33:211.
 18. Lara AR, Schwarz MI. Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage. Chest. 
2010;137:1164.
 19. Jordan AS, McSharry DG, Malhotra A. Adult obstructive sleep 
apnoea. Lancet. 2014;383(9918):736.
 20. Balanchandran JS, Patel SR. In the clinic: obstructive sleep apnea. 
Ann Intern Med. 2014;161:ITC1.
 21. Vital signs: current cigarette smoking among adults aged ≥18 
years—United States, 2005–2010. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 
2011;60(35):1207.
 22. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Smoking and tobacco 
use. Youth and tobacco Use 2014. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/
tobacco/data_statistics/fact_sheets/youth_data/tobacco_use./ 
Accessed January 29, 2015.
 23. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. How Tobacco 
Smoke Causes Disease: The Biology and Behavioral Basis for Smoking-
Attributable Disease: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta, GA: 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Dis-
ease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease 
Prevention and Health Promotion, Ofﬁce on Smoking and Health; 
2010. Available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK53017/. Accessed January 29, 2015.
 24. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Counseling and interventions 
to prevent tobacco use and tobacco-caused disease in adults and 
pregnant women: reafﬁrmation recommendation statement. Ann 
Intern Med. 2009;150:551.
 25. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Fact sheets. Health 
effects of cigarette smoking. 2014. Available at http://www.cdc.
gov/tobacco/data_statistics/fact_sheets/health_effects/effects_cig_
smoking/index.htm. Accessed January 29, 2015.
 26. Moyer VA. Primary care interventions to prevent tobacco use in 
children and adolescents: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force rec-
ommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2013;159:552.
 27. Rigotti NA. Strategies to help a smoker who is struggling to quit. 
JAMA. 2012;308:1573.
 28. Fiore MC, Baker TB. Clinical practice. Treating smokers in the 
health care setting. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:1222.
 29. Ranney L, Melvin C, Lux L, et al. Systematic review: smoking ces-
sation intervention strategies for adults and adults in special popu-
lations. Ann Intern Med. 2006;145:845.
 30. Norcross JC, Prochaska JO. Using the stages of change. Harv Ment 
Health Lett. 2002;18:5.
 31. Benowitz NL. Nicotine addiction. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:2295.
 32. Stead LF, Lancaster T. Combined pharmacotherapy and behav-
ioural interventions for smoking cessation. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2012;10:CD008286.
 33. Siegel R, Ma J, Zou Z, et al. Cancer statistics, 2014. CA Cancer J 
Clin. 2014;64:9.
 34. Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al. SEER Cancer Statistics 
Review, 1975–2011. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute; 
2014.
 35. Aberle DR, Adams AM, Berg CD, et al. Reduced lung-cancer mor-
tality with low-dose computed tomographic screening. N Engl J 
Med. 2011;365:395.
 36. Moyer VA. Screening for lung cancer: U.S. Preventive Services Task 
Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2014;160:330.
 37. Wender R, Fontham ET, Barrera E Jr., et al. American Cancer Soci-
ety lung cancer screening guidelines. CA Cancer J Clin. 2013;63:107.
 38. Estimates of deaths associated with seasonal inﬂuenza—United 
States, 1976–2007. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2010;59(33): 
1057.
 39. Grohskopf LA, Olsen SJ, Sokolow LZ, et al. Prevention and control 
of seasonal inﬂuenza with vaccines: recommendations of the Advi-
sory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP)—United 
States, 2014–2015 inﬂuenza season. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep. 2014;63(32):691.
 40. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prevention and con-
trol of seasonal inﬂuenza with vaccines. Recommendations of the 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices–United States, 
2015–2016. Updated August 6, 2015. Available at http://www.cdc.
gov/ﬂu/professionals/acip/index.htm. Accessed November 13, 
2015.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
342 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
 41. Updated recommendations for prevention of invasive pneumococ-
cal disease among adults using the 23-valent pneumococcal poly-
saccharide vaccine (PPSV23). MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 
2010;59(34):1102.
 42. Tomczyk S, Bennett NM, Stoecker C, et al. Use of 13-valent pneu-
mococcal conjugate vaccine and 23-valent pneumococcal polysac-
charide vaccine among adults aged >/ = 65 years: recommendations 
of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2014;63(37):822. See also Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention. Vaccine information state-
ment. Pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine - What you need to 
know; April 4, 2015. At http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/vis/vis-
statements/ppv.pdf. Accessed November 13, 2015.
 43. McGee S. Ch 26, Inspection of the Chest. In Evidence-based Physical 
Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:233–234.
 44. McGee S. Ch 27, Palpation and Percussion of the Chest. In Evidence-
based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 
2012:240.
 45. McGee S. Ch 27, Palpation and Percussion of the Chest. In Evidence-
Based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 
2012:248.
 46. Wong CL, Holroyd-Leduc J, Straus SE. Does this patient have a 
pleural effusion? JAMA. 2009;301:309.
 47. Bohadana A, Izbicki G, Kraman SS. Fundamentals of lung auscul-
tation. N Engl J Med. 2014;370:744.
 48. McGee S. Ch 28, Auscultation of the Lungs. In Evidence-Based Physical 
Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:260.
 49. Loudon R, Murphy LH. Lungs sounds. Am Rev Respir Dis. 
1994;130:663.
 50. Epler GR, Carrrington CB, Gaensler EA. Crackles (rales) in the 
interstitial pulmonary diseases. Chest. 1978;73:333.
 51. Nath AR, Capel LH. Inspiratory crackles and mechanical events of 
breathing. Thorax. 1974;29:695.
 52. Nath AR, Capel LH. Lung crackles in bronchiectasis. Thorax. 
1980;35:694.
 53. Littner M. In the clinic: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
Ann Intern Med. 2011;154:ITC4–1.
 54. Niewoehner DE. Clinical practice. Outpatient management of 
severe COPD. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1407.
 55. Qaseem A, Wilt TJ, Weinberger SE, et al; American College of Phy-
sicians; American College of Chest Physicians; American Thoracic 
Society; European Respiratory Society. Diagnosis and management 
of stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a clinical practice 
guideline update from the American College of Physicians, Ameri-
can College of Chest Physicians, American Thoracic Society, and 
European Respiratory Society. Ann Intern Med. 2011;155:179.
 56. Holleman DR, Simel DL. Does the clinical examination predict 
airﬂow limitation? JAMA. 1995;273:63.
 57. Straus SE, McAlister FA, Sackett DL, et al. The accuracy of patient 
history, wheezing, and laryngeal measurements in diagnosing 
obstructive airway disease. JAMA. 2000;283:1853.
 58. Spruit MA, Singh SJ, Garvey C, et al; ATS/ERS Task Force on Pul-
monary Rehabilitation. An ofﬁcial American Thoracic Society/
European Respiratory Society statement: key concepts and 
advances in pulmonary rehabilitation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 
2013;188:e13.
 59. McGee S. Ch 30, Pneumonia. In Evidence-Based Physical Diagnosis. 
3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:272.
 60. American Thoracic Society Committee on Proﬁciency Standards 
for Clinical Pulmonary Function Laboratories. ATS statement: 
guidelines for the six-minute walk test. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 
2002;166:111.
 61. Spruit MA, Watkins ML, Edwards LD, et al. Evaluation of COPD 
longitudinally to identify predictive surrogate endpoints (ECLIPSE) 
study investigators. Determinants of poor 6-min walking distance in 
patients with COPD: the ECLIPSE cohort. Respir Med. 2010;104:849.
 62. McGee S. Ch 29, Ancillary Tests. In Evidence-Based Physical Diagno-
sis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:267–268.
 63. Kouritas VK, Papagiannopoulos K. Pneumomediastinum. J Thorac 
Dis. 2015;7(Suppl 1):S44.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
343
C H A P T E R 9
The Cardiovascular System
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate  
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 10: Cardiovascular System)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com
Listening to the heart has come to epitomize the art of bedside diagnosis. Master-
ing the skills of cardiac examination requires patience, practice, and repetition—
a process especially vulnerable to evolving technology and the time constraints 
of clinical practice.1–4 Many reports attest to the current decline in physical 
examination skills, well documented for the cardiovascular system at all levels of 
training.5–12 As you study this chapter, combining your knowledge of anatomy 
and physiology with hands-on practice of inspection, palpation, and ausculta-
tion brings rewards of proven diagnostic value. Take advantage of the numerous 
programs for learning cardiac physiology and auscultation that can reinforce 
your growing clinical acumen, and pursue the emerging literature that compares 
the effectiveness of different modes of learning these important skills.13–22
Surface Projections of the Heart  
and Great Vessels
Visualize the underlying structures of the heart as you 
inspect the anterior chest. Note that the right ventricle 
(RV) occupies most of the anterior cardiac surface. This 
chamber and the pulmonary artery form a wedgelike 
structure behind and to the left of the sternum, outlined 
in black (Fig. 9-1).
The inferior border of the RV lies below the junction of the 
sternum and the xiphoid process. The RV narrows supe-
riorly and joins the pulmonary artery at the level of the 
sternal angle, or “base of the heart,” a clinical term that 
refers to the superior aspect of the heart at the right and 
left 2nd interspaces adjacent to the sternum.
Pulmonary artery
Right ventricle
F I G U R E  9 - 1 .  Chest wall and cardiac anatomy.
Anatomy and Physiology
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
344 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Apical impulse
Left ventricle
Superior
vena cava
Right atrium
Right ventricle
Pulmonary
artery
Aorta
F I G U R E  9 - 2 .  Cardiac anatomy—major structures.
The left ventricle, behind the RV and to the left, forms the left lateral margin of 
the heart (Fig. 9-2). Its tapered inferior tip is often termed the cardiac apex. It is 
clinically important because it produces the apical impulse, identiﬁed during 
palpation of the precordium as the point of maximal impulse (PMI). This impulse 
locates the left border of the heart and is normally found in the 5th intercostal 
space at or just medial to the left midclavicular line (or 7 to 9 cm lateral to the 
midsternal line). The PMI is not always palpable, even in a healthy patient with 
a normal heart. Detection is affected by both the patient’s body habitus and posi-
tion during the examination.
■ In supine patients the diameter of the PMI may be as large as a quarter, 
approximately 1 to 2.5 cm.
■ Note that, in some patients, the most prominent precordial impulse may not 
be at the apex of the left ventricle. For example, in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), the most prominent palpable im-
pulse or PMI may be in the xiphoid or epigastric area due to right ventricular 
hypertrophy.
Above the heart lie the great vessels. The pulmonary artery bifurcates quickly into 
its left and right branches. The aorta curves upward from the left ventricle to the 
level of the sternal angle, where it arches posteriorly to the left and then down-
ward. On the medial border, the superior and inferior venae cavae channel venous 
blood from the upper and lower portions of the body into the right atrium.
A PMI >2.5 cm is evidence of left  
ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) from 
hypertension or aortic stenosis. 
Displacement of the PMI lateral to the 
midclavicular line or >10 cm lateral to 
the midsternal line occurs in LVH and 
also in ventricular dilatation from myo-
cardial infarction (MI) or heart failure.
Rarely, in situs inversus and dextrocar-
dia, the PMI is located on the right 
side of the chest.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
345
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Cardiac Chambers, Valves, and Circulation
Circulation through the heart is diagrammed below. Identify the cardiac cham-
bers, valves, and direction of blood ﬂow. Because of their location, the mitral and 
tricuspid valves are often called atrioventricular (AV) valves. The aortic and pul-
monic valves are called semilunar valves because the valve leaﬂets are shaped like 
half moons.
As the heart valves close, the heart sounds of S1 and S2 arise from vibrations 
emanating from the leaﬂets, the adjacent cardiac structures, and the ﬂow of 
blood. Study carefully the opening and closing of the AV and semilunar valves 
in relation to events in the cardiac cycle to improve your diagnostic accuracy as 
you auscultate the heart. In Figure 9-3, note that the aortic and pulmonic valves 
are closed, and the mitral and tricuspid valves are open, as seen in diastole.
Pulmonary artery 
(to lungs)
Pulmonary veins 
(from lungs)
Superior 
vena cava
Aorta
Aortic valve
Mitral valve
Pulmonic 
valve
Tricuspid valve
Inferior vena cava
RA
LA
LV
RV
RA = Right atrium; LA = Left atrium; RV = Right ventricle; LV = Left ventricle
Course of deoxygenated blood 
Course of oxygenated blood
F I G U R E  9 - 3 .  Cardiac chambers, valves, and circulation.
In most adults over age 40 years, the 
diastolic sounds of S3 and S4 are 
pathologic, and are correlated with 
heart failure and acute myocardial 
ischemia.19,23,24 In recent studies, an S3 
corresponds to an abrupt deceleration 
of inflow across the mitral valve, and 
an S4 to increased left ventricular end 
diastolic stiffness which decreases 
compliance.25–27 
Events in the Cardiac Cycle
The heart serves as a pump that generates varying pressures as its chambers 
contract and relax. Systole is the period of ventricular contraction. As shown in 
Figure 9-4, pressure in the left ventricle rises, from less than 5 mm Hg in its 
resting state, to a normal peak of 120 mm Hg. After the ventricle ejects much of 
its blood into the aorta, the pressure levels off and starts to fall. Diastole is the 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
346 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
period of ventricular relaxation. Ventricular pressure falls further to below 
5 mm Hg, and blood ﬂows from atrium to ventricle. Late in diastole, ventricular 
pressure rises slightly during inﬂow of blood from atrial contraction.
Note that during systole the aortic valve is open, allowing ejection of blood from 
the left ventricle into the aorta. The mitral valve is closed, preventing blood from 
regurgitating back into the left atrium. In contrast, during diastole the aortic valve 
is closed, preventing regurgitation of blood from the aorta back into the left ven-
tricle. The mitral valve is open, allowing blood to ﬂow from the left atrium into 
the relaxed left ventricle. At the same time, during systole the pulmonic valve 
opens and the tricuspid valve closes as blood is ejected from the RV into the 
pulmonary artery. During diastole, the pulmonic valve closes and the tricuspid 
valve opens as blood ﬂows into the right atrium.
Understanding the interrelationships of the pressure gradients in the left heart 
(the left atrium, left ventricle, and aorta), together with the position and move-
ment of the four heart valves, is fundamental to understanding heart sounds. An 
extensive literature explores how heart sounds are generated. Possible explana-
tions include closure of the valve leaﬂets; tensing of related structures, leaﬂet 
positions, and pressure gradients at the time of atrial and ventricular systole; and 
the acoustic effects of moving columns of blood.
Trace the changing left ventricular pressures and sounds through one cardiac 
cycle. Note that S1 and S2 deﬁne the duration of systole and diastole. Right heart 
Systole
Diastole
Left ventricular pressure curve
120
mm Hg
0
F I G U R E  9 - 4 .  Cardiac cycle—left ventricle.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
347
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
sounds occur at pressures that are usually lower than those on the left, and are 
usually less audible. The explanations given here are oversimpliﬁed, but retain 
clinical usefulness.
During diastole, pressure in the blood-
ﬁlled left atrium slightly exceeds that in 
the relaxed left ventricle, and blood ﬂows 
from left atrium to left ventricle across the 
open mitral valve (Fig. 9-5). Just before 
the onset of ventricular systole, atrial con-
traction produces a slight pressure rise in 
both chambers.
During systole, the left ventricle starts to 
contract and ventricular pressure rapidly 
exceeds left atrial pressure, closing the 
mitral valve (Fig. 9-6). Closure of the mitral 
valve produces the ﬁrst heart sound, S1.
As left ventricular pressure continues to 
rise, it quickly exceeds the pressure in the 
aorta and forces the aortic valve open 
(Fig. 9-7). In some pathologic conditions, 
an early systolic ejection sound (Ej)
accompanies the opening of the aortic 
valve. Normally, maximal left ventricular 
pressure corresponds to systolic blood 
pressure.
As the left ventricle ejects most of its 
blood, ventricular pressure begins to fall. 
When left ventricular pressure drops 
below aortic pressure, the aortic valve 
closes (Fig. 9-8). Aortic valve closure 
produces the second heart sound, S2, 
and another diastole begins.
Atrial contraction
Left atrial pressure
Left ventricular pressure
F I G U R E  9 - 5 .  Cardiac cycle—diastole.
Left atrial pressure
Left ventricular pressure
Mitral
valve
closes
S1
F I G U R E  9 - 6 .  Diastole—mitral valve closes.
Left ventricular pressure
Aortic pressure
Aortic
valve
opens
S1 Ej
F I G U R E  9 - 7 .  Systole—aortic valve opens.
Left atrial pressure
Left ventricular pressure
Aortic valve closes
S1
S2
Ej
Aortic pressure
F I G U R E  9 - 8 .  Systole—aortic valve closes.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
348 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
In diastole, left ventricular pressure con-
tinues to drop and falls below left atrial 
pressure. The mitral valve opens 
(Fig. 9-9). This event is usually silent, but 
may be audible as a pathologic opening 
snap (OS) if valve leaﬂet motion is 
restricted, as in mitral stenosis.
After the mitral valve opens, there is a 
period of rapid ventricular ﬁlling as blood 
ﬂows early in diastole from left atrium to 
left ventricle (Fig. 9-10). In children and 
young adults, a third heart sound, S3, may 
arise from rapid deceleration of the col-
umn of blood against the ventricular wall. 
In older adults, an S3, sometimes termed 
“an S3 gallop,” usually indicates a patho-
logic change in ventricular compliance.
Finally, although not often heard in nor-
mal adults, a fourth heart sound, S4, 
marks atrial contraction (Fig. 9-11). It 
immediately precedes S1 of the next beat 
and can also reﬂect a pathologic change in 
ventricular compliance.
Aortic pressure
Mitral valve opens
S1
S2 OS
Ej
Left atrial pressure
Left ventricular pressure
F I G U R E  9 - 9 .  Diastole—mitral valve opens.
Period of rapid
ventricular filling
S1
S2
S3
OS
Ej
F I G U R E  9 - 1 0 .  Diastole—rapid ventricular ﬁlling; S3.
Augmented ventricular
filling as a result of
atrial contraction
S1
S2
S3
S4
OS
Ej
Diastole
Systole
F I G U R E  9 - 1 1 .  Diastole—atrial contraction; S4.
The Splitting of Heart Sounds
While these events are occurring on the left side of the heart, similar changes are 
occurring on the right side, which involves the right atrium, tricuspid valve, RV, 
pulmonic valve, and pulmonary arteries. Right ventricular and pulmonary arte-
rial pressures are signiﬁcantly lower than corresponding pressures on the left 
side. Note that right-sided cardiac events usually occur slightly later than those 
on the left. Instead of a hearing a single heart sound for S2, you may hear two 
discernible components, the ﬁrst from left-sided aortic valve closure, or A2, and 
the second from right-sided closure of the pulmonic valve, or P2.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
349
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The second heart sound, S2, and its two components, A2 and P2, are caused pri-
marily by closure of the aortic and pulmonic valves, respectively. During inspira-
tion, the right heart ﬁlling time is increased, which increases right ventricular 
stroke volume and the duration of right ventricular ejection compared with the 
neighboring left ventricle. This delays the closure of the pulmonic valve, P2, 
splitting S2 into its two audible components. During expiration, these two com-
ponents fuse into a single sound, S2 (Fig. 9-12). Note that because walls of veins 
contain less smooth muscle, the venous system has more capacitance than the 
arterial system and lower systemic pressure. Distensibility and impedance in the 
pulmonary vascular bed contribute to the “hangout time” that delays P2.28
S1
INSPIRATION
S2
A2
P2
S1
EXPIRATION
S2
F I G U R E  9 - 1 2 .  Spitting of S2 during 
inspiration.
Of the two components of the S2, A2 is normally louder, reﬂecting the high 
pressure in the aorta. It is heard throughout the precordium. In contrast, P2 is 
relatively soft, reﬂecting the lower pressure in the pulmonary artery. It is heard 
best in its own area, the 2nd and 3rd left interspaces close to the sternum. It is 
here that you should search for the splitting of S2.
S1 also has two components, an earlier mitral and a later tricuspid sound. The 
mitral sound—the principal component of S1—is much louder, again reﬂecting 
the higher pressures on the left side of the heart. It can be heard throughout the 
precordium and is loudest at the cardiac apex. The softer tricuspid component 
is heard best at the lower left sternal border; it is here that you may hear a split 
S1. The earlier louder mitral component may mask the tricuspid sound, how-
ever, and splitting is not always detectable. Splitting of S1 does not vary with 
respiration.
Heart Murmurs
Heart murmurs are distinct heart sounds distinguished by their pitch and their 
longer duration. They are attributed to turbulent blood ﬂow and are usually 
diagnostic of valvular heart disease. At times, they may also represent “innocent” 
ﬂow murmurs, especially in young adults. A stenotic valve has an abnormally 
narrowed valvular oriﬁce that obstructs blood ﬂow, as in aortic stenosis, and 
causes a characteristic murmur. So does a valve that fails to fully close, as in 
aortic regurgitation. Such a valve allows blood to leak backward in a retrograde 
direction and produces a regurgitant murmur.
To identify murmurs accurately, you must learn where they are best heard on the 
chest wall, their timing in systole or diastole, and their descriptive qualities. In 
the Techniques of Examination section, you will learn to integrate location and 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
350 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
timing with the murmur’s shape, maximal intensity, direction of radiation, grade 
of intensity, pitch, and quality (see pp. 373–399).
Relation of Auscultatory Findings  
to the Chest Wall
The locations on the chest wall where you auscultate heart sounds and murmurs 
help identify the valve or chamber where they originate.
Chest Wall Location and Origin of  
Valve Sounds and Murmurs
Chest Wall Location
Typical Origin of 
Sounds and Murmurs
Right 2nd interspace to the apex
Aortic valve
Left 2nd and 3rd interspaces close to the 
sternum, but also at higher or lower levels
Pulmonic valve
At or near the lower left sternal border
Tricuspid valve
At and around the cardiac apex
Mitral valve
These areas overlap, as illustrated in Figure 9-13. Integrating the auscultatory 
location with the timing of the sound or murmur, either systole or diastole, is an 
important ﬁrst step in identifying sounds and murmurs correctly, and often leads 
to accurate bedside diagnosis when integrated with other cardiac ﬁndings.
Aortic
Tricuspid
Pulmonic
Mitral
F I G U R E  9 - 1 3 .  Listening areas on the chest wall.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
351
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The Conduction System
An electrical conduction system stimulates and coordinates the contraction of 
cardiac muscle.
Normally, each electrical impulse originates in the sinus node, a group of special-
ized cardiac cells located in the right atrium near the junction of the vena cava. 
The sinus node acts as the cardiac pacemaker and 
automatically discharges an impulse about 60 to 90 
times a minute. This impulse travels through both 
atria to the AV node, a specialized group of cells 
located low in the atrial septum. Here, the impulse is 
delayed before passing down the bundle of His and 
its branches to the ventricular myocardium. Muscu-
lar contraction follows: ﬁrst the atria, then the ven-
tricles. The normal conduction system is diagrammed 
in Figure 9-14 in simpliﬁed form.
The Electrocardiogram. The electrocardiogram, or ECG, records these 
events. Contraction of cardiac smooth muscle produces electrical activity, 
resulting in a series of waves on the ECG. The ECG consists of six limb leads in 
the frontal plane (Fig. 9-15) and six chest or precordial leads in the transverse plane 
(Fig. 9-16).
Interatrial
bundle
Left bundle
branch
Right bundle branch
Bundle of His
Atrioventricular
(AV) node
Sinoatrial 
(SA) node
F I G U R E  9 - 1 4 .  Cardiac conduction system.
Right
Left
aVL
aVR
aVF
I
II
III
Superior
F I G U R E  9 - 1 5 .  Limb leads: frontal 
plane.
Right
Posterior
Left
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
F I G U R E  9 - 1 6 .  Chest leads: 
transverse plane.
■ Electrical vectors approaching a lead cause a positive, or upward, deﬂection.
■ Electrical vectors moving away from the lead cause a negative, or downward, 
deﬂection.
■ When positive and negative vectors balance, they are isoelectric and appear 
as a straight line.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
352 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
P, Q, R, S, and T Waves. The deﬂections of the normal ECG and their 
duration are brieﬂy summarized here and shown in Figure 9-17. You will need 
further instruction and considerable practice to interpret recordings from 
patients.
R
P
Q S
T
F I G U R E  9 - 1 7 .  ECG deﬂections.
● The small P wave of atrial depolarization (duration up to 80 milliseconds; PR 
interval 120 to 200 milliseconds)
● The larger QRS complex of ventricular depolarization (up to 100 milliseconds), 
consisting of one or more of the following:
● the Q wave, a downward deﬂection from septal depolarization
● the R wave, an upward deﬂection from ventricular depolarization
● the S wave, a downward deﬂection following an R wave
● A T wave of ventricular repolarization, or recovery (duration relates to QRS)
ECG Waves and the Cardiac Cycle. The electrical impulse slightly 
precedes the myocardial contraction that it stimulates. The relation of 
electrocardiographic waves to the cardiac cycle is shown in Figure 9-18.
P
RS
T
Q
P
T
RS
Q
Systole
Diastole
Electrocardiogram
Heart sounds
S4 S1
S2
S3
S2
S4 S1
F I G U R E  9 - 1 8 .  ECG waves and the cardiac cycle.
The Heart as a Pump
The left and right ventricles pump blood into the systemic and pulmonary arte-
rial trees, respectively. Cardiac output, the volume of blood ejected from each 
ventricle during 1 minute, is the product of heart rate and stroke volume. Stroke 
volume (the volume of blood ejected with each heartbeat) depends in turn on 
preload, myocardial contractility, and afterload.
■ Preload refers to the load that stretches the cardiac muscle before contraction. 
The volume of blood in the RV at the end of diastole constitutes its preload 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
353
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
for the next beat. Right ventricular preload is increased by increasing venous 
return to the right heart. Physiologic causes include inspiration and the 
increased volume of blood ﬂow from exercising muscles. The increased 
blood volume of a dilated RV in heart failure also increases preload. Causes 
of decreased right ventricular preload include exhalation, decreased left ven-
tricular output, and pooling of blood in the capillary bed or the venous 
system.
■ Myocardial contractility refers to the ability of the cardiac muscle, when given 
a load, to shorten. Contractility increases when stimulated by action of the 
sympathetic nervous system and decreases when blood ﬂow or oxygen de-
livery to the myocardium is impaired.
■ Afterload refers to the degree of vascular resistance to ventricular contrac-
tion. Sources of resistance to contraction include the tone in the walls of 
the aorta, the large arteries, and the peripheral vascular tree (primarily the 
small arteries and arterioles), as well as the volume of blood already in the 
aorta.
Pathologic increases in preload and afterload, called volume overload and pressure 
overload, respectively, produce changes in ventricular function that may be clin-
ically detectable. These changes include alterations in ventricular impulses, 
detectable by palpation, and in normal heart sounds. Pathologic heart sounds 
and murmurs may also develop.
Arterial Pulses and Blood Pressure
With each contraction, the left ventricle ejects a volume of blood into the 
aorta that then perfuses the arterial tree. As the ensuing pressure wave moves 
rapidly through the arterial system it generates the arterial pulse. Although 
the pressure wave travels quickly, many times faster than the blood itself, 
a palpable delay between ventricular contraction and peripheral pulses 
makes the pulses in the arms and legs unsuitable for timing events in the 
cardiac cycle.
Blood pressure in the arterial system varies during the cardiac cycle, peaking in 
systole and falling to its lowest trough in diastole (Fig. 9-19). These are the 
levels that are measured with the blood pressure cuff, or sphygmomanometer. 
The difference between systolic and diastolic pressures is known as the pulse 
pressure.
The terms heart failure with preserved 
ejection fraction (EF) and heart failure 
with reduced EF are now preferred to 
“congestive heart failure” because of 
differences in treatment.29 
Factors Affecting Blood Pressure
● Left ventricular stroke volume
● Distensibility of the aorta and the large arteries
● Peripheral vascular resistance, particularly at the arteriolar level
● Volume of blood in the arterial system
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
354 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Changes in any of these four factors alter systolic pressure, diastolic pressure, 
or both. Blood pressure levels ﬂuctuate strikingly throughout any 24-hour 
period, varying with physical activity, emotional state, pain, noise, environ-
mental temperature, use of coffee, tobacco, and other drugs, and even time 
of day.
Jugular Venous Pressure and Pulsations
The jugular veins provide an important index of right heart pressures and cardiac 
function. Jugular venous pressure ( JVP) reﬂects right atrial pressure, which in 
turn equals central venous pressure and right ventricular end-diastolic pres-
sure. The JVP is best estimated from the right internal jugular vein, which has 
the most direct channel into the right atrium. Some afﬁrm that the right exter-
nal jugular vein can also be used.30 Because the jugular veins lie deep to the 
sternocleidomastoid (SCM) muscles, learn to identify the pulsations they trans-
mit to the surface of the neck, brieﬂy described below, and measure their highest 
point of oscillation.
Changing pressures in the right atrium during 
diastole and systole produce oscillations of ﬁll-
ing and emptying in the jugular veins, or jugular 
venous pulsations (Fig. 9-20). Atrial contraction 
produces an a wave in the jugular veins just 
before S1 and systole, followed by the x descent 
of atrial relaxation. As right atrial pressure begins 
to rise with inﬂow from the vena cava during 
right ventricular systole, there is a second eleva-
tion, the v wave, followed by the y descent as 
blood passively empties into the RV during early 
and middiastole.
120
80
40
0
Systole
Diastole
Diastolic pressure
Pulse pressure
Systolic pressure
mm Hg
F I G U R E  9 - 1 9 .  Blood pressure and pulse pressure in the cardiac cycle.
See pp. 374–379 for more detailed 
discussion of the JVP and techniques 
for its examination. 
x
y
v
a
S1
S1
S2
S2
Systole
Diastole
F I G U R E  9 - 2 0 .  Jugular venous 
pulsations.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
355
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Changes Over the Life Span
Aging may affect the location of the apical impulse, the pitch of heart sounds and 
murmurs, the stiffness of the arteries, and blood pressure. For example, the PMI 
is usually easily palpated in children and young adults; as the chest deepens in 
its anteroposterior (AP) diameter, the impulse gets harder to ﬁnd. For the same 
reason, splitting of S2 may be harder to hear in older people as its pulmonic com-
ponent becomes less audible. Furthermore, at some time during the life span, 
almost everyone has a heart murmur. Most murmurs occur without other evi-
dence of cardiovascular abnormality and are considered normal variants. These 
common murmurs vary with age, and knowing their patterns helps you to dis-
tinguish normal from abnormal.
Murmurs may originate in large blood vessels as well as in the heart. The jugular 
venous hum, which is common in children, may still be heard through young 
adulthood (see pp. 878–879). A second more important example is the cervical 
systolic murmur or bruit, which may be innocent in children but suspicious for 
atherosclerotic disease in adults.
Turn to Chapter 18, Assessing Chil-
dren: Infancy Through Adolescence, 
pp. 799–925, and to Chapter 19, The 
Pregnant Woman, p. 943, for discus-
sion of these innocent murmurs. 
The Health History
Assessing Cardiac Symptoms—Overview and Comparison 
with Baseline Activity Levels. This section approaches chest 
symptoms from a cardiac standpoint, and includes the important symptoms of 
chest pain, palpitations, shortness of breath from orthopnea or paroxysmal 
nocturnal dyspnea (PND), swelling from edema, and fainting. For chest 
symptoms, be systematic as you think through the range of possible cardiac, 
pulmonary, and extrathoracic etiologies. Study the various causes of chest 
pain, dyspnea, wheezing, cough, and even hemoptysis, because these symptoms 
can be cardiac as well as pulmonary in origin.
When assessing cardiac symptoms, it is important to quantify the patient’s 
baseline level of activity. For example, in patients with chest pain, does the pain 
occur with climbing stairs? How many ﬂights? How many steps? How about with 
walking—50 feet, one block, more? What about carrying groceries, making 
beds, or vacuuming? How does this compare with these activities in the past? 
Common or Concerning Symptoms
● Chest pain
● Palpitations
● Shortness of breath: dyspnea, orthopnea, or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea
● Swelling (edema)
● Fainting (syncope)
Review the Health History section of 
Chapter 8, The Thorax and Lungs,  
pp. 303–342; Table 8-1, Chest Pain,  
pp. 330–331; and Table 8-2, Dyspnea, 
pp. 332–333. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
356 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
When did the symptoms appear or change? If the patient is short of breath, does 
this occur at rest, during exercise, or after climbing stairs? Sudden shortness of 
breath has different implications in an athlete compared to a person who only 
walks from one room to another. Quantifying the baseline level of activity helps 
establish both the severity of the patient’s symptoms and their signiﬁcance as you 
consider the next steps for management.
Chest Pain. Chest pain is one of the most serious of all patient complaints, 
and accounts for 1% of primary care outpatient visits.31 It is the most common 
symptom of coronary heart disease (CHD), which affects over 15 million 
Americans age ≥20 years.32 In 2012, the prevalence of MI was 7.6 million 
people and of angina pectoris, 8.2 million. CHD is the leading killer of both 
men and women. In 2011, CHD accounted for one in seven U.S. deaths. Death 
rates remain highest for black men and black women compared to other ethnic 
groups.
As you evaluate your patient’s history of chest pain, always consider life-
threatening diagnoses such as angina pectoris, MI, dissecting aortic aneu-
rysm, and pulmonary embolus.31,34–36 Learn to distinguish cardiovascular 
causes from disorders of the pericardium, trachea and bronchi, parietal pleura, 
esophagus, and chest wall, and from extrathoracic causes in the neck, shoul-
der, gallbladder, and stomach.
Both men and women with acute coronary syndrome usually present with the 
classic symptoms of exertional angina; however, women, particularly those 
over age 65, are more likely to report atypical symptoms that may go unrecog-
nized, such as upper back, neck, or jaw pain, shortness of breath, paroxysmal 
nocturnal dyspnea, nausea or vomiting, and fatigue, making careful history 
taking especially important.37–39 Failure to identify cardiac causes of chest pain 
can have dire consequences. Inappropriate discharge from the emergency room 
results in a 25% mortality rate.40
Begin with open-ended questions… “Please tell me about any symptoms you 
might be having in your chest.” Then elicit more speciﬁc details. Ask the patient 
to point to the pain and describe all seven features of the symptom. Clarify “Is the 
pain related to exertion?” and “What kinds of activities bring on the pain?” Also, 
“How intense is the pain, on a scale of 1 to 10?”… “Does it radiate into the neck, 
shoulder, back, or down your arm?”… “Are there any associated symptoms like 
shortness of breath, sweating, palpitations, or nausea?”… “Does it ever wake you 
up at night?”… “What do you do to make it better?”
Palpitations. Palpitations involve an unpleasant awareness of the 
heartbeat. Patients use various terms to describe palpitations such as skipping, 
racing, ﬂuttering, pounding, or stopping of the heart. Palpitations may be 
irregular, rapidly slow down or accelerate, or arise from the increased 
forcefulness of cardiac contraction. Anxious and hyperthyroid patients may 
report palpitations. Palpitations do not necessarily mean heart disease. In 
contrast, the most serious dysrhythmias, such as ventricular tachycardia, often 
do not produce palpitations.
Classic exertional pain, pressure, or 
discomfort in the chest, shoulder, 
back, neck, or arm in angina pecto-
ris, is seen in 18% of patients with 
acute MI32; atypical descriptors also 
are common, such as cramping, 
grinding, pricking or, rarely, tooth  
or jaw pain.33 
Acute coronary syndrome is increas-
ingly used to describe the clinical syn-
dromes caused by acute myocardial 
ischemia, which include unstable 
angina, non–ST elevation MI, and ST  
elevation infarction.32 
Causes of chest pain in the absence of 
coronary artery disease on angiogram 
include microvascular coronary dysfunc-
tion and abnormal cardiac nocioception, 
which require specialized testing.37 
Roughly half of women with chest pain 
and normal angiograms have micro-
vascular coronary dysfunction. 
Anterior chest pain, often tearing or rip-
ping and radiating into the back or neck, 
occurs in acute aortic dissection.36,41 
See Table 9-1, Selected Heart Rates 
and Rhythms, and Table 9-2, Selected 
Irregular Rhythms, for selected heart 
rates and rhythms (pp. 400–401). 
If there are symptoms or signs of 
irregular heart action, obtain an ECG. 
This includes atrial fibrillation, which 
causes an “irregularly irregular” pulse 
often identified at the bedside.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
357
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Reword your questions if needed—“Are you ever aware of your heartbeat? What 
is it like?” Ask the patient to tap out the rhythm with a hand or ﬁnger. Was it fast 
or slow? Regular or irregular? How long did it last? If there was an episode of 
rapid heartbeats, did they start and stop suddenly or gradually? For this group 
of symptoms, an ECG is indicated.
Teach selected patients how to take serial measurements of their pulse rates in 
case they have further episodes.
Shortness of Breath. Shortness of breath is a common patient concern that 
can represent dyspnea, orthopnea, or PND. Dyspnea is an uncomfortable awareness 
of breathing that is inappropriate to a given level of exertion. This complaint is 
common in patients with cardiac or pulmonary problems.
Orthopnea is dyspnea that occurs when the patient is supine and improves when 
the patient sits up. Classically, it is quantiﬁed by the number of pillows the 
patient uses for sleeping, or by the fact that the patient needs to sleep sitting up. 
Make sure that the patient is using extra pillows or sleeping upright due to short-
ness of breath and not other causes.
PND describes episodes of sudden dyspnea and orthopnea that awaken the 
patient from sleep, usually 1 or 2 hours after going to bed, prompting the patient 
to sit up, stand up, or go to a window for air. There may be associated wheezing 
and coughing. The episode usually subsides but may recur at about the same 
time on subsequent nights.
Swelling (Edema). Swelling, or edema, refers to the accumulation of 
excessive ﬂuid in the extravascular interstitial space. Interstitial tissue can absorb 
up to 5 L of ﬂuid, accommodating up to a 10% weight gain, before pitting edema 
appears.43,44 Causes vary from systemic to local. Focus on the location, timing, 
and setting of the swelling, and on associated symptoms. “Have you had any 
swelling anywhere? Where? … Anywhere else? When does it occur? Is it worse 
in the morning or at night? Do your shoes get tight?”
Continue with “Are the rings tight on your ﬁngers? Are your eyelids puffy or 
swollen in the morning? Have you had to let out your belt?” Also, “Have your 
clothes gotten tight around the middle?” Consider asking patients who retain 
ﬂuid to record daily morning weights because edema may not be obvious until 
several liters of extra ﬂuid have accumulated.
Clues in the history include: tran-
sient skips and flip-flops (possible 
premature contractions); rapid  
regular beating of sudden onset 
and offset (possible paroxysmal 
supraventricular tachycardia); and a 
rapid regular rate of <120 beats per 
minute, especially if gradually start-
ing and stopping (possible sinus 
tachycardia). 
Sudden dyspnea occurs in pulmonary 
embolus, spontaneous pneumothorax, 
and anxiety. 
See Chapter 8, The Thorax and Lungs, 
pp. 303–342.
Orthopnea and PND occur in left ven-
tricular heart failure and mitral steno-
sis and also in obstructive lung disease. 
PND may be mimicked by nocturnal 
asthma attacks. 
Causes are frequently cardiac (right or 
left ventricular dysfunction; pulmo-
nary hypertension) or pulmonary 
(obstructive lung disease),45 but can 
also be nutritional (hypoalbumin-
emia), and/or positional. Dependent 
edema appears in the lowest body 
parts: the feet and lower legs when 
sitting, or the sacrum when bedrid-
den. Anasarca is severe generalized 
edema extending to the sacrum and 
abdomen. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Look for the periorbital puffiness and 
tight rings of nephrotic syndrome  
and an enlarged waistline from ascites 
and liver failure. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
358 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Fainting (Syncope). Fainting, blacking out, or syncope, is a transient loss 
of consciousness followed by recovery. Since the most common cause is 
neurocardiogenic (also called neutrally mediated vasodepressor syncope or 
vasovagal syncope) and of cardiac origin from arrhythmias in only ∼20% of 
cases, please turn to Chapter 17, The Nervous System, p. 724 and Table 17-3, 
pp. 778–779 for discussion of the symptoms and causes of syncope.
Health Promotion and 
Counseling: Evidence and 
Recommendations
See discussion of Promoting Lifestyle 
and Risk Factor Modification, p. 358, 
and Chapter 3, Interviewing and the 
Health History, p. 81, for discussion of 
motivational interviewing.48 
Important Topics for Health Promotion  
and Counseling
● The challenges of cardiovascular disease screening
● Special populations at risk
● Screening for cardiovascular risk factors
● Step 1: Screen for global risk factors
● Step 2: Calculate 10-year and lifetime CVD risk using an online calculator
● Step 3: Track individual risk factors—hypertension, diabetes, dyslipidemias, 
metabolic syndrome, smoking, family history, and obesity
● Promoting lifestyle changes and risk factor modiﬁcation
CVD, which consists primarily of hypertension (which accounts for the vast 
majority of diagnoses), CHD, heart failure, and stroke, affects nearly 84 million 
U.S. adults.46 CVD is the leading cause of death in the United States, accounting 
for almost 800,000 deaths in 2011. CVD death rates have been declining due 
to both reduction in cardiovascular risk factors, or primary prevention, and 
improvements in secondary prevention—treatments following clinical CVD 
events, such as heart attack and stroke. However, CVD still accounts for about 
one of every three deaths in the United States, and obesity, diabetes, hyperten-
sion, physical inactivity, and tobacco abuse present important challenges to 
achieving greater reductions in the burden of CVD.47
Health promotion to prevent CVD includes screening for and addressing impor-
tant risk factors, knowledge of evidence-based guidelines and interventions, and 
acquisition of interviewing and counseling skills that nurture healthier lifestyles 
and behaviors. As emerging clinicians, your task is threefold:
1. To understand important epidemiologic data about CVD and prevention
2. To identify modiﬁable cardiovascular risk factors
3. To help patients reduce cardiovascular risk by adopting lifestyle changes and 
appropriate pharmacologic treatments
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
359
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
The Challenges of Cardiovascular Disease Screening. New 
studies continually reﬁne our understanding of the epidemiology of CVD and 
provide evidence-based guidance for preventive interventions. Many 
cardiovascular diseases share common risk factors, and major professional 
societies of related disciplines are now issuing joint guidelines. As a result, 
screening guidelines are becoming more complex as approaches to speciﬁc risk 
groups become more customized. For example, guidelines for prescribing 
aspirin for primary prevention now differ by gender, age, and risk of CHD 
versus stroke.49,50 Increasingly, clinicians are urged to engage patients in shared 
decision making, helping them make informed personalized decisions about 
preventive interventions which can have both beneﬁts and harms. As an aid, 
online calculators are available for rapidly assessing risk for coronary artery 
disease and stroke.
This section on Health Promotion and Counseling section provides an 
approach to screening and prevention, but you should review the excellent 
reports listed below for a deeper understanding of the evidence base of recent 
recommendations.
Key Reports on Cardiovascular Health and  
Risk Assessment
● Heart disease and stroke statistics—2016 update: a report from the American 
Heart Association (AHA).32 Updated annually.
● 2013 American College of Cardiology (ACC)/AHA guideline on the assessment 
of cardiovascular risk: a report of the ACC/AHA Task Force on Practice Guide-
lines.51
● Eﬀectiveness-based guidelines for the prevention of CVD in women—2011 
update: a guideline from the AHA.52
● Management of high blood pressure in blacks. An update of the International 
Society on Hypertension in Blacks consensus statement 2010.53
● Guidelines for the primary prevention of stroke. A guideline for healthcare 
professionals from the AHA/American Stroke Association 2014.54
● American Diabetes Association. Executive summary: Standards of medical 
care in diabetes—2015.55 Updated annually.
Screening Early. Heart disease has “a long asymptomatic latent period,” 
and about half of all coronary deaths lack prior warning signs or cardiac diag-
noses.56 Consequently, clinicians are encouraged to assess lifetime risk in 
asymptomatic patients, possibly beginning as early as age 20 years. Earlier 
risk assessment can lead to more timely interventions to lower the burden of 
CVD.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
360 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
The Challenge of Risk Factor Reduction. The 2020 AHA goals promote 
the concept of “ideal cardiovascular health,” deﬁned as:
The absence of clinically manifest CVD and the simultaneous presence of 
optimal levels of seven health metrics, including four health behaviors (lean 
body mass index <25 kg/m2, not smoking, being physically active, and fol-
lowing a healthy diet), and three health factors (untreated total cholesterol 
<200 mg/dL, untreated blood pressure <120/<80 mm Hg, and fasting blood 
glucose <100 mg/dL).46
Figure 9-21, based on data available in 2014, shows that substantial portions of 
the United States population fail to reach ideal cardiovascular health. Among U.S. 
adults age ≥20 years, the age-standardized prevalence of ideal levels of cardiovas-
cular health behaviors and factors ranges widely: for the healthy diet score—0.5%; 
weight—31%; blood pressure—45%; physical activity—41%; cholesterol—47%; 
fasting glucose—58%; and never smoked or stopped smoking for more than 12 
month—76%. Most U.S. adults, ∼68%, have two, three, or four criteria at ideal 
levels of cardiovascular health. Approximately 13% of U.S. adults meet ﬁve or 
more criteria, 5% meet six or more criteria, and virtually none meet seven 
criteria at ideal levels.32
F I G U R E  9 - 2 1 .  American Heart Association Prevalence Estimates for poor, 
intermediate, and ideal cardiovascular health (U.S. adults, 2014). Source: Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger 
VL, et al. Heart disease and stroke statistics—2014 update: a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2014;129:e28.
The AHA has set the ambitious goals of improving cardiovascular health for all 
Americans between 2010 and 2020 by 20% and of reducing deaths from CVD 
and stroke by 20%.32
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
361
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Special Populations at Risk
Women. Women have become increasingly aware that CVD is their lead-
ing cause of death.57 Improved CVD prevention and treatment efforts for 
women have led to dramatic decreases in the age-adjusted mortality rates for 
CHD—a decrease of nearly two thirds between 1980 and 2007.57,58 Nonethe-
less, in the 2011 Guideline for the Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease in 
Women, the AHA cautioned that “reversing a trend of the past 4 decades, CHD 
death rates in U.S. women 35 to 54 years of age now actually appear to be 
increasing,” which the AHA attributed to the effects of obesity.52 Men’s cardio-
vascular risk scores have improved more than women’s in recent years, though 
the prevalence of diabetes has increased in both sexes.59 The statistics below 
illuminate concerning issues for cardiovascular health in women.
Cardiovascular Disease in U.S. Women
● 2013 data indicate that CVD death rates remain signiﬁcantly higher for 
black women than white women, 247 versus 184 per 100,000, largely  
due to disparities in risk factors such as hypertension, diabetes, and  
obesity.32 CHD death rates are also higher for black women than white 
women, 94.7 versus 75.0 per 100,000.
● Women age >65 years have a slightly higher prevalence of hypertension 
than men, but a much higher prevalence of uncontrolled hypertension. 
Black women have the highest prevalence of hypertension (46%) and 
uncontrolled hypertension. About two thirds of all U.S. women are now 
overweight or obese, contributing to the epidemic of type 2 diabetes and 
increasing risks for MI and stroke.
● Women account for nearly 60% of stroke deaths in the United States and 
have a higher lifetime risk of stroke than men. Stroke risk increases with age, 
and women have a greater life expectancy than men. Women also have a 
lower awareness of heart disease and stroke symptoms.
● Women have unique risk factors for stroke: pregnancy, hormone therapy, 
early menopause, and preeclampsia. Women are more likely than men to have 
risk factors of atrial ﬁbrillation, migraine with aura, obesity, and metabolic 
syndrome. Atrial ﬁbrillation, which increases stroke risk ﬁvefold in women, is 
often asymptomatic and undetected. For these reasons, the 2014 AHA expert 
panel on stroke prevention highlighted risk stratiﬁcation and appropriate 
anticoagulation for women with atrial ﬁbrillation.60
In 2011, the AHA, recognizing the special cardiovascular risk faced by women, 
adopted more speciﬁc CVD risk classiﬁcations. They recommended placing 
women into one of three categories: high risk, at risk, and “ideal” cardiovascular 
health.52
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
362 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
American Heart Association Cardiovascular 
Risk Categories for Women
High Risk
● ≥1 of the high-risk states, including existing CHD, CVD, peripheral arterial dis-
ease, abdominal aortic aneurysm, diabetes mellitus, or end-stage or chronic 
renal disease
● 10-year predicted risk of >10%
At Risk
● ≥1 major risk factors including smoking, blood pressure ≥120/≥80 or treated 
hypertension, total cholesterol ≥200 mg/dL, HDL-c <50 mg/dL, or treated 
dyslipidemia, obesity, poor diet, physical inactivity, or family history of  
premature CVD
● Evidence of advanced subclinical atherosclerosis (e.g., coronary calciﬁcation, 
carotid plaque, intima-media thickness), metabolic syndrome, or poor exer-
cise capacity on a treadmill test
● Systemic autoimmune collagen vascular disease (e.g., lupus or rheumatoid 
arthritis)
● History or preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, or pregnancy-induced hyper-
tension
Ideal Cardiovascular Health (All of These)
● Total cholesterol <200 mg/dL (untreated)
● BP <120/<80 (untreated)
● Fasting glucose <100 mg/dL (untreated)
● Body mass index <25 kg/m2
● Abstinence from smoking
● Physical activity at goal: ≥150 minutes/week moderate intensity, ≥75 minutes/
week vigorous intensity, or combination
● Healthy diet
Source: Mosca L, Benjamin EJ, Berra K, et al. Eﬀectiveness-based guidelines for the prevention of 
CVD in women—2011 update: A guideline from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2011; 
123:1243.
African Americans. CVD death rates show marked ethnic disparities: in 
2013, they were 357 versus 271 per 100,000 for black men compared to white 
men, and 247 versus 184 per 100,000 for black women compared to white 
women.32 Overall, about 40% of white adults have ≥three of the seven AHA 
cardiovascular health metrics (see above) at ideal levels compared to about 30% 
of black adults.32 Selected striking CVD disparities are shown on next page. The 
high prevalence of high cholesterol, obesity, and diabetes in Mexican Americans 
places them at similar risk to blacks.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
363
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Cardiovascular Diseases and Risk Factors: 
Prevalence in U.S. White and Black Adults
Men
Women
White
Black
White
Black
Total Cardiovascular 
Disease
36.1%
46.0%
31.9%
48.3%
Coronary Heart Disease
7.8%
7.2%
4.6%
7.0%
Hypertension
32.9%
44.9%
30.1%
46.1%
Stroke
2.2%
4.2%
2.5%
4.7%
Diabetes (Physician 
Diagnosed)
7.6%
13.8%
6.1%
14.6%
Overweight/Obesity
72.7%
69.4%
61.2%
81.9%
Cholesterol ≥200 mg/dL
39.9%
37.4%
45.9%
40.7%
Smoking
21.7%
21.1%
18.7%
15.0%
Physical Activity 
(Meeting Federal 
Aerobic Guidelines)
57.0%
49.8%
50.0%
34.6%
Sources: Mozaﬀarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, et al. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics—2016 Update: 
A Report From the American Heart Association. Circulation 2016;133:e38; Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention. Prevalence of coronary heart disease—United States, 2006–2010. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2011;60:1377.
Screening for Cardiovascular Risk Factors
Step 1: Screen for Global Risk Factors. Begin routine screening at 
20 years for individual risk factors or “global” risk of CVD and for any family 
history of premature heart disease (age <55 years in ﬁrst-degree male relatives 
and age <65 years in ﬁrst-degree female relatives). Recommended screening 
intervals are listed below.
Major Cardiovascular Risk Factors and 
Screening Frequency
Risk Factor
Screening 
Frequency
Goal
Family history of  
premature CVD
Update regularly
Cigarette smoking
At each visit
Cessation
Poor diet
At each visit
Improved overall eating 
pattern
Physical inactivity
At each visit
30 minutes moderate 
intensity daily
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
364 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Major Cardiovascular Risk Factors and 
Screening Frequency (continued )
Risk Factor
Screening 
Frequency
Goal
Obesity, especially  
central adiposity
At each visit
BMI 20–25 kg/m2; waist 
circumference:  
≤40 inches for men, 
≤35 inches for women
Hypertension
At each visit
<140/90 for adults <60 
years, adults >60 
with diabetes or 
chronic kidney dis-
ease; <150/90 for all 
other adults age ≥60 
years
Dyslipidemias
Every 5 years if low risk
Every 2 years if strong 
risk
Initiate statin therapy if 
meeting ACC/AHA 
guidelines
Diabetes
Every 3 years (if nor-
mal) beginning at 
age 45 years; more 
frequently at any age 
if risk factors
Prevent/delay diabetes 
for those with HbA1c 
of 5.7–6.4%
Pulse
At each visit
Identify and treat atrial 
ﬁbrillation
Sources: Adapted from: Goﬀ DC, Jr., Lloyd-Jones DM, Bennett G, et al. 2013 ACC/AHA guideline on 
the assessment of cardiovascular risk: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63(25 Pt B):2935; 
Stone NJ, Robinson JG, Lichtenstein AH, et al. 2013 ACC/AHA guideline on the treatment of blood 
cholesterol to reduce atherosclerotic cardiovascular risk in adults: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2014;129:S1; James PA, Oparil S, Carter BL, et al. 2014 evidence-based guideline for the manage-
ment of high blood pressure in adults: report from the panel members appointed to the Eighth 
Joint National Committee (JNC 8). JAMA. 2014;311:507; Meschia JF, Bushnell C, Boden-Albala B, et 
al. Guidelines for the primary prevention of stroke: a statement for healthcare professionals from 
the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2014;45:3754; Flack JM, Sica 
DA, Bakris G, et al. Management of high blood pressure in Blacks: an update of the International 
Society on Hypertension in Blacks consensus statement. Hypertension. 2010;56:780; American 
Diabetes A. Executive summary: Standards of medical care in diabetes—2014. Diabetes Care. 2014; 
37 Suppl 1:S5.
Step 2: Calculate 10-Year and Lifetime CVD Risk Using an Online 
Calculator. Use the CVD risk calculators to establish 10-year and lifetime 
risk for patients ages 40 to 79 years. The most recent ACC/AHA Cholesterol 
Guideline provides a new risk-assessment calculator.61
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
365
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
The risk estimates, which incorporate age, gender, smoking history, total choles-
terol level, HDL cholesterol level, systolic blood pressure, antihypertensive ther-
apy, and diabetes, are based on pooled data from population-based studies. The 
new calculators provide gender and race-speciﬁc risk estimates for a ﬁrst MI, 
CHD death, or fatal or nonfatal stroke.
Step 3: Track Individual Risk Factors—Hypertension, Diabetes, 
Dyslipidemias, Metabolic Syndrome, Smoking, Family History, and 
Obesity
Hypertension. About one third of U.S. adults over the age of 20 years have 
hypertension (deﬁned as a blood pressure ≥140/90 mm Hg), representing 
nearly 80 million people.32 Over 40% of U.S. cardiovascular mortality and 30% 
of overall mortality is attributed to hypertension, representing an estimated 
362,000 deaths in 2010.47,62
■ Primary (essential) hypertension is the most common cause of hypertension: 
risk factors include age, genetics, black race, obesity and weight gain, exces-
sive salt intake, physical inactivity, and excessive alcohol use.
■ Secondary hypertension accounts for less than 5% of hypertension cases. 
Causes include sleep apnea, chronic kidney disease, renal artery stenosis, 
medications, thyroid disease, parathyroid disease, Cushing syndrome, hy-
peraldosteronism, pheochromocytoma, and coarctation of the aorta.
While the prevalence of hypertension is similar between men and women, 
prevalence in blacks is substantially higher than in whites. Most hypertensive 
adults know of their diagnosis, though only about 75% are taking medications 
and only half have achieved their target blood pressure goal.56,63 The U.S. Pre-
ventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) has issued a grade A recommendation 
for hypertension screening among adults 18 years and older.64 The American 
Society of Hypertension68 and Seventh Joint National Committee on Preven-
tion, Detection, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure69 have suggested cate-
gories for classifying blood pressure readings (Table).
In 2014, the Eighth Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Eval-
uation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure issued updated guidelines shown 
with strength of evidence for speciﬁc recommendations on the next page.65 
These recommendations have not been universally accepted, even among 
members of the Joint National Committee.66–68
CVD Risk Calculators
● http://my.americanheart.org/cvriskcalculator
● http://www.acc.org/tools-and-practice-support/mobile-resources/
features/2013-prevention-guidelines-ascvd-risk-estimator?w_nav=S.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
366 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Blood Pressure Classiﬁcation for Adults—JNC 7, 
American Society of Hypertension
Category
Systolic (mm Hg)
Diastolic (mm Hg)
Normal
<120
<80
Prehypertension
  120–139
  80–89
Stage 1 hypertension
Age ≥18 to <60 yrs
Age ≥60 yrsa
  140–159
  150–159
  90–99
  90–99
Stage 2 hypertension
≥160
≥100
If diabetes or renal disease 
(including age ≥60 yrs)
<140
<90
aThe American Society of Hypertension raises this cutoﬀ to age ≥80 years.
Sources:  Weber MA, Schiﬀrin EL, White WB, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the management 
of hypertension in the community: A statement by the American Society of Hypertension and the 
International Society of Hypertension. J Clin Hypertens. 2014;16:14; Chobanian AV, Bakris GL, Black 
HR, et al. The Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, 
and Treatment of High Blood Pressure—The JNC 7 Report. JAMA. 2003;289:2560. Available at  
http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-pro/guidelines/current/
See Chapter 4, Beginning the Physical 
Examination: General Survey, Vital 
Signs, and Pain, pp. 118–119, for 
discussion of the benefits of 
restricting dietary sodium to <2,300 
mg/day and increasing physical 
activity for CVD risk reduction and 
control of hypertension.70 
JNC 8: Indications and Strength of Evidence  
for Initiating Pharmacologic Therapy to  
Lower Blood Pressure
Age ≥60 years
Systolic blood pressure ≥150 mm Hg or diastolic blood 
pressure ≥90 mm Hg (strong recommendation)
Age <60 years
Systolic blood pressure ≥140 mm Hg (expert opinion)
Diastolic blood pressure ≥90 mm Hg (strong recom-
mendation)
Age >18 years with 
chronic kidney dis-
ease or diabetes
Systolic blood pressure ≥140 mm Hg or diastolic blood 
pressure ≥90 mm Hg (expert opinion)
Source: James PA, Oparil S, Carter BL, et al. 2014 evidence-based guideline for the management of 
high blood pressure in adults: report from the panel members appointed to the Eighth Joint National 
Committee (JNC 8). JAMA. 2014;311:507.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
The AHA, ACC, and the American Society of Hypertension issued guidelines in 
2015 for treating hypertension in patients with existing coronary artery disease. 
A blood pressure of <140/90 mm Hg is an appropriate goal for most patients 
with coronary artery disease, congestive heart failure, or acute coronary syn-
drome. Lowering blood pressure below 130/80 mm Hg may be appropriate for 
some patients with coronary artery disease, previous heart attacks, history of 
stroke or transient ischemic attack, carotid artery disease, peripheral arterial 
disease, or abdominal aortic aneurysm.71
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
367
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Public health efforts such as the “Million Hearts” initiative have targeted blood 
pressure control as an important step in reducing cardiovascular morbidity and 
mortality.72
Diabetes. Diabetes wreaks devastating health consequences in the United 
States and worldwide. The dramatic increase in obesity coupled with physical 
inactivity has created an epidemic of diabetes. The CDC estimated that in 2012, 
diabetes affected over 12% of U.S. adults, or nearly 29 million people.73 This 
ﬁgure includes over 8 million adults who are undiagnosed. Another 86 million 
adults (37% of the population) have prediabetes. The total prevalence of diabetes 
in the United States is expected to double by 2050.
Not treated and undiagnosed
Not treated, but aware
Treated and uncontrolled
Treated and controlled
8.0%
39.5%
26.1%
26.5%
F I G U R E  9 - 2 2 .  Treatment of diabetes. Source: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
(NHANES) 2011–2012 in Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger VL, et al. Heart disease and stroke statistics—2014 update: a report from 
the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2014;129:e28. Available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24352519. Accessed 
April 5, 2015.
There are striking disparities in the age-adjusted diabetes prevalences among 
adults: 7% to 9% of whites and Asian Americans compared to ∼13% of Hispan-
ics and blacks, rising to 16% of American Indian/Alaska Natives.73 Unfortu-
nately, as shown in Figure 9-22, only 25% of those affected are treated and 
controlled, and diabetes is associated with a two-fold increased risk of CVD 
events and mortality.
Although diabetes unequivocally increases the risk of CVD, early detection and 
treatment has not been ﬁrmly established to improve cardiovascular outcomes. 
Nonetheless, the 2015 American Diabetes Association guidelines support screen-
ing and then diagnosing diabetes if fasting glucose is ≥126 mg/dL and HbA1c 
values exceed 6.5%.74 Diagnostic criteria for diabetes and prediabetes, as well as 
screening guidelines, are shown on the next page. Screening should be initiated 
at age 45 years and repeated at 3-year intervals. Screening should be initiated at 
any age for adults having a BMI of ≥25 and additional risk factors.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
368 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
American Diabetes Association 2015: 
Classiﬁcation and Diagnosis of Diabetes
Screening Criteria
Healthy adults with no risk factors: begin at age 45 years, repeat at 3-year intervals
Adults with BMI ≥25 kg/m2 and additional risk factors:
● Physical inactivity
● First-degree relative with diabetes
● Members of a high-risk ethnic population—African American, Hispanic/
Latino American, Asian American, Paciﬁc Islander
● Mothers of infants ≥4.08 kg (9 lb) at birth or diagnosed with gestational diabetes
● Hypertension ≥140/90 mm Hg or on therapy for hypertension
● HDL cholesterol <35 mg/dL and/or triglycerides >250 mg/dL
● Women with polycystic ovary syndrome
● HbA1c ≥5.7%, impaired glucose tolerance, or impaired fasting glucose on pre-
vious testing
● Other conditions associated with insulin resistance such as severe obesity, 
acanthosis nigricans
● History of CVD
Diagnostic Criteria
Diabetesa
Prediabetes
HbA1c 
≥6.5%
5.7–6.4%
Fasting plasma glucose (on at 
least 2 occasions)
≥126 mg/dL
100–125 mg/dL
2-hour plasma glucose (oral 
glucose tolerance test)
≥200 mg/dL
140–199 mg/dL
Random glucose, if classic 
symptoms
≥200 mg/dL
aIn the absence of classic symptoms, an abnormal test must be repeated to conﬁrm the diagnosis. 
However, if two diﬀerent tests are both abnormal then no additional testing is necessary.
Source: American Diabetes Association. Classiﬁcation and diagnosis of diabetes. Diabetes Care. 
2015;38(Suppl):S8.
Dyslipidemias. The USPSTF has issued a grade A recommendation for rou-
tine lipid screening for all men of age >35 years and women >45 years who are 
at increased risk for CHD.75 The Task Force also issued a grade B recommenda-
tion to screen for lipid disorders beginning at age 20 years for men and women 
who have diabetes, hypertension, obesity, tobacco use, noncoronary atheroscle-
rosis, or family history of early CVD. These recommendations are currently being 
updated.
In 2014, the ACC/AHA published “a guideline on the treatment of blood 
cholesterol to reduce atherosclerotic cardiovascular risk in adults.”61 This 
guideline offers evidence-based recommendations on using statins to treat 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
369
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
cholesterol in high-risk groups (Fig. 9-23). Persons with clinical atheroscle-
rotic CVD include “those with an acute coronary syndrome and those with a 
history of MI, stable or unstable, angina, coronary of other arterial revascular-
ization, or stroke, transient ischemic attack, or peripheral arterial disease … 
of atherosclerotic origin.” In addition, the ACC/AHA provides a calculator for 
clinicians and patients to estimate 10-year and lifetime gender and race-speciﬁc 
risks for CHD and stroke events to guide statin use for primary prevention: 
ACC/AHA Risk Calculator, http://tools.cardiosource.org/ASCVD-Risk-Estimator/ 
(see also p. 365).
Patients age >21 yr without heart failure (New York Heart Association
class II, III, or IV) or end-stage renal disease (undergoing hemodialysis)
Screen for cardiovascular risk factors
Measure LDL cholesterol
Clinical atherosclerotic
CVD
High-intensity statin therapy
Diabetes mellitus (type 1 or
type 2) and age 40–75 yr and
LDL cholesterol 70–189 mg/dl
Calculate 10-yr risk of athero-
sclerotic CVD
If risk >5% to <7.5%, moderate-
intensity statin therapy
If risk ≥7.5%, high-intensity
statin therapy
Calculate 10-yr risk of athero-
sclerotic CVD
No diabetes mellitus
 and age 40–75 yr and
LDL cholesterol 70–189 mg/dl
If risk ≥7.5%, moderate-to-
high-intensity statin therapy
LDL cholesterol ≥190 mg/dl
High-intensity statin therapy
F I G U R E  9 - 2 3 .  American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association cholesterol guideline, 2013.76
Use the CVD risk calculators to establish 10-year risk. The most recent ACC/AHA 
Cholesterol Guideline provides evidence-based recommendations for initiating 
statin therapy based on risk level.61 The recommendations shown in Figure 9-23 
are brieﬂy summarized below. The guideline notes that high-intensity therapy 
lowers LDL by about 50% and moderate-intensity therapy lowers LDL by 30% 
to 50%.
■ For patients with clinical CVD (secondary prevention) or LDL cholesterol levels 
>190 mg/dL (primary prevention)—prescribe high-intensity statin therapy.
■ For patients with diabetes and/or LDL cholesterol levels from 70 to 189 mg/
dL—determine the 10-year risk of atherosclerotic CVD with the new risk 
calculator (see above). Although the evidence for initiating statins for pri-
mary prevention is stronger for adults with 10-year risks above 7.5%, statins 
can also be considered for risk levels between 5% and <7.5%.
■ However, the guideline also states that clinicians and patients should engage 
in shared decision making, addressing the potential beneﬁts and harms of 
prescribing statins and eliciting patient preferences before initiating therapy. 
The guideline ﬁrmly emphasizes the importance of encouraging all patients 
to adhere to a healthy lifestyle.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
370 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
The Metabolic Syndrome. The metabolic syndrome consists of a cluster of risk 
factors that increase risk of both CVD and diabetes. In 2009, the International 
Diabetes Association, the National Heart Lung Blood Institute, the AHA, and 
other societies established diagnostic criteria as the presence of ≥three of the 
ﬁve risk factors listed below.77 The prevalence of this syndrome in U.S. adults 
≥20 years of age is approximately 34%.46
Metabolic Syndrome: 2009 Diagnostic Criteria—
Must Meet ≥3 of 5
Waist circumference
Men ≥102 cm, women ≥88 cm
Fasting plasma glucose
≥100 mg/dL, or being treated for elevated glucose
HDL cholesterol
Men <40 mg/dL, women <50 mg/dL, or being 
treated with drugs
Triglycerides
≥150 mg/dL, or being treated with drugs
Blood pressure
≥130/≥85 mm Hg, or being treated with drugs
Source: Alberti KG, Eckel RH, Grundy SM, et al. Harmonizing the metabolic syndrome: a joint 
interim statement of the International Diabetes Federation Task Force on Epidemiology and 
Prevention; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; American Heart Association; World Heart 
Federation; International Atherosclerosis Society; and International Association for the Study of 
Obesity. Circulation. 2009;120:1640.
Other Risk Factors: Smoking, Family History, and Obesity. Risk factors such as 
smoking, family history, and obesity contribute substantially to the population 
burden of CVD.46,78 Smoking increases the risk of CHD and stroke by two- to 
fourfold compared to nonsmokers or past smokers who quit >10 years previ-
ously. About 14% of the annual cardiovascular deaths in the population, or over 
150,000 deaths, are attributed to smoking. Among adults, 13% report a family his-
tory of heart attack or angina before age 50 years. Along with a family history of 
premature revascularization, this risk factor is associated with about a 50% increased 
lifetime risk for CHD and for CVD mortality. Obesity, or BMI over 30 kg/m2, 
contributed to 112,000 excess adult deaths compared to those of normal weight, 
and was associated with 13% of CVD deaths in 2004.
Promoting Lifestyle Change and Risk Factor Modiﬁcation. 
Motivating behavior change is challenging, but it is an essential clinical skill for 
risk factor reduction. Promoting cardiovascular health is a high priority for 
Healthy People 2020. Objectives include increases in physical activity and 
reductions in: the prevalence of hypertension, tobacco use, and obesity; 
consumption of calories from solid fats and added sugars; and CHD deaths.79 
The well-known Prochaska model is a useful tool for assessing patient “readiness 
to change” and tailoring advice to the patient’s level of motivation.80
The USPSTF has given a B recommendation for referring adults with cardiovas-
cular risk factors to behavioral counseling interventions that encourage a 
healthy diet and physical activity.81 The ACC/AHA recommendations on life-
style management address diet, physical activity, body weight, and tobacco 
avoidance, as well as controlling hypertension and diabetes.82
See Table 4-4, Obesity: Stages of 
Change Model and Assessing Readi-
ness, p. 142, and Chapter 8, Thorax 
and Lungs, pp. 303–342, for examples 
of how this model can be applied to 
clinical counseling. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
371
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Hypertension. Encourage your patients to adopt the recommendations 
for pertinent lifestyle modiﬁcations listed below.
Lifestyle Modiﬁcations to Prevent or  
Manage Hypertension
● Optimal weight, or BMI of 18.5 to 24.9 kg/m2
● Intake of <6 g of sodium chloride or 2.3 g of sodium per day
● Regular aerobic exercise such as brisk walking three to four times a week, 
averaging 40 minutes per session
● Moderate alcohol consumption per day of ≤2 drinks for men and ≤1 drink for 
women (2 drinks = 1 oz ethanol, 24 oz beer, 10 oz wine, or 2 to 3 oz whiskey)
● Diet rich in fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and low-fat dairy products with 
reduced intake of saturated and total fat, sweets, and red meats
Source: Eckel RH, Jakicic JM, Ard JD, et al. 2013 AHA/ACC guideline on lifestyle management to 
reduce cardiovascular risk: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Associa-
tion Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129:S76.
Tobacco Use. Ask every patient “Do you smoke or use tobacco prod-
ucts?” and then ask tobacco users “Do you want to quit?” Use the “5 As” frame-
work and the Stages of Change model described in Chapter 8 to develop 
strategies for quitting. Encourage patients to use services that increase quit 
rates like the National Smoking Cessation Hotline: 1-800-QUIT NOW. If the 
patient is not using tobacco, ask whether they are former users. If so, encour-
age continued abstinence—and consider interventions to prevent relapse for 
recent quitters.83
Obesity: Healthy Eating and Weight Loss. Begin with a dietary history 
to explore the patient’s eating habits, then target the importance of foods low in 
total fat, especially foods low in saturated and trans fats. Foods with mono- and 
polyunsaturated fats and the omega-3 fatty acids found in ﬁsh oils help lower 
serum cholesterol. A Mediterranean diet (fruits, vegetables, seafood, white meat, 
wine), supplemented by extra-virgin olive oil and nuts, has been shown to reduce 
major cardiovascular events among high-risk patients.84 Review the food sources 
of these healthy and unhealthy fats in the box below.
See discussion on Tobacco Cessation, 
Chapter 8, Thorax and Lungs,  
pp. 313–315. 
See discussion of Optimal Weight, 
Nutrition, and Diet in Chapter 4, 
Beginning the Physical Examination: 
General Survey, Vital Signs, and Pain,  
pp. 114–118. 
Food Sources of Healthy and Unhealthy Fats
Healthy 
Fats
Foods high in monounsaturated fat: nuts, such as almonds, pecans, 
and peanuts; sesame seeds; avocados; canola, sunﬂower, high 
oleic saﬄower, olive, and peanut oil; peanut butter85
Foods high in polyunsaturated fat: corn, cottonseed, and soybean 
oil; walnuts; pumpkin or sunﬂower seeds; soft (tub)  
margarine; mayonnaise; salad dressings
Foods high in omega-3 fatty acids: ﬂaxseed, walnuts, tuna, ancho-
vies, herring, mackerel, rainbow trout, salmon, sardines, shrimp
(continued )
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
372 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Food Sources of Healthy and  
Unhealthy Fats (continued )
Unhealthy 
Fats
Foods high in saturated fat: high-fat dairy products—cream, 
cheese, ice cream, whole and 2% milk, butter, and sour cream; 
bacon; chocolate; coconut oil; lard and gravy from meat drip-
pings; high-fat meats like ground beef, bologna, hot dogs, and 
sausage
Foods high in trans fat: snacks and baked goods with hydrogenated 
or partially hydrogenated oil, stick margarines, shortening, and 
fried foods
Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Dietary 
Guidelines for Americans, 2010. Washington, D.C., U.S. Government Printing Oﬃce. 7th ed. Available 
at http://www.health.gov/dietaryguidelines/dga2010/DietaryGuidelines2010.pdf. Accessed March 
30, 2015.
Less than 1% of the U.S. population meets most healthy dietary goals for fruits 
and vegetables, ﬁsh, sodium, sugar-sweetened drinks, and whole grains. Nearly 
35% of adult Americans are obese (BMI ≥30 kg/m2), an epidemic problem in 
the United States since 1980.46 Healthy People 2020 targets reductions in the 
proportions of obese children and adolescents and in caloric intake from solid 
fats and added sugars.79
You should counsel patients about unhealthy weight. Assess BMI as described in 
Chapter 4. Discuss the principles of healthy eating. Patients with a high fat intake 
are more likely to accumulate body fat than those with diets high in protein and 
carbohydrates. Help the patient to set realistic goals for diet and exercise that 
promote healthy eating habits for life.
Physical Activity. About 12% of the population burden of CVD is attrib-
uted to insufﬁcient physical activity.56 A major goal of Healthy People 2020 is to 
increase the proportion of people meeting federal physical activity targets for 
aerobic and muscle strengthening activity.79
■ For aerobic activity, adults should perform at least 150 minutes (2 hours 
and 30 minutes) of moderate-intensity cardiorespiratory activity, such as 
brisk walking, each week.86 Markers that help patients recognize the onset 
of aerobic metabolism include deep breathing, sweating in cool tempera-
tures, and pulse rates exceeding 60% of the maximum normal age-adjusted 
heart rate (220 minus the person’s age).
■ Muscle strengthening activities, which include resistance training and lifting 
weights, can increase ﬁtness and bone strength. Activities strengthening all 
the major muscle groups should be performed at least twice weekly.
■ Spur motivation by emphasizing the important beneﬁts to health and well-
being, even with just an hour of moderate-intensity activity each week—
”some is better than none.”
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
373
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Inactive adults should only gradually increase their activity toward the recom-
mended goals to avoid injuries. Be sure to assess any pulmonary, cardiac, or 
musculoskeletal conditions that may limit the patient’s exercise capacity.
Techniques of Examination
Turn now to the classic techniques for examining the heart and great vessels. A 
sound knowledge of cardiovascular anatomy and physiology is key to under-
standing the hemodynamics of this closed-pump forward-ﬂow system. It is only 
through diligent repetition, however, that you will gain conﬁdence in the accu-
racy of your clinical ﬁndings.22 Examine each patient carefully and methodi-
cally. Practice examining normal patients will help you recognize when patients 
have important cardiac pathology. Knowing how well these ﬁndings, by them-
selves or in concert with others, predict the presence or absence of cardiac 
disease is vitally important. The “test characteristics” of cardiac ﬁndings such as 
sensitivity, speciﬁcity, and likelihood ratios, are provided when pertinent and 
available. Students can also turn to several excellent resources for more detailed 
information.87,88
As you practice the cardiac examination, be sure you are proﬁcient in the basic 
objectives listed below.
Cardiac Examination Skills:  
Objectives for Mastery
● Describe the chest wall anatomy and identify the key listening areas.
● Evaluate the jugular venous pulse, the carotid upstroke, and presence or 
absence of carotid bruits.
● Palpate and describe the PMI.
● Auscultate S1 and S2 in six positions from the base to the apex.
● Recognize the eﬀect of the P-R interval on the intensity of S1.
● Identify physiologic and paradoxical splitting of S2.
● Auscultate and recognize abnormal sounds in early diastole, including an S3 
and OS of mitral stenosis.
● Auscultate and recognize an S4 later in diastole.
● Distinguish systolic and diastolic murmurs, using maneuvers when needed.
● Evaluate and interpret a paradoxical pulse.
BLOOD PRESSURE AND HEART RATE
The general appearance of the patient provides many clues to cardiac illness, so 
pay special attention to the patient’s color, respiratory rate, and level of anxiety, 
in addition to blood pressure and heart rate. Since auscultation is so important 
for detecting subtle ﬁndings, examine the patient in a quiet comfortable room 
where distractions and noise are at a minimum.
See Chapter 4, Beginning the Physical 
Examination: General Survey, Vital 
Signs, and Pain, especially Blood  
Pressure, pp. 124–132. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
374 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
As you begin, review the blood pressure and heart rate recorded at the start of 
the visit. If you need to repeat these measurements, or if they have not already 
been done, measure the blood pressure and heart rate using optimal tech-
nique.89,90
In brief review, after letting the patient rest for at least 5 minutes in a quiet setting 
with feet on the ﬂoor, choose a correctly sized cuff and position the patient’s 
unclothed arm at heart level, either resting on a table if the patient is seated, or 
supported at midchest level if supine or standing. Heart level is usually at the 4th 
intercostal space at the sternum. Make sure the bladder of the cuff is centered 
over the brachial artery. Inﬂate the cuff approximately 30 mm Hg above the pres-
sure at which the brachial or radial pulse disappears. As you deﬂate the cuff, 
listen ﬁrst for the Korotkoff sounds of at least two consecutive heartbeats; these 
mark the systolic pressure. Then listen for the disappearance point of the heart-
beats, which marks the diastolic pressure. For heart rate, palpate the radial pulse 
using the pads of your index and middle ﬁngers, or auscultate the apical pulse 
with your stethoscope.
JUGULAR VENOUS PRESSURE  
AND PULSATIONS
Jugular Venous Pressure
Identifying the JVP. Estimating the JVP is one of the most important and 
frequently used skills of physical examination. The JVP closely parallels pressure 
in the right atrium, or central venous pressure, related primarily to volume in the 
venous system.95 The JVP is best assessed from pulsations in the right internal 
jugular vein, which is directly in line with the superior vena cava and right 
atrium.96–99 The internal jugular veins lie deep to the SCM muscles in the neck 
and are not directly visible, so you must learn to identify the pulsations of the 
internal jugular vein that are transmitted to the surface of the neck (Fig. 9-24). 
Pulsations in the right external jugular vein can also be used,30 but the route from 
the vena cava is more tortuous, and examination can be impaired by kinking and 
obstruction at the base of the neck and by obesity.96,100 Note that the jugular 
veins and pulsations are difﬁcult to see in children under 12 years of age, so 
inspection is not useful in this age group.
Pressure changes from right atrial ﬁlling, contraction, and emptying cause ﬂuc-
tuations in the JVP and its waveforms that are visible to the examiner. The dom-
inant movement of the JVP is inward, coinciding with the x descent.96 In 
contrast, the dominant movement of the carotid pulse, often confused with the 
JVP, is outward. Careful observation of the ﬂuctuations of the JVP yields clues 
about volume status, right and left ventricular function, patency of the tricuspid 
and pulmonary valves, pressures in the pericardium, and arrhythmias caused by 
junctional rhythms and AV blocks. For example, JVP falls with loss of blood or 
decreased venous vascular tone and increases with right or left heart failure, 
pulmonary hypertension, tricuspid stenosis, AV dissociation, increased venous 
vascular tone, and pericardial compression or tamponade.
At higher arm levels, the blood pres-
sure recordings will be lower; at lower 
levels, the blood pressure recordings 
will be higher. 
A growing literature documents the 
poor reliability of clinic blood pres-
sure measurements.91–94 Multiple 
averaged measurements improve pre-
cision, especially when using auto-
mated home and ambulatory blood 
pressure readings, which are more 
reliable, accurate, and better corre-
lated with cardiovascular outcomes 
than clinic readings.
See discussion of the double peak of 
the a and v waves and of the x and y 
descent on p. 378. 
Although the JVP accurately predicts 
elevations in fluid volume in heart 
failure, its prognostic value for heart 
failure outcomes and mortality is 
unclear.101
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
375
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The Oscillation Point of the JPV. To estimate the level of the JVP, learn 
to ﬁnd the highest point of oscillation in the internal jugular vein or, alternatively, the 
point above which the external jugular vein appears collapsed. The JVP is usually 
measured in vertical distance above the sternal angle (also called the angle of 
Louis), the bony ridge adjacent to the second rib where the manubrium joins the 
body of the sternum.
Study carefully the illustrations in Figure 9-25. Note that in the three positions, 
the sternal angle remains roughly 5 cm above the right midatrium. In this patient, 
the pressure in the internal jugular vein is somewhat elevated.
Sternomastoid 
Internal carotid
artery
External
carotid artery
Common carotid
artery
Internal jugular vein
External jugular vein
Subclavian vein
F I G U R E  9 - 2 4 .  Internal and external jugular veins.
5 cm
Height of venous
pressure from 
sternal angle
A
B
C
30˚
60˚
90˚
F I G U R E  9 - 2 5 .  JVP height remains relatively constant.
Some authors report that at 30° to 
45°, the estimated JVP may be 3 cm 
lower than catheter measurements 
from the right midatrium.102,103
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
376 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ In Position A, the head of the bed is raised to the usual level, approximately 
30°, but the JVP cannot be measured because the level of oscillation, or menis-
cus, is above the jaw and, therefore, not visible.
■ In Position B, the head of the bed is raised to 60°. The “top” of the internal 
jugular vein is now easily visible, so the vertical distance from the sternal 
angle or right atrium can now be measured.
■ In Position C, the patient is upright and the veins are barely discernible above 
the clavicle, making measurement untenable.
Note that the height of the venous pressure as measured from the sternal angle 
is similar in all three positions, but your ability to measure the height of the col-
umn of venous blood, or JVP, differs according to how you position the patient. 
JVP measured at >3 cm above the sternal angle, or >8 cm above the right atrium, 
is considered elevated or abnormal.
The JVP and Volume Status. As you begin your assessment, consider 
the patient’s volume status and whether you need to alter the elevation of the 
head of the bed or examining table.
■ The usual starting position for the head of the bed or examining table when 
assessing the JVP is 30°. Turn the patient’s head slightly to the left, then the 
right, and identify the external jugular vein on each side. Then focus on the 
internal jugular venous pulsations on the right, transmitted from deep in 
the neck to the overlying soft tissues. The JVP is the highest oscillation 
point, or meniscus, of the jugular venous pulsations that is usually evident 
in euvolemic patients.
■ If the patient is hypovolemic, you can anticipate that the JVP will be low, caus-
ing you to lower the head of the bed, sometimes even to 0°, to see the point of 
oscillation best.
■ Likewise, if the patient is volume-overloaded, or hypervolemic, anticipate that 
the JVP will be high, causing you to raise the head of the bed.
Measuring the JVP. To help you learn the techniques for this challeng-
ing portion of the cardiac examination, steps for assessing the JVP are outlined 
below.
A hypovolemic or septic patient may 
have to lie flat before you see the neck 
veins. In contrast, when there is vol-
ume overload, you may need to ele-
vate the patient’s head to 60° or even 
90° to locate the oscillation point. 
Steps for Measuring the  
Jugular Venous Pressure
1. Make the patient comfortable. Raise the head slightly on a pillow to relax the 
SCM muscles.
2. Raise the head of the bed or examining table to about 30°. Turn the patient’s 
head slightly away from the side you are inspecting.
(continued )
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
377
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Distinguishing Jugular Venous Pulsations from Carotid Pulsa-
tions. The following features help to distinguish jugular from carotid artery 
pulsations.98
Steps for Measuring the  
Jugular Venous Pressure (continued )
3. Use tangential lighting and examine both sides of the neck. Identify the exter-
nal jugular vein on each side, then ﬁnd the internal jugular venous pulsations.
4. If necessary, raise or lower the head of the bed until you can see the oscillation 
point or meniscus of the internal jugular venous pulsations in the lower half 
of the neck.
5. Focus on the right internal jugular vein. Look for pulsations in the supraster-
nal notch, between the attachments of the SCM muscle on the sternum 
and clavicle, or just posterior to the SCM. Distinguish the pulsations of the 
internal jugular vein from those of the carotid artery (see box below).
6. Identify the highest point of pulsation in the right jugular vein. Extend a long 
rectangular object or card horizontally from this point and a centimeter 
ruler vertically from the sternal angle, making an exact right angle. Mea-
sure the vertical distance in centimeters above the sternal angle where 
the horizontal object crosses the ruler and add to this distance 5 cm, the 
distance from the sternal angle to the center of the right atrium. The sum 
is the JVP.
Distinguishing Internal Jugular and  
Carotid Pulsations
Internal Jugular Pulsations
Carotid Pulsations
Rarely palpable
Soft biphasic undulating quality, usu-
ally with two elevations and charac-
teristic inward deﬂection (x descent)
Pulsations eliminated by light pressure 
on the vein(s) just above the sternal 
end of the clavicle
Height of pulsations changes with 
position, normally dropping as the 
patient becomes more upright
Height of pulsations usually falls with 
inspiration
Palpable
A more vigorous thrust with a single 
outward component
Pulsations not eliminated by pressure 
on veins at sternal end of clavicle
Height of pulsations unchanged by 
position
Height of pulsations not aﬀected by 
inspiration
Establishing the true vertical and horizontal lines to measure the JVP is difﬁcult. 
Place the zero point of your ruler on the sternal angle and line it up with a verti-
cal edge in the room. Then place a card or rectangular object at an exact right 
angle to the ruler (Fig. 9-26). This constitutes your horizontal line. Move it up 
or down—still horizontal—so that the lower edge rests at the top of the jugular 
pulsations, and read the vertical distance on the ruler. Round your measurement 
off to the nearest centimeter.
An elevated JVP is highly correlated 
with both acute and chronic heart fail-
ure.102,104–110 It is also seen in tricuspid 
stenosis, chronic pulmonary hyperten-
sion, superior vena cava obstruction, 
cardiac tamponade, and constrictive 
pericarditis.111–113 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
378 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
F I G U R E  9 - 2 6 .  Measure the JVP with a horizontal card and vertical ruler.
In patients with obstructive lung dis-
ease, the JVP can appear elevated on 
expiration, but the veins collapse on 
inspiration. This finding does not  
indicate heart failure.
JVP measured at >3 cm above the sternal angle, or more than 8 cm in total 
distance above the right atrium, is considered elevated above normal.
The highest point of venous pulsations may lie below the level of the sternal 
angle. Under these circumstances, venous pressure is not elevated and seldom 
needs to be measured.
Jugular Venous Pulsations. Oscillations in the right internal jugular 
vein, and often in the external jugular vein, reﬂect changing pressures in the 
right atrium. Careful inspection of these waveforms reveals two quick peaks and 
two troughs, diagrammed in Figure 9-27. Considerable practice and experience 
are required to discern these ﬂuctuations.
■ The ﬁrst elevation, the presystolic a wave, reﬂects the slight rise in atrial pres-
sure that accompanies atrial contraction. It occurs just prior to S1 and before 
the carotid upstroke.
■ The following trough, the x descent, starts with atrial relaxation. It continues 
as the RV, contracting during systole, pulls the ﬂoor of the atrium downward, 
and ends just before S2. During ventricular systole, blood continues to ﬂow 
into the right atrium from the venae cavae.
■ The tricuspid valve is closed, the chamber begins to ﬁll, and right atrial pres-
sure begins to rise again, creating the second elevation, the v wave. When the 
tricuspid valve opens early in diastole, blood in the right atrium ﬂows pas-
sively into the RV, and right atrial pressure falls again, creating the second 
trough, or y descent.
An elevated JVP is >95% specific for 
an increased left ventricular end dia-
stolic pressure and low left ventricular 
EF, although its role as a predictor of 
hospitalization and death from heart 
failure is less clear.102,114 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
379
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ A simpliﬁed way to remember the three peaks is: a for atrial contraction, c 
for carotid transmission (although this may represent closure of the tricus-
pid valve),102 and v for venous ﬁlling. To the naked eye, the two descents, x 
and y, are the most visible events in the cycle of atrial contraction, atrial re-
laxation, atrial ﬁlling, and atrial emptying again followed by atrial contrac-
tion. Of the two, the sudden collapse of the x descent late in systole is more 
prominent, occurring just before S2. The y descent follows S2 early in diastole.
Observe the amplitude and timing of the jugular venous pulsations. To time them, feel 
the left carotid artery with your right thumb or listen to the heart simultaneously. 
The a wave just precedes S1 and the carotid pulse, the x descent can be seen as a 
systolic collapse, the v wave almost coincides with S2, and the y descent follows 
early in diastole. Look for absent or unusually prominent waves.
F I G U R E  9 - 2 7 .  Jugular venous pulsations. (Adapted with permission from Douglas G, Nicol F, 
Robertson C. Macleod’s Clinical Examination, 13th ed. London: Elsevier, 2013.) 
Abnormally prominent a waves occur in 
increased resistance to right atrial con-
traction, as in tricuspid stenosis; also in 
severe 1st-, 2nd-, and 3rd-degree AV 
block, supraventricular tachycardia, 
junctional tachycardia, pulmonary 
hypertension, and pulmonic stenosis. 
Absent a waves signal atrial fibrillation.
Increased v waves occur in tricuspid 
regurgitation, atrial septal defects, and 
constrictive pericarditis.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
380 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
THE CAROTID PULSE
Next, examine the carotid pulse, including the carotid upstroke, its amplitude 
and contour, and the presence or absence of thrills or bruits. The carotid pulse 
provides valuable information about cardiac function, especially aortic valve ste-
nosis and regurgitation.
To assess amplitude and contour, the patient should be supine with the head of the 
bed elevated to about 30°. First inspect the neck for carotid pulsations, often 
visible just medial to the SCM muscles. Then place your index and middle 
ﬁngers (Fig. 9-28) or left thumb (Fig. 9-29) on the right carotid artery in the 
lower third of the neck and palpate for pulsations.
For irregular rhythms, see Table 9-1, 
Selected Heart Rates and Rhythms,  
p. 400, and Table 9-2, Selected Irregu-
lar Rhythms, p. 401. 
F I G U R E  9 - 2 8 .  Palpate the carotid 
pulse with index and middle ﬁngers.
F I G U R E  9 - 2 9 .  Palpate with the 
thumb.
A tortuous and kinked carotid artery 
may produce a unilateral pulsatile 
bulge. 
Causes of decreased pulsations include 
decreased stroke volume from shock or 
MI and local atherosclerotic narrowing 
or occlusion. 
Press just inside the medial border of a relaxed SCM muscle, roughly at the level 
of the cricoid cartilage. Avoid pressing on the carotid sinus, which lies adjacent to 
the top of the thyroid cartilage. For the left carotid artery, use your right ﬁngers 
or thumb. Never palpate both carotid arteries at the same time. This may 
decrease blood ﬂow to the brain and induce syncope.
Slowly increase pressure until you feel a maximal pulsation; then slowly decrease 
pressure until you best sense the arterial pressure and contour. Assess the pulse 
characteristics listed below.
Pressure on the carotid sinus may 
cause reflex bradycardia or drop in 
blood pressure. 
See Table 9-3, Abnormalities of the 
Arterial Pulse and Pressure Waves,  
p. 402. 
The carotid pulse is small, thready, or 
weak in cardiogenic shock; the pulse 
is bounding in aortic regurgitation 
(see p. 411). 
The carotid upstroke is delayed in  
aortic stenosis. 
Assessment Characteristics of the  
Carotid Pulse
● The amplitude of the pulse. This correlates reasonably well with the pulse pres-
sure.
● The contour of the pulse wave, namely the speed of the upstroke, the duration of its 
summit, and the speed of the downstroke. The normal upstroke is brisk; it is 
smooth, rapid, and follows S1 almost immediately. The summit is smooth, rounded, 
and roughly midsystolic. The downstroke is less abrupt than the upstroke.
(continued )
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
381
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Pulsus alternans and a bigeminal 
pulse vary beat to beat; a paradoxical 
pulse varies with respiration, 
described below. 
Assessment Characteristics of the  
Carotid Pulse (continued )
● Any variations in amplitude, either from beat to beat or with respiration.
● The timing of the carotid upstroke in relation to S1 and S2. Note that the normal 
carotid upstroke follows S1 and precedes S2. This relationship is very  
helpful in correctly identifying S1 and S2, especially when the heart rate is 
increased and the duration of diastole, normally longer than systole, is short-
ened and approaches the duration of systole.
Pulsus Alternans. In pulsus alternans, the rhythm of the pulse remains 
regular, but the force of the arterial pulse alternates because of alternating strong 
and weak ventricular contractions. Pulsus alternans almost always indicates 
severe left ventricular dysfunction. It is usually best felt by applying light 
pressure on the radial or femoral arteries. Use a blood pressure cuff to conﬁrm 
your ﬁnding. After raising the cuff pressure, lower it slowly to just below the 
systolic level. The initial Korotkoff sounds are the strong beats. As you lower 
the cuff, you will hear the softer sounds of the alternating weak beats, which 
will eventually disappear, causing the remaining Korotkoff sounds to double.
Paradoxical Pulse. This is a greater than normal drop in systolic blood 
pressure during inspiration. If the pulse varies in amplitude with respiration or 
you suspect cardiac tamponade (because of jugular venous distention, dyspnea, 
tachycardia, mufﬂed heart tones, and hypotension), use a blood pressure cuff to 
check for a paradoxical pulse. As the patient breathes quietly, lower the cuff 
pressure to the systolic level. Note the pressure level at which the ﬁrst sounds 
can be heard. Then drop the pressure very slowly until sounds can be heard 
throughout the respiratory cycle. Again note the pressure level. The difference 
between these two levels is normally no greater than 3 or 4 mm Hg.
Carotid Artery Thrills and Bruits. As you palpate the carotid artery, 
you may detect vibrations, or thrills, like the throat vibrations of a cat when it 
purrs. Proceed to auscultation.
Auscultate both the carotid arteries to listen for a bruit, a murmur-like sound 
arising from turbulent arterial blood ﬂow. Ask the patient to stop breathing for 
∼15 seconds, then listen with the diaphragm of the stethoscope, which generally 
detects the higher frequency sounds of arterial bruits better than the bell.115 Note 
that higher-grade stenoses may have lower frequency or even absent sounds, 
more amenable to detection with the bell. Place the diaphragm near the upper 
end of the thyroid cartilage below the angle of the jaw, which overlies the bifurca-
tion of the common carotid artery into the external and internal carotid arteries. 
A bruit in this location is less likely to be confused with a transmitted murmur 
from the heart or subclavian or vertebral artery bruits.
Alternately loud and soft Korotkoff 
sounds or a sudden doubling of the 
apparent heart rate as the cuff pres-
sure declines signals pulsus alternans 
(see p. 402). 
Placing the patient in the upright 
position may accentuate this finding.
The pressure when Korotkoff sounds 
are first heard is the highest systolic 
pressure during the respiratory cycle. 
The pressure when sounds are heard 
throughout the cycle is the lowest sys-
tolic pressure. A difference between 
these levels of ≥10 mm Hg to 12 mm Hg 
constitutes a paradoxical pulse, found 
most commonly in acute asthma and 
obstructive pulmonary disease (see  
p. 402). It also occurs in pericardial tam-
ponade and at times in constrictive peri-
carditis and acute pulmonary embolism. 
Thrills in aortic stenosis are transmit-
ted to the carotid arteries from the 
suprasternal notch or 2nd right inter-
costal space. 
Although usually caused by atheroscle-
rotic luminal stenosis, bruits are also 
caused by a tortuous carotid artery, 
external carotid arterial disease, aortic 
stenosis, the hypervascularity of hyper-
thyroidism, and external compression 
from thoracic outlet syndrome. Bruits 
do not correlate with clinically signifi-
cant underlying disease.116–118 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
382 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Listen for bruits in older patients and patients with suspected cerebrovascular 
disease.
Because auscultation has low sensitivity and speciﬁcity for detecting asymptom-
atic carotid disease (46% to 77% and 71% to 98%) and there are high rates of 
false positives with ultrasound, the USPSTF recommends against routine screen-
ing.124 Consider further evaluation for high-risk groups.125–128
The Brachial Artery. 
In patients with carotid 
obstruction, kinking, or 
thrills, assess the pulse in 
the brachial artery, applying 
the techniques described 
previously for determining 
amplitude and contour.
The patient’s arm should rest 
with the elbow extended, 
palm up. Cup your hand 
under the patient’s elbow or 
support the forearm. You 
may need to ﬂex the elbow 
to a varying degree to get 
optimal muscular relaxation. 
Use the index and middle 
ﬁngers or thumb of your opposite hand for palpation. Feel for the pulse just 
medial to the biceps tendon (Fig. 9-30).
THE HEART
Positioning the Patient. For the cardiac examination, stand at the 
patient’s right side. The patient should be supine, with the upper body and head 
of the bed or examining table raised to about 30°. To assess the PMI and extra 
heart sounds such as S3 or S4, ask the patient to turn to the left side, termed the 
left lateral decubitus position—this brings the ventricular apex closer to the 
chest wall. To bring the left ventricular outﬂow tract closer to the chest wall 
and improve detection of aortic regurgitation, have the patient sit up, lean 
forward, and exhale. The box on next page summarizes patient positions and a 
suggested sequence for the examination.
Carotid artery stenosis causes ∼10% of 
ischemic strokes and doubles the risk of 
CHD.119–121 The prevalence of asymp-
tomatic carotid stenosis in the United 
States is ∼1% for stenoses occluding 
75% to 90% of the lumen, and increases 
significantly with age.119,122,123 The 
5-year risk of ipsilateral stroke from 
asymptomatic stenoses of over 70%  
is ∼5%. 
F I G U R E  9 - 3 0 .  Palpate the brachial pulse.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
383
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Accentuated Findings 
Low-pitched extra sounds such as an 
S3, opening snap, diastolic rumble of 
mitral stenosis 
Soft decrescendo higher-pitched dia-
stolic murmur of aortic regurgitation 
Sequence of the Cardiac Examination
Patient Position
Examination
Supine, with the head 
elevated 30°
After examining the JVP and carotid pulse, inspect 
and palpate the precordium: the 2nd right and left 
interspaces; the RV; and the LV, including the apical 
impulse (diameter, location, amplitude, duration).
Left lateral decubitus
Palpate the apical impulse to assess its diameter. Lis-
ten at the apex with the bell of the stethoscope.
Supine, with the head 
elevated 30°
Listen at the 2nd right and left interspaces, down the 
left sternal border to the 4th and 5th interspaces, 
and across to the apex the six listening areas with 
the diaphragm, then the bell (see p. 391). As indi-
cated, listen at the lower right sternal border for 
right-sided murmurs and sounds, often accentu-
ated with inspiration, with the diaphragm and bell.
Sitting, leaning forward, 
after full exhalation
Listen down the left sternal border and at the apex 
with the diaphragm.
Location and Timing of Cardiac Findings. Identify both the 
anatomical location of impulses, heart sounds, and murmurs and where they fall 
in the cardiac cycle. Remember to integrate your ﬁndings with the characteristics 
of the patient’s JVP and carotid upstroke.
■ Identify the anatomical location of cardiac ﬁndings in terms of interspaces and 
the distance of the PMI from the midclavicular (or midsternal) line. The 
midsternal line offers the most reproducible zero point for measurement, but 
some experts recommend the midclavicular line due to its better correlation 
with left ventricular pathology, as long as the midpoint between the acromio-
clavicular and sternoclavicular joints is carefully identiﬁed.129
■ Identify the timing of impulses, sounds, and murmurs in relation to the cardiac 
cycle. Timing of sounds is often possible through auscultation alone, but 
aided by inspection and palpation as well. In most patients with normal or 
slow heart rates, it is easy to identify the paired heart sounds of S1 and S2 that 
mark the onset of systole and diastole. The relatively long diastolic interval 
after S2 separates one pair from the next (Fig. 9-31).
Systole
S1
S2
S1
S2
Systole
Diastole
F I G U R E  9 - 3 1 .  Diastole (S2 to S1) lasts longer than systole (S1 to S2).
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
384 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The relative intensity of S1 and S2 is also helpful. S1 is usually louder than S2 at 
the apex; S2 is usually louder than S1 at the base.
“Inching” your stethoscope also helps clarify the timing of S1 and S2. Return to a 
place on the chest, typically the base, where it is easy to identify S1 and S2. Get 
their rhythm clearly in mind. Then inch your stethoscope down the left sternal 
border in steps until you hear changes in the sounds.
At times, the intensities of S1 and S2 may be abnormal, or at rapid heart rates the 
duration of diastole may shorten, making it difﬁcult to distinguish systole from 
diastole. Palpation of the carotid artery during auscultation is an invaluable aid 
to the timing of sounds and murmurs. Since the carotid upstroke always occurs 
in systole immediately after S1, sounds or murmurs coinciding with the upstroke 
are systolic; sounds or murmurs following the carotid upstroke are diastolic. 
Inspection
Careful inspection of the anterior chest may reveal the location of the apical impulse 
or PMI, or less commonly, the ventricular movements of a left-sided S3 or S4. Shine 
a tangential light across the chest wall over the cardiac apex to make these move-
ments more visible. Plan to further characterize these movements as you proceed 
to palpation. Keep in mind the anatomic locations diagrammed in Figure 9-32.
For example, S1 is diminished in first-
degree heart block; S2 is diminished in 
aortic stenosis. 
Left
ventricular
area—Apex 
Right 2nd
interspace—
Aortic area
Left 2nd
interspace—
Pulmonic area
Epigastric
(subxiphoid)
Right
ventricular
area—
Left sternal
border 
F I G U R E  9 - 3 2 .  Palpation areas on the chest wall.
Palpation
Begin with general palpation of the chest wall. In women, keeping the right chest 
draped, gently lift the breast with your left hand or ask the woman to do this to 
assist you.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
385
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Heaves, Lifts, Thrills; S1 and S2, S3 and S4. Using the techniques 
below, palpate in the 2nd right interspace, the 2nd left interspace, along the 
sternal border, and at the apex for heaves, lifts, thrills, impulses from the RV, and 
the four heart sounds.
■ To palpate heaves and lifts, use your palm and/or hold your fingerpads 
flat or obliquely against the chest. Heaves and lifts are sustained 
impulses that rhythmically lift your fingers, usually produced by an 
enlarged right or left ventricle or atrium and occasionally by ventricular 
aneurysms.
■ For thrills, press the ball of your hand (the padded area of your palm near the 
wrist) ﬁrmly on the chest to check for a buzzing or vibratory sensation 
caused by underlying turbulent ﬂow. If present, auscultate the same area for 
murmurs. Conversely, once a murmur is detected, it is easier to palpate a 
thrill in the position that accentuates the murmur, such as the leaning for-
ward position after detecting aortic regurgitation.
■ Palpate impulses from the RV in the right ventricular area, normally at the 
lower left sternal border and in the subxiphoid area (see p. 375).
■ To palpate S1 and S2, using ﬁrm pressure, place your right hand on the chest 
wall. With your left index and middle ﬁngers, palpate the carotid upstroke 
to identify S1 and S2 just before and just after the upstroke. With practice, 
you will succeed in palpating S1 and S2. For S3 and S4, apply lighter pressure 
at the cardiac apex to detect the presence of any extra movements.
Left Ventricular Area
The Apical Impulse or Point of Maximal Impulse. The apical impulse 
represents the brief early pulsation of the left ventricle as it moves anteriorly dur-
ing contraction and contacts the chest wall. In most examinations the apical 
impulse is the PMI; however, pathologic conditions such as right ventricular 
hypertrophy, a dilated pulmonary artery, or an aortic aneurysm may produce a 
pulsation that is more prominent than the apex beat.
If you cannot identify the apical impulse with the patient supine, ask the patient 
to roll partly onto the left side into the left lateral decubitus position. Palpate 
again, using the palmar surfaces of several ﬁngers (Fig. 9-33). If you cannot ﬁnd 
the apical impulse, ask the patient to exhale fully and stop breathing for a few 
seconds. When examining a woman, it may be helpful to displace the left breast 
upward or laterally as necessary, or ask her to do this for you.
Palpation is less useful in patients 
with a thickened chest wall or 
increased AP diameter. 
The presence of a thrill changes the 
grading of the murmur, as described 
in pp. 396. 
In dextrocardia, a rare congenital 
transposition of the heart, the heart 
is situated in the right chest cavity 
and generates a right-sided apical 
impulse. Use percussion to help 
locate the heart border, the liver, 
and stomach. In full situs inversus, 
the heart, trilobed lung, stomach, 
and spleen are on the right, and the 
liver and gallbladder are on the 
left. 
The apex beat is palpable in 25% to 
40% of adults in the supine position 
and in 50% to 73% of adults in the left 
lateral decubitus position, especially 
those who are thin.129,130 Obesity, a 
very muscular chest wall, or an 
increased AP diameter of the chest 
may obscure detection. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
386 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Now assess the location, diameter, amplitude, and duration of the apical impulse. 
You may wish to have the patient breathe out and brieﬂy stop breathing to check 
your ﬁndings.
F I G U R E  9 - 3 3 .  Palpate the apical impulse in the left lateral decubitus position.
F I G U R E  9 - 3 4 .  Palpate the apical impulse with one ﬁnger.
Once you have found the apical impulse, make ﬁner assessments with your 
ﬁngertips, and then with one ﬁnger (Fig. 9-34). With experience, you will learn 
to palpate the apical impulse in most patients.
See Table 9-4, Variations and Abnor-
malities of the Ventricular Impulses,  
p. 403, for how to characterize the PMI 
as tapping, sustained, or diffuse. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
387
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Location. Initially try to assess loca-
tion with the patient supine, because 
the left lateral decubitus position 
displaces the apical impulse to the 
left. Locate two points: the inter-
spaces, usually the 5th or possibly 
the 4th, which give the vertical loca-
tion; and the distance in centimeters 
from the midclavicular line (or mid-
sternal line), which gives the hori-
zontal location (Fig. 9-35). For the 
midclavicular line, use a ruler to 
mark the midpoint between the ster-
noclavicular and acromioclavicular 
joints so that other clinicians can 
reproduce your ﬁndings.
■ Diameter. Palpate the diameter of the apical impulse. In the supine patient, 
it usually measures less than 2.5 cm, about the size of a quarter, and occupies 
only one interspace. It may feel larger in the left lateral decubitus position.
■ Amplitude. Estimate the amplitude of the impulse. Is the PMI brisk and tap-
ping, diffuse, or sustained? These are three important descriptors in clinical 
practice. Normally, the amplitude of the PMI is small and feels brisk and 
tapping (Fig. 9-36). Some young adults have an increased amplitude, or 
hyperkinetic impulse, especially when excited or after exercise; the duration, 
however, is normal.
Midsternal
line
Midclavicular
line
Apical
pulse
2
3
4
5
F I G U R E  9 - 3 5 .  Locate the apical 
impulse (PMI).
F I G U R E  9 - 3 6 .  PMI amplitude—
normal and hyperkinetic.
Normal
S1
S2
Hyperkinetic
S1
S2
■ Duration. Duration is the most useful characteristic of the apical impulse for 
identifying hypertrophy of the left ventricle. To assess duration, auscultate 
the heart sounds as you palpate the apical impulse, or watch the movement 
of your stethoscope as you listen at the apex. Estimate the proportion of 
systole occupied by the apical impulse. Normally, it lasts through the ﬁrst 
two thirds of systole, or often less, but does not continue to the second heart 
sound (Fig. 9-37).
Pregnancy or a high left diaphragm 
may shift the apical impulse upward 
and to the left. 
Lateral displacement toward the axillary 
line from ventricular dilatation is seen in 
heart failure, cardiomyopathy, and isch-
emic heart disease; and also in thoracic 
deformities and mediastinal shift.
Lateral displacement from the midcla-
vicular line makes increased left ven-
tricular volume and a low left 
ventricular EF 5 and 10 times more 
likely, respectively.129
In the left lateral decubitus position, a 
diffuse PMI with a diameter >3 cm sig-
nals left ventricular enlargement;131 a 
diameter of >4 cm makes left ventric-
ular overload almost 5 times more 
likely.129 
A hyperkinetic high-amplitude 
impulse may occur in hyperthyroid-
ism, severe anemia, pressure over-
load of the left ventricle from 
hypertension or aortic stenosis, or 
volume overload of the left ventricle 
from aortic regurgitation. 
A sustained high-amplitude impulse 
significantly increases the likelihood 
of LVH from the pressure overload 
seen in hypertension.131 If such an 
impulse is displaced laterally, consider 
volume overload. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
388 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Palpable S3 and S4. By inspection and palpation, you may detect early 
and late diastolic ventricular movements that are synchronous with pathologic 
third and fourth heart sounds. With the patient in the left lateral decubitus posi-
tion, palpate the apical beat gently with one ﬁnger as the patient exhales and 
brieﬂy stops breathing. By marking an X on the apex, you may be able to palpate 
these brief diastolic outward movements.
Right Ventricular Area—The Left Sternal Border in the 3rd, 
4th, and 5th Interspaces. With the patient supine and the head elevated 
to 30°, ask the patient to exhale and brieﬂy stop breathing, then place the tips 
of your curved ﬁngers in the left 3rd, 4th, and 5th interspaces to palpate for the 
systolic impulse of the RV (Fig. 9-39). If there is a palpable impulse, assess its 
location, amplitude, and duration. In thin individuals, you may detect a brief 
systolic tap, especially when stroke volume is increased by conditions such as 
anxiety.
F I G U R E  9 - 3 7 .  PMI duration—
normal and sustained.
S1
S2
Normal
Sustained
S1
S2
A diffuse sustained low-amplitude 
(hypokinetic) impulse is seen in heart 
failure and dilated cardiomyopathy. 
S1
S2
Hypokinetic
F I G U R E  9 - 3 8 .  Sustained 
hypokinetic PMI of dilated 
cardiomyopathy.
A brief early to middiastolic impulse 
represents a palpable S3; an outward 
movement just before S1 signifies a 
palpable S4. 
F I G U R E  9 - 3 9 .  Palpate right ventricular systolic impulse.
A sustained left parasternal move-
ment beginning at S1 points to pres-
sure overload from pulmonary 
hypertension and pulmonic stenosis or 
the chronic ventricular volume over-
load of an atrial septal defect. A sus-
tained movement later in systole can 
be seen in mitral regurgitation. 
Occasionally, the diastolic movements of right-sided S3 and S4 are palpable in the 
left 4th and 5th interspaces. Time them by auscultation or palpation of the 
carotid upstroke.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
389
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
In patients with an increased AP diameter, ask the patient to inhale and brieﬂy 
stop breathing. Palpate for the RV in the epigastric or subxiphoid area. With your 
hand ﬂattened, press your index ﬁnger just under the rib cage and up toward the 
left shoulder to assess any right ventricular pulsations (Fig. 9-40). The inspira-
tory position moves your hand well away from the pulsations of the abdominal 
aorta, which might otherwise confuse your ﬁndings.
F I G U R E  9 - 4 0 .  Palpate in epigastric area if increased AP diameter.
Pulmonic Area—The Left 2nd Interspace. This interspace overlies 
the pulmonary artery. As the patient holds expiration, inspect and palpate for 
pulmonary artery pulsations and transmitted heart sounds, especially if patients 
are excited or examined after exercise.
Aortic Area—The Right 2nd Interspace. This interspace overlies the 
aortic outﬂow tract. Search for pulsations and palpable heart sounds.
PERCUSSION
Palpation has replaced percussion when estimating cardiac size. If you cannot pal-
pate the apical impulse, percussion may be your only option, but has limited correla-
tion with the cardiac borders. Starting well to the left on the chest, percuss from 
resonance toward cardiac dullness in the 3rd, 4th, 5th, and, possibly, 6th interspaces.
AUSCULTATION
Auscultation of heart sounds and murmurs is a pre-eminent skill that leads 
directly to important clinical diagnoses. The ACC and the AHA has deemed 
cardiac auscultation as “the most widely used method of screening for valvular 
heart disease.”132 Review the six auscultatory areas in Figure 9-41, with the 
In obstructive pulmonary disease, 
hyperinflation of the lungs may pre-
vent palpation of the hypertrophied 
RV in the left parasternal area. The RV 
impulse is readily palpated high in the 
epigastrium where heart sounds are 
also more audible. 
A prominent pulsation here often 
accompanies dilatation or increased 
flow in the pulmonary artery. A palpable 
S2 points to increased pulmonary artery 
pressure from pulmonary hypertension. 
A pulsation here suggests a dilated or 
aneurysmal aorta. A palpable S2 can 
accompany systemic hypertension. 
A markedly dilated failing heart may 
have a hypokinetic apical impulse dis-
placed far to the left. A large pericar-
dial effusion may make the impulse 
undetectable. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
390 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
following caveats: (1) many authorities discourage designations such as “aortic 
area,” because murmurs may be loudest in other areas, and (2) these areas do not 
apply to patients with cardiac dilatation or hypertrophy, anomalies of the great 
vessels, or dextrocardia.
2nd right
interspace—
aortic area
2nd left
interspace—
pulmonic area
Lower left
sternal border—
tricuspid area
Apex—
mitral area
F I G U R E  9 - 4 1 .  Auscultatory areas on the chest wall.
Throughout your examination, take your time at each of the six auscultatory 
areas. Concentrate on each of the events in the cardiac cycle, listening carefully 
to S1, then S2, then other sounds and murmurs occurring in systole and diastole. 
Techniques for assessing these events are described in the pages that follow.
Know Your Stethoscope! It is important to understand the uses of both 
the diaphragm and the bell.
■ The diaphragm. The diaphragm is better for picking up the relatively high-
pitched sounds of S1 and S2, the murmurs of aortic and mitral regurgita-
tion, and pericardial friction rubs. Listen throughout the precordium with the 
diaphragm, pressing it ﬁrmly against the chest.
■ The bell. The bell is more sensitive to the low-pitched sounds of S3 and S4 
and the murmur of mitral stenosis. Apply the bell lightly, with just enough 
pressure to produce an air seal with its full rim. Use the bell at the apex, then 
move medially along the lower sternal border. Resting the heel of your hand on 
the chest like a fulcrum may help you to maintain light pressure.
Firm pressure on the bell can stretch the underlying skin and make it function 
more like the diaphragm. Low-pitched sounds like S3 and S4 may then disap-
pear—an observation that can help identify them. In contrast, high-pitched 
Heart sounds and murmurs that origi-
nate in the four valves radiate widely, 
as illustrated in Figure 9-42. Use ana-
tomical location rather than valve 
area to describe your findings.
Aortic
Tricuspid
Pulmonic
Mitral
F I G U R E  9 - 4 2 .  Radiation of heart 
sounds and murmurs.
Many types of stethoscopes are avail-
able. Learn about the various options 
before purchasing this expensive 
instrument. Some are “tunable,” allow-
ing you to vary the pressure on the 
diaphragm to alter its acoustic charac-
teristics; others are electronic and can 
amplify and even digitally record aus-
cultatory events. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
391
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
sounds such as a midsystolic click, an ejection sound, or an OS will persist or 
get louder.
The Pattern of Auscultation. In a quiet room, auscultate the heart with 
your stethoscope with the patient’s head and upper chest elevated to 30°. Start 
at either the base or apex, listening ﬁrst with the diaphragm, then with the bell.
■ Some experts recommend starting at the apex and moving to the base: Move the 
stethoscope from the PMI medially to the left sternal border, superiorly to 
the 2nd interspace, then across the sternum to the 2nd interspace at the right 
sternal border, stopping at “the 6 listening spots” marked by the white circles 
in Figure 9-41. To clarify ﬁndings, “inch” the stethoscope in smaller incre-
ments as needed (see p. 384).
■ Alternatively, you can start at the base and inch your stethoscope to the apex: 
with your stethoscope in the right 2nd interspace close to the sternum, move 
along the left sternal border in each interspace from the 2nd through the 5th, 
and then toward the apex.
Two Important Maneuvers. For new patients and patients needing a com-
plete cardiac examination, use two additional maneuvers to enhance detection 
of mitral stenosis and aortic regurgitation.
■ Mitral stenosis. Ask the patient to roll into the left lateral decubitus position, 
which brings the left ventricle closer to the chest wall. Place the bell of your 
stethoscope lightly on the apical impulse (Fig. 9-43).
F I G U R E  9 - 4 3 .  Auscultate for mitral stenosis in the left lateral decubitus position.
This position accentuates a left-sided 
S3 and S4 and mitral murmurs, espe-
cially mitral stenosis. Otherwise, you 
may miss these important findings. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
392 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Aortic regurgitation. Ask the patient to sit up, lean forward, exhale completely, 
and brieﬂy stop breathing after expiration. Pressing the diaphragm of your 
stethoscope on the chest, listen along the left sternal border and at the apex, 
pausing periodically so the patient may breathe (Fig. 9-44).
F I G U R E  9 - 4 4 .  Auscultate for aortic regurgitation with the patient leaning forward.
Identifying Systole and Diastole. To facilitate the correct identiﬁcation 
of systole and diastole, as you auscultate the chest, palpate the right carotid 
artery in the lower third of the neck with your left index and middle ﬁngers—S1 
falls just before the carotid upstroke and S2 follows the carotid upstroke. Be sure 
to compare the intensities of S1 and S2 as you move your stethoscope through the 
listening areas above.
■ At the base, you will note that S2 is louder than S1 and may split with respira-
tion. At the apex, S1 is usually louder than S2 unless the PR interval is 
prolonged.
■ By carefully noting the intensities of S1 and S2, you will conﬁrm each of these 
sounds and thereby correctly identify systole, the interval between S1 and S2, 
and diastole, the interval between S2 and S1.
The correct timing of systole and diastole is the fundamental prerequisite to 
identifying events in the cardiac cycle. Review the guides to auscultation on 
next page and learn the tips for identifying heart murmurs which follow in the 
next section.
You may easily miss the soft diastolic 
decrescendo murmur of aortic 
regurgitation unless you listen at this 
position. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
393
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Auscultatory Sounds
Heart Sounds
Guides to Auscultation
S1
Note its intensity and any apparent splitting. Normal 
splitting is detectable along the lower left sternal border.
S2
Note its intensity.
Split S2
Listen for splitting of this sound in the 2nd and 3rd 
left interspaces. Ask the patient to breathe quietly, 
and then slightly more deeply than normal. Does S2 
split into its two components, as it normally does? If 
not, ask the patient to (1) breathe a little more 
deeply, or (2) sit up. Listen again. A thick chest wall 
may make the pulmonic component of S2 inaudible.
Width of split. How wide is the split? It is normally 
quite narrow.
Timing of split. When in the respiratory cycle do you 
hear the split? It is normally heard late in inspiration.
Does the split disappear as it should, during exhala-
tion? If not, listen again with the patient sitting up.
Intensity of A2 and P2. Compare the intensity of the 
two components, A2 and P2; A2 is usually louder.
Extra Sounds in 
Systole
Such as ejection sounds or systolic clicks
Note their location, timing, intensity, and pitch, and 
variations with respiration
Extra Sounds in 
Diastole
Such as S3, S4, or an opening snap
Note the location, timing, intensity, and pitch, and 
variations with respiration. An S3 or S4 in athletes is 
a normal ﬁnding.
Systolic and Diastolic 
Murmurs
Murmurs are diﬀerentiated from S1, S2, and extra 
sounds by their longer duration.
See Table 9-5, Variations in the First 
Heart Sound—S1, p. 404. Note that S1 
is louder at more rapid heart rates, 
and PR intervals are shorter. 
See Table 9-6, Variations in the Second 
Heart Sound—S2, p. 405. 
When either A2 or P2 is absent, as in 
aortic or pulmonic valve disease, S2 is 
persistently single. 
Expiratory splitting suggests a valvu-
lar abnormality (p. 405). 
Persistent splitting results from 
delayed closure of the pulmonic valve 
or early closure of the aortic valve. 
A loud P2 points to pulmonary  
hypertension. 
The systolic click of mitral valve pro-
lapse is the most common extra 
sound. See Table 9-7, Extra Heart 
Sounds in Systole, p. 406. 
See Table 9-8, Extra Heart Sounds in 
Diastole, p. 407. 
See Table 9-9, Midsystolic Murmurs, 
pp. 408–409; Table 9-10, Pansystolic 
(Holosystolic) Murmurs, p. 410; and 
Table 9-11, Diastolic Murmurs,  
p. 411. 
Identifying Heart Murmurs. Correctly identifying heart murmurs is a 
diagnostic challenge. A systematic approach, thorough understanding of cardiac 
anatomy and physiology, and, above all, your dedication to the practice and 
mastery of techniques of examination will lead to your success. Whenever 
possible, compare your ﬁndings with those of an experienced clinician to improve 
your clinical acumen. Review the tips for identifying heart murmurs, then carefully 
study the subsequent sections on the timing, shape, location, radiation, intensity, 
pitch, and quality of heart murmurs for more details.140 Study the tables at the 
end of the chapter to further expand your skills. Reinforce your learning by 
listening to heart sound recordings, which can increase accurate identiﬁcation of 
heart murmurs (and generally transfers to actual patients).15,17–19,21,22
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
394 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Systolic Murmurs
Systolic murmurs are typically midsystolic or pansystolic. Midsystolic murmurs 
can be functional murmurs; these are typically short midsystolic murmurs that 
decrease in intensity with maneuvers that reduce left ventricular volume, such 
as standing, sitting up, and straining during the Valsalva maneuver. These mur-
murs are often heard in healthy patients and are not pathologic. Early systolic 
murmurs are uncommon and are not depicted below.
Tips for Identifying Heart Murmurs
● Time the murmur—is it in systole or diastole? What is its duration?
● Locate where on the precordium the murmur is loudest—at the base, along 
the sternal border, at the apex? Does it radiate?
● Conduct any necessary maneuvers, such as having the patient lean forward 
and exhale or turn to the left lateral decubitus position.
● Determine the shape of the murmur—for example, is it crescendo or decre-
scendo, is it holosystolic?
● Grade the intensity of the murmur from 1 to 6, and determine its pitch and 
quality.
● Identify associated features such as the quality of S1 and S2, the presence of 
extra sounds such as S3, S4, or an OS, or the presence of additional murmurs.
● Be sure you are listening in a quiet room!
Timing. First decide if you are hearing a systolic murmur, falling between S1 
and S2, or a diastolic murmur, falling between S2 and S1. Palpating the carotid 
pulse as you listen can help you with timing. Murmurs that coincide with the 
carotid upstroke are systolic.
Diastolic murmurs usually represent 
valvular heart disease. Systolic mur-
murs point to valvular disease but can 
be physiologic flow murmurs arising 
from normal heart valves. 
Murmurs detected during pregnancy 
should be promptly evaluated for 
possible risk to the mother and fetus, 
especially those of aortic stenosis or 
pulmonary hypertension.154 
Midsystolic murmurs typically arise 
from blood flow across the semilunar 
(aortic and pulmonic) valves. See 
Table 9-10, Pansystolic (Holosystolic) 
Murmurs, p. 411. 
Pansystolic murmurs often occur with 
regurgitant (backward) flow across 
the AV valves. See Table 9-9, Midsys-
tolic Murmurs, pp. 408–409. 
This is the murmur of mitral valve pro-
lapse and is often, but not always, pre-
ceded by a systolic click (see p. 406); 
the murmur of mitral regurgitation 
may also be late systolic. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
S1
S1
S2
Midsystolic murmur: Begins after S1 and 
stops before S2. Brief gaps are audible 
between the murmur and the heart sounds. 
Listen carefully for the gap just before S2, 
which is more readily detected and, if pres-
ent, usually conﬁrms the murmur as midsys-
tolic, not pansystolic.
S1
S1
S2
Pansystolic (holosystolic) murmur: Starts 
with S1 and stops at S2, without a gap 
between murmur and heart sounds.
S1
S1
S2
Late systolic murmur: Usually starts in mid- 
or late systole and persists up to S2.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
395
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Continuous Murmurs
Some congenital and clinical conditions produce continuous murmurs.
Diastolic Murmurs
Diastolic murmurs may be early diastolic, middiastolic, or late diastolic.
S1
S2
S1
Systole
Diastole
Congenital patent ductus arteriosus 
and AV fistulas, common in dialysis 
patients, produce continuous murmurs 
that are nonvalvular in origin. Venous 
hums and pericardial friction rubs also 
have both systolic and diastolic com-
ponents. See Table 9-12, Cardiovascu-
lar Sounds with Both Systolic and 
Diastolic Components, p. 412. 
Note the presystolic murmur of mitral 
stenosis in normal sinus rhythm. 
S2
S1
S1
Note the early diastolic murmur of 
aortic regurgitation.
S2
S1
S1
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Early diastolic murmurs typically 
reflect regurgitant flow across  
incompetent semilunar valves. 
S1
S2
S1
Early diastolic murmur: Starts immediately 
after S2, without a discernible gap, then 
usually fades into silence before the next S1.
Middiastolic and presystolic murmurs 
reflect turbulent flow across the AV 
valves. See Table 9-11, Diastolic  
Murmurs, p. 411. 
S1
S2
S1
Middiastolic murmur: Starts a short time 
after S2. It may fade away, as illustrated, or 
merge into a late diastolic murmur.
S1
S2
S1
Late diastolic (presystolic) murmur: Starts 
late in diastole and typically continues up to S1.
Continuous murmur: Begins in systole 
and extends into all or part of diastole (but 
is not necessarily uniform throughout).140
Crescendo murmur: Grows louder.
Decrescendo murmur: Grows softer.
Shape. The shape or conﬁguration of a murmur is determined by its inten-
sity over time.
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
396 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Location of Maximal Intensity. This is determined by the site where the 
murmur originates. Find the location by exploring the area where you hear the 
murmur. Describe where you hear it best in terms of the intercostal space and its 
proximity to the sternum, the apex, or its measured distance from the midclavicu-
lar, midsternal, or one of the axillary lines.
Radiation or Transmission from the Point of Maximal Intensity. This 
reﬂects not only the site of origin but also the intensity of the murmur, the direction 
of blood ﬂow, and bone conduction in the thorax. Explore the area around a mur-
mur and determine where else you can hear it.
Intensity. This is usually graded on a six-point scale and expressed as a 
fraction. The numerator describes the intensity of the murmur wherever it is loud-
est; the denominator indicates the scale you are using. Intensity is inﬂuenced by 
the thickness of the chest wall and the presence of intervening tissue.
Grade murmurs using the six-point scale below (the Levine grading sys-
tem).161,162 Note that grades 4 through 6 require the added presence of a pal-
pable thrill.
Listen for the midsystolic murmur of 
aortic stenosis and innocent flow  
murmurs. 
S1
S1
S2
S1
S1
Note the pansystolic murmur of mitral 
regurgitation.
For example, a murmur best heard in 
the 2nd right interspace often origi-
nates at or near the aortic valve. 
The murmur of aortic stenosis often 
radiates to the neck in the direction of 
arterial flow, especially on the right 
side. In mitral regurgitation, the mur-
mur often radiates to the axilla, sup-
porting transmission by bone 
conduction.141,160 
An identical degree of turbulence 
would cause a louder murmur in a thin 
person than in a very muscular or 
obese person. Emphysematous lungs 
may diminish the intensity of murmurs. 
For maneuvers, see Special Techniques, 
pp. 397–399. 
Gradations of Murmurs
Grade
Description
Grade 1
Very faint, heard only after listener has “tuned in”; may not be 
heard in all positions
Grade 2
Quiet, but heard immediately after placing the stethoscope on 
the chest
Grade 3
Moderately loud
Grade 4
Loud, with palpable thrill
Grade 5
Very loud, with thrill. May be heard when the stethoscope is 
partly oﬀ the chest
Grade 6
Very loud, with thrill. May be heard with stethoscope entirely 
oﬀ the chest
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Crescendo–decrescendo murmur: 
First rises in intensity, then falls.
Plateau murmur: Has the same intensity 
throughout.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
397
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Pitch. This is categorized as high, medium, or low.
Quality. This is described in terms such as blowing, harsh, rumbling, and 
musical.
Other useful characteristics of murmurs and heart sounds include variation with 
respiration, the position of the patient, and other special maneuvers.
Integrating Cardiovascular Assessment
Cardiovascular assessment requires more than careful examination. You need to 
correctly identify and interpret individual ﬁndings, ﬁt them together in a logi-
cal pattern, and correlate your cardiac ﬁndings with the patient’s blood pres-
sure and heart rate, carotid upstroke and JVP, the arterial pulses, the remainder 
of your physical examination, and the patient’s history. Evaluating systolic mur-
murs illustrates this point. 
A fully described murmur might be: a 
“medium-pitched, grade 2/6, blowing 
decrescendo diastolic murmur, best 
heard in the 4th left interspace, with radi-
ation to the apex” (aortic regurgitation). 
Right-sided heart murmurs generally 
increase with inspiration; left-sided 
murmurs generally increase with 
expiration.132 
A 60-year-old woman with angina 
might have a harsh 3/6 midsystolic cre-
scendo–decrescendo murmur in the 
right 2nd interspace radiating to the 
neck. These findings are consistent 
with aortic stenosis but could arise 
from aortic sclerosis (leaflets are scle-
rotic but not stenotic), a dilated aorta, 
or increased flow across a normal 
valve. Assess any delay in the carotid 
upstroke and the intensity of A2 for evi-
dence of aortic stenosis. Check the api-
cal impulse for LVH. Listen for aortic 
regurgitation as the patient leans for-
ward and exhales. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Integrated Assessment: Systolic Murmurs
An asymptomatic teenager might have a grade 2/6 midsystolic murmur in the 
2nd and 3rd left interspaces. Because this suggests a pulmonic murmur you 
should assess the RV for hypertrophy by carefully palpating the left parasternal 
area. Because pulmonic stenosis and atrial septal defects can cause this murmur, 
auscultate carefully for a split S2, any ejection sounds, and variation with inspira-
tion. Listen to the murmur after the patient sits up. Look for evidence of anemia, 
hyperthyroidism, or pregnancy that could cause such a murmur by increasing the 
ﬂow across the aortic or the pulmonic valve. If all your ﬁndings are normal, your 
patient probably has a functional murmur—one with no pathologic signiﬁcance.
Integrating this information allows you to generate a diﬀerential diagnosis 
about the origin of the murmur and pursue further evaluation. 
Special Techniques: Maneuvers to Identify 
Murmurs and Heart Failure
The maneuvers described below help distinguish mitral valve prolapse and 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy from aortic stenosis.
Standing and Squatting. When a person is standing up, venous return to the 
heart decreases, as does peripheral vascular resistance. Arterial blood pressure, 
stroke volume, and the volume of blood in the left ventricle all decline. With 
squatting, vascular and volume changes occur in the opposite direction. These 
maneuvers help (1) to identify a prolapsed mitral valve and (2) to distinguish 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy from aortic stenosis.
Secure the patient’s gown so that it will not interfere with your examination, and 
prepare for prompt auscultation. Instruct the patient to squat next to the examin-
ing table and hold on to it for balance. Listen to the heart with the patient in the 
squatting position and again in the standing position.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
398 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Maneuvers to Identify Systolic Murmurs
Effect on Systolic Sounds and Murmurs
Maneuver
Cardiovascular Effect
Mitral Valve 
Prolapse
Hypertrophic 
Cardiomyopathy
Aortic Stenosis
Squatting; 
Valsalva:
 
Release  
 
Phase
Increased left ventricular 
volume from ↑ venous 
return to heart
↓ prolapse of mitral 
valve
↓ outﬂow 
obstruction
↑ blood volume ejected 
into aorta
Increased vascular  
tone: ↑ arterial blood 
pressure; ↑ peripheral 
vascular resistance
Delay of click and 
murmur shortens
↓ intensity of 
murmur
↑ intensity of murmur
Standing; 
Valsalva: 
 
Strain 
 
 Phase
Decreased left ventricular 
volume from ↓ venous 
return to heart
Decreased vascular  
tone: ↓ arterial blood 
pressure
↑ prolapse of mitral 
valve 
Click moves earlier in 
systole and mur-
mur lengthens
↑ outﬂow 
obstruction 
↑ intensity of 
murmur
↓ blood volume ejected 
into aorta 
↓ intensity of murmur
μ
μ
μ
μ
The murmur of hypertrophic cardiomy-
opathy is the only systolic murmur that 
increases during the “strain phase” of 
the Valsalva maneuver due to 
increased outflow tract obstruction.143 
In patients with severe heart failure, 
blood pressure remains elevated and 
there are Korotkoff sounds during the 
phase 2 strain phase, but not during 
phase 4 release, termed “the square 
wave” response. This response is highly 
correlated with volume overload and 
elevated left ventricular end-diastolic 
pressure and pulmonary capillary 
wedge pressure, in some studies outper-
forming brain natriuretic peptide.142,163 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Valsalva Maneuver. The Valsalva maneuver involves forcible exhalation 
against a closed glottis after full inspiration, causing increased intrathoracic pres-
sure. The normal systolic blood pressure response follows four phases: (1) tran-
sient increase during onset of the “strain” phase when the patient bears down, 
due to increased intrathoracic pressure; (2) sharp decrease to below baseline as 
the “strain” phase is maintained, due to decreased venous return; (3) further 
acute drop of both blood pressure and left ventricular volume during the “release” 
phase, due to decreased intrathoracic pressure; and (4) “overshoot” increased 
blood pressure, due to reﬂex sympathetic activation and increased stroke vol-
ume.142,163 This maneuver has several uses at the bedside.
To distinguish the murmur of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, ask the supine patient 
to “bear down, like straining during a bowel movement.” Alternatively, place one 
hand on the patient’s midabdomen and ask the patient to strain against it. With 
your other hand, place your stethoscope on the patient’s chest and listen at the 
lower left sternal border.
The Valsalva maneuver can also identify heart failure and pulmonary hyperten-
sion. Inﬂate the blood pressure cuff to 15 mm Hg greater than the systolic 
blood pressure and ask the patient to perform the Valsalva maneuver for 
10 seconds, then resume normal respiration. Keep the cuff pressure locked 
at 15 mm Hg above the baseline systolic pressure during the entire maneuver 
and for 30 seconds afterward. Listen for Korotkoff sounds over the brachial 
artery throughout. Typically, only phases 2 and 4 are signiﬁcant, since phases 
1 and 3 are too short for clinical detection. In healthy patients, phase 2, the 
“strain” phase, is silent; Korotkoff sounds are heard after straining is released dur-
ing phase 4.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
399
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
Isometric Handgrip. Isometric handgrip increases the systolic murmurs of 
mitral regurgitation, pulmonic stenosis, and ventricular septal defect, and also 
the diastolic murmurs of aortic regurgitation and mitral stenosis.132
Transient Arterial Occlusion. Transient compression of both arms by bilat-
eral blood pressure cuff inﬂation to 20 mm Hg greater than peak systolic blood 
pressure augments the murmurs of mitral regurgitation, aortic regurgitation, and 
ventricular septal defect.132
Recording Your Findings
Note that initially you may use sentences to describe your ﬁndings; later you will 
use phrases. The style below contains phrases appropriate for most write-ups.
Recording the Cardiovascular Examination
“The JVP is 3 cm above the sternal angle with the head of bed elevated to 30°. 
Carotid upstrokes are brisk, without bruits. The PMI is tapping, 1 cm lateral to 
the midclavicular line in the 5th intercostal space. Crisp S1 and S2. At the base, S2 
is louder than S1 with physiologic split of A2 > P2. At the apex, S1 is louder than S2. 
There are no murmurs or extra sounds.”
OR
“The JVP is 5 cm above the sternal angle with the head of bed elevated to 50°. 
Carotid upstrokes are brisk; a bruit is heard over the left carotid artery. The PMI 
is diﬀuse, 3 cm in diameter, palpated at the anterior axillary line in the 5th and 
6th intercostal spaces. S1 and S2 are soft. S3 is present at the apex. High-pitched 
harsh 2/6 holosystolic murmur best heard at the apex, radiating to the axilla.”
These findings suggest heart failure 
with volume overload with possible 
left carotid occlusion and mitral regur-
gitation.104,106,114,164,165 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
400 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 9-1 Selected Heart Rates and Rhythms
Cardiac rhythms may be classiﬁed as regular or irregular. When rhythms are irregular or rates are either fast or slow, obtain an ECG 
to identify the origin of the beats (sinus node, AV node, atrium, or ventricle) and the conduction pattern. The normal range for 
normal sinus rhythm is reported at 50 to 90 beats/minute.42 Note that AV nodal rhythms, including AV block, may have a fast, 
normal, or slow ventricular rate.
ECG Pattern
Usual Resting Rate
WHAT IS  
THE RATE?
FAST 
(>100)
Sinus tachycardia
Supraventricular (atrial or nodal) tachycardia
Atrial ﬂutter with a regular ventricular response
Ventricular tachycardia
100–180
150–250
100–175
110–250
REGULAR
OR
NORMAL 
(60–90)
Normal sinus rhythm
Second-degree AV block
Atrial ﬂutter with a regular ventricular response
60–90
60–100
75–100
OR
IS THE RHYTHM 
REGULAR OR 
IRREGULAR?
SLOW 
(<60)
Sinus bradycardia
Second-degree AV block
Complete heart block
<60
30–60
<40
IRREGULAR
SPORADIC 
OR
REGULARLY 
IRREGULAR
Premature or extra beats at random intervals, but 
normal underlying rhythm: i.e., atrial or ventricular 
premature contractions, sinus arrhythmia
Regular pattern of cadences: i.e., ventricular 
trigeminy
See Table 9-2
OR
IRREGULARLY 
IRREGULAR
No discernible regularity: i.e., atrial ﬁbrillation, 
atrial ﬂutter
WHAT IS THE 
PATTERN OF 
IRREGULARITY?
μ
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
401
Table 9-2 Selected Irregular Rhythms
Type of Rhythm
ECG Waves and Heart Sounds
SPORADIC
Sinus Arrhythmia
S1
S2
S1 S2
S1
S2
S1
S2
S1
S2
INSPIRATION
EXPIRATION
Rhythm. The heart varies 
cyclically, usually speeding up 
with inspiration and slowing 
down with expiration.
Heart Sounds. Normal, although 
S1 may vary with the heart rate.
Atrial or Nodal Premature 
Contractions 
(Supraventricular)
Aberrant P wave
Normal QRS and T
S1
S2
Early beat
Pause
QRS
P
T
Rhythm. A beat of atrial or nodal 
origin comes earlier than the next 
expected normal beat. A pause 
follows, and then the rhythm 
resumes.
Heart Sounds. S1 may differ in 
intensity from the S1 of normal 
beats, and S2 may be decreased.
SPORADIC OR REGULARLY 
IRREGULAR
Ventricular Premature 
Contractions
(Ventricular bigeminy or trigeminy)
No P wave
Early beat with split sounds
S1
S2
Aberrant QRS and T
Pause
Rhythm. A beat of ventricular 
origin comes earlier than the next 
expected normal beat. A pause 
follows, and the rhythm resumes.
Heart Sounds. S1 may differ in 
intensity from the S1 of the 
normal beats, and S2 may be 
decreased. Both sounds are likely 
to be split.
IRREGULARLY IRREGULAR
Atrial Fibrillation and Atrial 
Flutter with Varying AV 
Block
No P waves
Fibrillation waves
S1
S2
S1 S2
S1
S1
S2
S2
Rhythm. The ventricular rhythm 
is totally irregular, although short 
runs of the irregular ventricular 
rhythm may seem regular.
Heart Sounds. S1 varies in 
intensity.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
402 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 9-3  Abnormalities of the Arterial Pulse  
and Pressure Waves
Normal
mm Hg
The pulse pressure is approximately 30–40 mm Hg. The pulse 
contour is smooth and rounded. (The notch on the descending 
slope of the pulse wave is not palpable.)
Small Weak Pulses
The pulse pressure is diminished, and the pulse feels weak and 
small. The upstroke may feel slowed, the peak prolonged. 
Causes include (1) decreased stroke volume, as in heart failure, 
hypovolemia, and severe aortic stenosis; and (2) increased 
peripheral resistance, as in exposure to cold and severe heart 
failure.
Large Bounding Pulses
The pulse pressure is increased, and the pulse feels strong and 
bounding. The rise and fall may feel rapid, the peak brief. 
Causes include (1) increased stroke volume, decreased 
peripheral resistance, or both, as in fever, anemia, 
hyperthyroidism, aortic regurgitation, arteriovenous ﬁstulas, 
and patent ductus arteriosus; (2) increased stroke volume 
because of slow heart rates, as in bradycardia and complete 
heart block; and (3) decreased compliance (increased stiffness) 
of the aortic walls, as in aging or atherosclerosis.
Bisferiens Pulse
A bisferiens pulse is an increased arterial pulse with a double 
systolic peak, detected during moderate compression of the 
artery. Causes include pure aortic regurgitation, combined aortic 
stenosis and regurgitation, and, though less commonly palpable, 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Pulsus Alternans
The pulse is completely regular, but has alternating strong and 
weak beats (unlike bigeminy). If there is only a slight difference 
between the strong and weak beats, detection requires use of a 
blood pressure cuff (see p. 381). Pulsus alternans indicates left 
ventricular failure and is usually accompanied by a left-sided S3.
Bigeminal Pulse
Premature contractions
This disorder may mimic pulsus alternans. A bigeminal pulse is 
caused by a normal beat alternating with a premature contraction. 
The stroke volume of the premature beat is diminished in relation 
to that of the normal beats, and the pulse varies in amplitude 
accordingly.
Paradoxical Pulse
Expiration
Inspiration
A paradoxical pulse may be detected by a palpable decrease in 
the pulse amplitude on quiet inspiration. If the sign is less 
pronounced, a blood pressure cuff is needed. Systolic pressure 
decreases by >10–12 mm Hg during inspiration. A paradoxical 
pulse occurs in pericardial tamponade, exacerbations of asthma 
and COPD, and constrictive pericarditis.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
403
Table 9-4 Variations and Abnormalities of the 
Ventricular Impulses
In the healthy heart, the left ventricular impulse is usually the PMI. This brief impulse is generated by the movement of the 
ventricular apex against the chest wall during contraction. The right ventricular impulse is normally not palpable beyond infancy, 
and its characteristics are indeterminate. Learn the classical descriptors of the normal left ventricular PMI:
■ Location: in the 4th or 5th interspace, at the midclavicular line
■ Diameter: discrete, or ≤2 cm
■ Amplitude: brisk and tapping
■ Duration: ≤2/3 of systole
Careful examination of the ventricular impulse gives you important clues about underlying cardiovascular hemodynamics.  
The characteristics of the ventricular impulse change as the left and right ventricles adapt to high-output states (anxiety, 
hyperthyroidism, and severe anemia) and to the more pathologic conditions of chronic pressure or volume overload. In addition 
to the normal brisk tapping PMI, learn to recognize three additional types of ventricular impulses and their distinguishing 
features in the table below:
■ Hyperkinetic: The hyperkinetic ventricular impulse from transiently increased stroke volume—this change does not necessarily 
indicate heart disease.
■ Sustained: The sustained ventricular impulse of ventricular hypertrophy from chronic pressure load, known as increased 
afterload (see p. 387).
■ Diffuse: The diffuse ventricular impulse of ventricular dilation from chronic volume overload, or increased preload.
Left Ventricular Impulse
Right Ventricular Impulse
Hyperkinetic
Pressure 
Overload
Volume 
Overload
Hyperkinetic
Pressure 
Overload
Volume 
Overload
Examples 
of Causes
Anxiety, 
hyperthyroidism, 
severe anemia
Aortic stenosis, 
hypertension
Aortic or mitral 
regurgitation; 
cardiomyopathy
Anxiety, 
hyperthyroidism, 
severe anemia
Pulmonic 
stenosis, 
pulmonary 
hypertension
Atrial septal 
defect
Location
Normal
Normal
Displaced to the 
left and possibly 
downward
3rd, 4th, or 5th 
left interspaces
3rd, 4th, or 
5th left 
interspaces, 
also 
subxiphoid 
area
Left sternal 
border, 
extending 
toward the left 
cardiac 
border, also 
subxiphoid 
area
Diameter
∼2 cm, though 
increased 
amplitude may 
make diameter 
feel larger
>2 cm
>2 cm
Not useful
Not useful
Not useful
Amplitude
More forceful 
tapping
More forceful 
tapping
Diffuse
Slightly more 
forceful
More forceful
Slightly to 
markedly 
more forceful
Duration
<2/3 systole
Sustained (up 
to S2)
Often slightly 
sustained
Normal
Sustained
Normal to 
slightly 
sustained
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
404 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 9-5 Variations in the First Heart Sound—S1
Normal Variations
S1
S2
S1 is softer than S2 at the base (right and left 2nd 
interspaces).
S1
S2
S1 is often but not always louder than S2 at the apex.
Accentuated S1
S1
S2
S1 is accentuated in (1) tachycardia, rhythms with a 
short PR interval, and high cardiac output states (e.g., 
exercise, anemia, hyperthyroidism) and (2) mitral 
stenosis. In these conditions, the mitral valve is still 
open wide at the onset of ventricular systole and then 
closes quickly.
Diminished S1
S1
S2
S1 is diminished in ﬁrst-degree heart block, left bundle 
branch block, and myocardial infarction due to weak 
ventricular contraction. Early mitral valve closure 
occurring before ventricular contraction also causes a 
soft S1, seen in acute aortic regurgitation.
Varying S1
S1
S2
S1
S2
S1 varies in intensity (1) in complete heart block, when 
atria and ventricles are beating independently of each 
other and (2) in any totally irregular rhythm (e.g., atrial 
ﬁbrillation). In these situations, the mitral valve is in 
varying positions before being shut by ventricular 
contraction. Its closure sound, therefore, varies in 
loudness.
Split S1
S1
S2
Delayed closure of the tricuspid valve increases splitting 
of S1, best heard along the lower left sternal border 
where the tricuspid component, often too faint to be 
heard, becomes audible. A prominent split S1 occurs 
when right ventricular contraction is delayed, as in right 
bundle branch block and left premature contractions. 
This split may sometimes be heard at the apex, but must 
be distinguished from an S4, an aortic ejection sound, 
and an early systolic click.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
405
Table 9-6 Variations in the Second Heart Sound—S2
Inspiration
Expiration
Physiologic Splitting
S1
S2
S1
S2
A2
P2
Listen for physiologic splitting of S2 in the 2nd 
or 3rd left interspace. The pulmonic 
component of S2 is usually too faint to be 
heard at the apex or aortic area, where S2 is a 
single sound derived only from aortic valve 
closure. Normal splitting is accentuated by 
inspiration, which increases the interval 
between A2 and P2, and disappears on 
expiration. In some patients, especially 
younger ones, S2 may not become single on 
expiration until the patient sits up.
Pathologic Splitting 
(Audible splitting occurs dur-
ing expiration and suggests 
heart disease.)
S1
S2
S1
S2
Wide physiologic splitting of S2 refers to an 
increase in the usual splitting of S2 during 
inspiration that persists throughout the 
respiratory cycle. Wide splitting is caused by 
delayed closure of the pulmonic valve (as in 
pulmonic stenosis or right bundle branch 
block) or early closure of the aortic valve 
(mitral regurgitation). Right bundle branch 
block is illustrated here.
S1
S2
S1
S2
Fixed splitting refers to wide splitting that 
does not vary with respiration, often due to 
prolonged right ventricular systole, seen in 
atrial septal defect (when the pulse is 
regular) and in right ventricular failure.
S1
S2
P2
A2
S1
S2
Paradoxical or reversed splitting refers to 
splitting that appears on expiration and 
disappears on inspiration. Closure of the aortic 
valve is abnormally delayed so that A2 follows 
P2 in expiration. Normal inspiratory delay of 
P2 makes the split disappear. The most 
common cause is left bundle branch block.
A2 and P2: 2nd Right Interspace
A2 with Increased Intensity (A2 can usually be heard only in 
right 2nd interspace): occurs in systemic hypertension because 
of the increased pressure load. Increased intensity also occurs 
when the aortic root is dilated, attributed to the increased 
proximity of the aortic valve to the chest wall.
A2 Decreased or Absent: occurs in calciﬁc aortic stenosis due 
to valve immobility. If A2 is inaudible, no splitting is heard.
P2 with Increased Intensity: When P2 is equal to or louder 
than A2, suspect pulmonary hypertension. Other causes 
include a dilated pulmonary artery and an atrial septal defect. 
When a split S2 is heard widely, extending to the apex and the 
right base, P2 is accentuated.
P2 Decreased or Absent: This usually occurs from the 
increased AP diameter of the chest associated with aging. It can 
also result from pulmonic stenosis. If P2 is inaudible, no 
splitting is heard.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
406 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 9-7 Extra Heart Sounds in Systole
There are two kinds of extra heart sounds in systole: (1) early ejection sounds and (2) clicks, commonly heard in mid- and late 
systole.
Early Systolic 
Ejection Sounds
S1
Ej
S2
Early systolic ejection sounds occur shortly after S1, coincident with 
sudden pathologic halting of the aortic and pulmonic valves as they 
open in early systole.133 They are relatively high in pitch, have a 
sharp clicking quality, and are best heard with the diaphragm. An 
ejection sound indicates CVD.
Listen for an aortic ejection sound at both the base and apex. It may be 
louder at the apex and usually does not vary with respiration. An 
aortic ejection sound may accompany a dilated aorta, or aortic valve 
disease from congenital stenosis or a bicuspid aortic valve.134,135
A pulmonic ejection sound is heard best in the 2nd and 3rd left 
interspaces. When S1, usually relatively soft in this area, appears to 
be loud, consider a possible pulmonic ejection sound. Its intensity 
often decreases with inspiration. Causes include dilatation of the 
pulmonary artery, pulmonary hypertension, and pulmonic stenosis.
Systolic Clicks
S1
C1
S2
Systolic clicks are usually caused by mitral valve prolapse—an 
abnormal systolic ballooning of part of the mitral valve into the left 
atrium related to leaﬂet redundancy and elongation of the chordae 
tendineae. The clicks are usually mid- or late systolic. Prolapse of the 
mitral valve is a common cardiac condition, affecting about 2% to 
3% of the general population, with equal prevalence in men and 
women.136–138 Systolic clicks may also be of extracardiac or 
mediastinal origin.
S1
C1
Squatting
S2
The click is usually single, but there may be more than one, usually 
at or medial to the apex, but also at the lower left sternal border. The 
click is high-pitched, so best heard with the diaphragm. It is often 
followed by a late systolic murmur from mitral regurgitation that 
crescendos up to S2. Auscultatory ﬁndings are notably variable. Most 
patients have only a click, some have only a murmur, and some have 
both.
S1
C1
Standing
S2
In mitral valve prolapse, ﬁndings vary from one examination to the 
next and often change with body position. Several positions are 
recommended to identify the syndrome: supine, seated, squatting, 
and standing. Squatting (and the Valsalva release phase) delays the click 
and murmur due to increased venous return; standing (and the Valsalva 
strain phase) moves them closer to S1 (see p. 398).
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
407
Table 9-8 Extra Heart Sounds in Diastole
Opening 
Snap
S1
S1
S2 OS
The opening snap (OS) is a very early diastolic sound caused by abrupt 
deceleration during the opening of a stenotic mitral valve. It is best heard 
just medial to the apex and along the lower left sternal border. If loud, 
an OS radiates to the apex and to the pulmonic area, where it may be 
mistaken for the pulmonic component of a split S2. Its high pitch and 
snapping quality help to distinguish it from an S2, but it becomes less 
audible as the valve leaﬂets become more calciﬁed. It is heard better 
with the diaphragm.
S3
S1
S2
S3
S1
You will detect physiologic S3 frequently in children and young adults to 
the age of 35 or 40 years, and often during the last trimester of 
pregnancy. Occurring early in diastole during rapid ventricular ﬁlling, it 
is later than an OS, dull and low in pitch, and heard best at the apex in 
the left lateral decubitus position. The bell of the stethoscope should be 
used with very light pressure.
A pathologic S3 or ventricular gallop sounds like a physiologic S3. An S3 
in adults over age 40 years is usually pathologic, arising from high 
left ventricular ﬁlling pressures and abrupt deceleration of inﬂow 
across the mitral valve at the end of the rapid ﬁlling phase of 
diastole.25,27 Causes include decreased myocardial contractility, heart 
failure, and ventricular volume overload from aortic or mitral 
regurgitation, and left-to-right shunts. Listen for a left-sided S3 at the 
apex in the left lateral decubitus position. A right-sided S3 is usually 
heard along the lower left sternal border or below the xiphoid with the 
patient supine, and is louder on inspiration. The term gallop comes 
from the cadence of three heart sounds, especially at rapid heart rates, 
which sounds like “Kentucky.”
S4
S1
S1
S2
S4
An S4 (atrial sound or atrial gallop) occurs just before S1. It is dull, low 
in pitch, and best heard at the apex with the bell. Listen at the lower 
left sternal border for a right ventricular S4 (or in the subxiphoid area if 
obstructive lung disease). An S4 is occasionally normal, especially in 
trained athletes and older age groups. More commonly, it is due to 
ventricular hypertrophy or ﬁbrosis causing stiffness and increased 
resistance (or decreased compliance) during ventricular ﬁlling 
following atrial contraction.26,139
Causes of a left-sided S4 include hypertensive heart disease, aortic 
stenosis, and ischemic and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A left-sided 
S4 is heard best at the apex in the left lateral decubitus position, with a 
cadence like “Tennessee.” The less common right-sided S4 is heard along 
the lower left sternal border or below the xiphoid. It often gets louder 
with inspiration. Causes include pulmonary hypertension and pulmonic 
stenosis.
An S4 is also associated with delayed conduction between the atria and 
ventricles. This delay separates the normally faint atrial sound from the 
louder S1 and makes it audible. An S4 is never heard when there no 
atrial contraction (absent during atrial ﬁbrillation).
Occasionally, a patient has both an S3 and an S4, producing a quadruple 
rhythm of four heart sounds. At rapid heart rates, the S3 and S4 may 
merge into one loud extra heart sound, called a summation gallop.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
408 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 9-9 Midsystolic Murmurs
Midsystolic ejection murmurs are the most common kind of heart murmur. They may be (1) innocent—without any detectable 
physiologic or structural abnormality; (2) physiologic—from physiologic changes in body metabolism; or (3) pathologic—aris-
ing from structural abnormalities in the heart or great vessels.140–143 Midsystolic murmurs tend to peak near midsystole and usu-
ally stop before S2. The crescendo–decrescendo or “diamond” shape is not always audible, but the gap between the murmur and S2
helps to distinguish midsystolic from pansystolic murmurs.
Innocent Murmurs
Physiologic Murmurs
S1
S2
S1
S2
Murmur
Location. Left 2nd to 4th interspaces between the 
left sternal border and the apex
Similar to innocent murmurs
Radiation. Minimal
Intensity. Grade 1 to 2, possibly 3
Pitch. Soft to medium
Quality. Variable
Maneuvers. Usually decreases or disappears on 
sitting
Associated 
Findings
None: normal splitting, no ejection sounds, no 
diastolic murmurs, and no palpable evidence of 
ventricular enlargement. Occasionally, both an 
innocent murmur and pathologic murmur are 
present.
Signs of physiologic causes (see mechanisms below)
Mechanism
Turbulent blood ﬂow, probably generated by 
ventricular ejection of blood into the aorta from the 
left and occasionally the right ventricle. Very 
common in children and young adults, but may 
also be present in older adults. There is no 
underlying CVD.
Turbulence due to a temporary increase in blood 
ﬂow in predisposing conditions such as anemia, 
pregnancy, fever, and hyperthyroidism.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
409
Pathologic Murmurs
Aortic Stenosis135,144,145
Hypertrophic 
Cardiomyopathy146
Pulmonic Stenosis147
S1
S2
May be
decreased
S1
S1
E1
P2
S1
A2
Location. Right 2nd and 3rd interspaces
Location. Left 3rd and 4th 
interspaces
Location. Left 2nd and 3rd 
interspaces
Radiation. Often to the carotids, down the left sternal 
border, even to the apex. If severe, may radiate to left  
2nd and 3rd interspaces
Radiation. Down the left sternal 
border to the apex, possibly to the 
base, but not to the neck
Radiation. If loud, toward the left 
shoulder and neck
Intensity. Sometimes soft, but often loud, with a thrill 
(Grade 4/6 and above)
Intensity. Variable. See Maneuvers.
Intensity. Soft to loud; if loud, 
associated with a thrill
Pitch. Medium, harsh; crescendo–decrescendo may be 
higher at the apex
Pitch. Medium
Pitch. Medium; crescendo–
decrescendo
Quality. Often harsh; may be more musical at the apex
Quality. Harsh
Quality. Often harsh
Maneuvers. Heard best with the patient sitting and leaning 
forward
Maneuvers. Intensity decreases with 
squatting and Valsalva release phase 
(increases venous return), increases 
with standing and Valsalva strain 
phase (decreases left ventricular 
volume) (see p. 398)
As aortic stenosis worsens, the murmur peaks later in 
systole, and A2 decreases in intensity. A2 may be delayed 
and merged with P2 → single S2 on expiration or a 
paradoxical S2 split. Carotid upstroke may be delayed, with 
a slow rise, small amplitude, and decreased volume. The 
hypertrophied left ventricle may produce a sustained apical 
impulse and an S4 due to decreased compliance. After age 
40 years there may be a dilated aorta and murmur of aortic 
regurgitation. Subendocardial ischemia due to poor 
coronary perfusion distal to the valve causes angina and 
syncope.
The carotid upstroke rises quickly, 
unlike aortic stenosis. The apical 
impulse is sustained. S2 may be 
single. An S4 is usually present at 
the apex (unlike mitral 
regurgitation). Usually benign, but 
progresses in 25% to syncope, 
ischemia, atrial ﬁbrillation, dilated 
cardiomyopathy and heart failure, 
and stroke, with increased risk of 
sudden death.
The JVP is usually normal, but 
may have prominent a wave. The 
right ventricular impulse is often 
sustained. An early pulmonic 
ejection sound is present in mild 
to moderate stenosis. In severe 
stenosis, S2 is widely split and P2 
softens. May hear a right-sided S4 
over the left sternal border.
Signiﬁcant stenosis causes turbulent blood ﬂow across the 
valve, and increases left ventricular afterload. The most 
common cause is valve calciﬁcation in older adults, at times 
progressing from nonobstructing sclerosis (present in 25%) 
to stenosis. The second most common cause is a congenital 
bicuspid aortic valve, often not recognized until adulthood.
Unexplained diffuse or focal 
ventricular hypertrophy with 
myocyte disarray and ﬁbrosis 
associated with unusually rapid 
ejection of blood from the left 
ventricle during systole. Outﬂow 
tract obstruction of ﬂow may 
coexist. Associated distortion of 
the mitral valve may cause mitral 
regurgitation.
Primarily a congenital disorder 
with valvular, supravalvular, or 
subvalvular stenosis. Stenosis 
impairs ﬂow across the valve, 
increasing right ventricular 
afterload. In an atrial septal defect, 
increased ﬂow across the 
pulmonic valve may mimic 
pulmonic stenosis.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
410 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 9-10 Pansystolic (Holosystolic) Murmurs
Pansystolic (holosystolic) murmurs are pathologic, arising from blood ﬂow from a chamber with high pressure to one of lower pressure, 
through a valve or other structure that should be closed. The murmur begins immediately with S1 and continues up to S2.
Mitral 
Regurgitation137,148–150
Tricuspid 
Regurgitation151–153
Ventricular Septal 
Defect
S1
S2
S3
Decreased
S1
S2
S3
S1
S2
Murmur
Location. Apex
Location. Lower left sternal border. If 
right ventricular pressure is high and 
the ventricle is enlarged, the murmur 
may be loudest at the apex and con-
fused with mitral regurgitation.
Location. Left 3rd, 4th, and 5th  
interspaces
Radiation. To the left axilla, less 
often to the left sternal border
Radiation. To the right of the ster-
num, to the xiphoid area, and at 
times to the left midclavicular line, 
but not into the axilla.
Radiation. Often wide, depending 
on the size of the defect.
Intensity. Soft to loud; if loud, asso-
ciated with an apical thrill
Intensity. Variable
Intensity. Often very loud, with a 
thrill. Smaller defects have louder 
murmurs.
Pitch. Medium to high
Pitch. Medium
Pitch. High, holosystolic. Smaller 
defects have murmurs with a higher 
pitch.
Quality. Harsh, holosystolic
Quality. Blowing, holosystolic
Quality. Often harsh
Maneuvers. Unlike tricuspid regurgita-
tion, the intensity of the murmur does 
not change with inspiration.
Maneuvers. Unlike mitral regurgita-
tion, the intensity increases with in-
spiration.
Associated 
Findings
S1 normal (75%), loud (12%), soft 
(12%)
An apical S3 reﬂects volume over-
load of the left ventricle.
The apical impulse may be diffuse 
and laterally displaced. There may be 
a sustained lower left parasternal im-
pulse from a dilated left atrium.
The right ventricular impulse is in-
creased in amplitude and may be 
sustained, with a “precordial rock.”
An S3 may be audible along the 
lower left sternal border. The JVP is 
often elevated, with large v waves in 
the jugular veins, a pulsatile liver, as-
cites, and edema.
S2 may be obscured by the loud 
murmur. Findings and associated 
ﬁndings vary with the size of the 
defect. Larger defects cause left-to-
right shunts, pulmonary hyperten-
sion, and right ventricular overload.
Mechanism
When the mitral valve fails to close 
fully in systole, blood regurgitates 
from left ventricle to left atrium, 
causing the murmur and increasing 
left ventricular preload, ultimately 
leading to left ventricular dilatation. 
Causes are structural, from mitral 
valve prolapse, infectious endocardi-
tis, rheumatic heart disease, and col-
lagen vascular disease; and func-
tional, from ventricular dilatation and 
dilatation of the mitral valve annulus 
and from leaﬂet, papillary muscle, or 
chordae tendinae dysfunction.
When the tricuspid valve fails to close 
fully in systole, blood regurgitates from 
RV to right atrium, producing a mur-
mur. The most common causes are: 
right ventricular failure and dilatation, 
with resulting enlargement of the tri-
cuspid oriﬁce, often induced by pul-
monary hypertension or left ventricu-
lar failure; and endocarditis—the RV 
and pulmonary artery pressures are 
low, so the murmur is early systolic.
A ventricular septal defect is a congeni-
tal abnormality classiﬁed according to 
one of four locations in the ventricular 
septum. The defect is a conduit for 
bloodﬂow from the relatively high-pressure 
left ventricle into the low-pressure right 
ventricle. The defect may be accompa-
nied by aortic regurgitation, tricuspid 
regurgitation, and aneurysms of the 
ventricular septum; an uncomplicated 
lesion is described here.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
411
Table 9-11 Diastolic Murmurs 
Diastolic murmurs are almost always pathologic. There are two basic types in adults. Early decrescendo diastolic murmurs signify 
regurgitant ﬂow through an incompetent semilunar valve, usually the aortic. Rumbling diastolic murmurs in mid- or late diastole point to 
stenosis of an AV valve, usually the mitral. Diastolic murmurs are less common than systolic murmurs and more difﬁcult to hear, 
requiring more meticulous examination (see important Maneuvers below).
Aortic Regurgitation155–158
Mitral Stenosis153,156
S1
S2
S2
OS
S1
Accentuated
Murmur
Location. Left 2nd to 4th interspaces
Location. Usually limited to the apex
Radiation. If loud, to the apex, perhaps to the right sternal 
border
Radiation. Little or none
Intensity. Grade 1 to 3
Intensity. Grade 1 to 4
Pitch. High. Use the diaphragm.
Pitch. Decrescendo low-pitched rumble with pre-
systolic accentuation. Use the bell.
Quality. Blowing decrescendo; may be mistaken for breath 
sounds
Maneuvers. The murmur is heard best with the patient sitting, 
leaning forward, with breath held after exhalation.
Maneuvers. Placing the bell exactly on the apical 
impulse, turning the patient into a left lateral posi-
tion, and mild exercise like handgrips make the 
murmur audible. It is heard better in exhalation.
Associated 
Findings
With advancing severity, the diastolic pressure drops to  
as low as 50 mm Hg; the pulse pressure can widen by  
>80 mm Hg.
The apical impulse becomes diffuse, displaced laterally and 
downward, and increased in diameter, amplitude, and dura-
tion. A systolic ejection sound may be present; S2 is increased 
in aortic root dilatation and decreased if leaﬂets are thickened 
and calciﬁed; and an S3 often reﬂects ventricular dysfunction 
from both volume and pressure overload. A midsystolic ﬂow 
murmur or a mitral diastolic (Austin Flint) murmur, usually 
with middiastolic and presystolic components, reﬂect in-
creased regurgitant ﬂow.
The arterial pulse wave collapses suddenly creating bounding 
arterial pulses with pistol shot sounds on light pressure of the 
diaphragm, especially with arm elevation (Corrigan pulse), a 
to–fro murmur over the brachial or femoral artery with ﬁrm 
pressure (Duroziez sign), and capillary pulsations with nail 
blanching (Quincke pulses).
S1 is loud and may be palpable at the apex. An OS 
often follows S2 and initiates the murmur. If pul-
monary hypertension develops, P2 is accentuated, 
the right ventricular parasternal impulse becomes 
palpable, and the a wave of the JVP is more promi-
nent. The apical impulse is small and tapping. 
Atrial ﬁbrillation occurs in about a third of symp-
tomatic patients, with ensuing risks of thrombo-
embolism.
Mechanism
The aortic valve leaﬂets fail to close completely during dias-
tole, causing regurgitation from the aorta back into the left 
ventricle and left ventricular overload. The associated mid-
systolic ﬂow murmur results from the ejection of this in-
creased stroke volume across the aortic valve. The mitral dia-
stolic (Austin Flint) murmur is seen in moderate to severe dis-
ease and attributed to diastolic impingement of the regurgi-
tant ﬂow on the anterior leaﬂet of the mitral valve. Causes  
include leaﬂet abnormalities, aortic pathology (Marfan  
syndrome), and subvalvular abnormalities such as subaortic 
stenosis or an atrial septal defect.
The stiffened mitral valve leaﬂets move into the left 
atrium in midsystole and narrow the valve open-
ing, causing turbulence. The resulting murmur has 
two components: (1) middiastolic (during rapid 
ventricular ﬁlling) and (2) presystolic accentua-
tion, possibly related to ventricular contraction. 
The most common cause worldwide is rheumatic 
fever, which causes ﬁbrosis, calciﬁcation, and 
thickening of the leaﬂets and commissures, and 
chordal fusion.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
412 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 9-12  Cardiovascular Sounds with Both Systolic 
and Diastolic Components
Some cardiovascular sounds extend beyond one phase of the cardiac cycle. Three examples, all nonvalvular in origin, are: (1) a 
venous hum, a benign sound produced by turbulence of blood in the jugular veins—common in children; (2) a pericardial friction 
rub, produced by inﬂammation of the pericardial sac; and (3) patent ductus arteriosus, a congenital anomaly that persists after birth 
causing a left-to-right shunt from the aorta to the pulmonary artery. Continuous murmurs begin in systole and extend through S2 
into all or part of diastole, as in patent ductus arteriosus. Arteriovenous ﬁstulas, common in dialysis patients, also produce 
continuous murmurs.
Venous Hum
Pericardial Friction Rub140,159
Patent Ductus 
Arteriosus
Systole
Diastole
S1
S2
S1
Ventricular
systole
Ventricular
diastole
Atrial
systole
S1
S2
S1
S1
S2
S1
Diastole
Systole
Timing
Continuous murmur without a 
silent interval. Loudest in diastole.
Inﬂammation of the visceral and parietal 
pericardium from pericarditis produces a 
coarse grating sound with one, two, or 
three components (ventricular systole; 
ventricular ﬁlling and atrial contraction 
during diastole). Rubs are heard with 
and without pericardial effusions.
Continuous murmur in 
both systole and diastole, 
often with a silent interval 
late in diastole. Loudest in 
late systole, obscures S2, 
and fades in diastole.
Location
Above the medial third of the 
clavicles, especially on the right, 
often when the head is turned in 
the opposite direction. Best heard 
when patient in sitting position; 
disappears when patient supine.
Usually best heard in the left 3rd 
interspace next to the sternum with the 
patient sitting and leaning forward with 
breath held after forced expiration. (In 
contrast, a pleural rub is heard only 
during inspiration.) May come and go 
spontaneously and require auscultation 
in several positions. Causes include 
myocardial infarction, uremia, 
connective tissue disease.
Left 2nd interspace
Radiation
Right or left 1st and 2nd 
interspaces
Minimal.
Toward the left clavicle
Intensity
Soft to moderate. The hum is 
obliterated by pressure on the 
internal jugular vein.
Superﬁcial sound of varying intensity 
that seems “close to the stethoscope.”
Usually loud, sometimes 
associated with a thrill
Quality
Humming, roaring
Scratchy, scraping, grating
Harsh, machinery-like
Pitch
Low (heard better with the bell)
High (heard better with the diaphragm)
Medium
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
413
REFERENCES
References
 1. Clark D 3rd, Ahmed MI, Dell’italia LJ, et al. An argument for 
reviving the disappearing skill of cardiac auscultation. Cleve Clin 
J Med. 2012;79:536.
 2. Delora A. The decline of cardiac auscultation: ‘the ball of the 
match point is poised on the net’. J Cardiovasc Med. 2008;9:1173.
 3. Markel H. The stethoscope and the art of listening. N Engl J Med. 
2006;354:551.
 4. Simel DL. Time, now, to recover the fun in the physical examina-
tion rather than abandon it. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166:603.
 5. Vukanovic-Criley JM, Hovanesyan A, Criley SR, et al. Conﬁden-
tial testing of cardiac examination competency in cardiology and 
noncardiology faculty and trainees: a multicenter study. Clin Car-
diol. 2010;33:738.
 6. Wayne DB, Butter J, Cohen ER, et al. Setting defensible standards 
for cardiac auscultation skills in medical students. Acad Med. 
2009;84(10 Suppl):S94.
 7. Marcus G, Vessey J, Jordan MV, et al. Relationship between accu-
rate auscultation of a clinically useful third heart sound and level 
of experience. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166:617.
 8. Vukanovic-Criley JM, Criley S, Warde CM, et al. Competency in 
cardiac examination skills in medical students, trainees, physicians, 
and faculty. A multicenter study. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166:610.
 9. March SK, Bedynek JL Jr, Chizner MA. Teaching cardiac ausculta-
tion: effectiveness of a patient-centered teaching conference on 
improving cardiac auscultatory skills. Mayo Clin Proc. 2005; 
80;1443.
 10. RuDusky BM. Auscultation and Don Quixote. Chest. 2005;127: 
1869.
 11. Mangione S. Cardiac auscultatory skills of physicians-in-training: 
a comparison of three English-speaking countries. Am J Med. 
2001;110:210.
 12. Mangione S. Cardiac auscultatory skills of internal medicine and 
family practice trainees. A comparison of diagnostic proﬁciency. 
JAMA. 1997;278:717.
 13. McKinney J, Cook DA, Wood D, et al. Simulation-based training 
for cardiac auscultation skills: systematic review and meta-analy-
sis. J Gen Intern Med. 2013;28:283.
 14. McGaghie WC, Issenberg SB, Cohen ER, et al. Translational edu-
cational research: a necessity for effective health-care improve-
ment. Chest. 2012;142:1097.
 15. Norman G, Dore K, Grierson L. The minimal relationship between 
simulation ﬁdelity and transfer of learning. Med Ed. 2012;46:636.
 16. McGaghie WC, Issenberg SB, Cohen ER, et al. Does simulation-
based medical education with deliberate practice yield better 
results than traditional clinical education? A meta-analytic com-
parative review of the evidence. Acad Med. 2011;86:706.
 17. University of Washington Department of Medicine. Introduction: 
examination for heart sounds & murmurs. Advanced physical 
diagnosis. Learning and teaching at the bedside. Available at 
https://depts.washington.edu/physdx/heart/index.html. Accessed 
June 16, 2015.
 18. Butter J, McGaghie WC, Cohen ER, et al. Simulation-based mas-
tery learning improves cardiac auscultation skills in medical stu-
dents. J Gen Intern Med. 2010;25:780.
 19. Michaels AD, Khan FU, Moyers B. Experienced clinicians improve 
detection of third and fourth heart sounds by viewing acoustic 
cardiography. Clin Cardiol. 2010;33:E36.
 20. Saxena A, Barrett MJ, Patel AR, et al. Merging old school methods 
with new technology to improve skills in cardiac auscultation. 
Semin Med Pract. 2008;11:21.
 21. Vukanovic-Criley JM, Boker JR, Criley SR, et al. Using virtual 
patients to improve cardiac examination competency in medical 
students. Clin Cardiol. 2008;31:334.
 22. Barrett MJ, Lacey CS, Sekara AE, et al. Mastering cardiac mur-
murs. The power of repetition. Chest. 2004;126:470.
 23. Lee E, Michaels AD, Selvester RH, et al. Frequency of diastolic 
third and fourth heart sounds with myocardial ischemia induced 
during percutaneous coronary intervention. J Electrocardiol. 
2009;42:39.
 24. Marcus GM, Gerber IL, McKeown BH, et al. Association between 
phonocardiographic third and four heart sound and objective 
measure of left ventricular function. JAMA. 2005;293:2238.
 25. Shah SJ, Marcus GM, Gerber IL, et al. Physiology of the third heart 
sound: novel insights from tissue Doppler imaging. J Am Soc Echo-
cardiogr. 2008;21:394.
 26. Shah SJ, Nakamura K, Marcus GM, et al. Association of the fourth 
heart sound with increased left ventricular end-diastolic stiffness. 
J Card Fail. 2008;14:431.
 27. Shah SJ, Michaels AD. Hemodynamic correlates of the third heart 
sound and systolic time intervals. Congest Heart Fail. 2006;12(4 
suppl 1):8.
 28. O’Rourke RA, Braunwald E. Ch 209, Physical examination of the 
cardiovascular system. In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. 
16th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2005:1307.
 29. Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2013 AACF/AHA Guideline 
for the Management of Heart Failure. J Am College Cardiol. 2013; 
62:e148.
 30. Vinayak AG, Levitt J, Gehlbach B, et al. Usefulness of the external 
jugular vein examination in detecting abnormal central venous 
pressure in critically ill patients. Arch Int Med. 2006;166:2132.
 31. McConaghy JR, Oza RS. Outpatient diagnosis of acute chest pain 
in adults. Am Fam Physician. 2013;87:177.
 32. Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, et al. Heart Disease and 
Stroke Statistics—2016 Update: A Report From the American 
Heart Association. Circulation 2016;133:e38.
 33. Abrams J. Chronic stable angina. N Engl J Med. 2005;352:2524.
 34. Wilson JF. In the clinic. Stable ischemic heart disease. Ann Intern 
Med. 2014;160:ITC1.
 35. Ashley KE, Geraci SA. Ischemic heart disease in women. South 
Med J. 2013;106:427.
 36. Braverman AC. Aortic dissection: prompt diagnosis and emer-
gency treatment are critical. Cleve Clin J Med. 2011;78:685.
 37. Crea F, Carnici PG, Bairey Merz CN. Coronary microvascular dys-
function: an update. Eur Heart J. 2014;35:1101.
 38. Canto JG, Rogers WJ, Goldberg RJ, et al. Association of age and 
sex with myocardial infarction symptom presentation and in-
hospital mortality. JAMA. 2012;307:813.
 39. Nugent L, Mehta PK, Bairey Merz CN. Gender and microvascular 
angina. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2011;31:37.
 40. Goldman L, Kirtane AJ. Triage of patient with acute chest syn-
drome and possible cardiac ischemia: the elusive search for diag-
nostic perfection. Ann Intern Med. 2003;139:987.
 41. Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force 
on Practice Guidelines; American Association for Thoracic 
Surgery; American College of Radiology; American Stroke 
Association; Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists; Society 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
414 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions; Society of 
Interventional Radiology; Society of Thoracic Surgeons; Society 
for Vascular Medicine. Guidelines for the management of patients 
with thoracic aortic disease. Circulation. 2010;121:e266.
 42. Spodick DH. Normal sinus heart rate: appropriate rate thresh-
olds for sinus tachycardia and bradycardia. S Med J. 1996;89: 
666.
 43. Cho S, Atwood JE. Peripheral edema. Am J Med. 2002;113:580.
 44. Clark AL, Cleland JG. Causes and treatment of oedema in patients 
with heart failure. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2013;10:156.
 45. Shah MG, Cho S, Atwood JE, et al. Peripheral edema due to heart 
disease: diagnosis and outcome. Clin Cardiol. 2006;29:31.
 46. Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger VL, et al. Heart disease and stroke 
statistics—2014 update: a report from the American Heart Asso-
ciation. Circulation. 2014;129:e28.
 47. Yang Q, Cogswell ME, Flanders WD, et al. Trends in cardiovascu-
lar health metrics and associations with all-cause and CVD mor-
tality among U.S. adults. JAMA. 2012;307:1273.
 48. Hettema J, Steele J, Miller WR. Motivational interviewing. Annu 
Rev Clin Psychol. 2005;1:91.
 49. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Aspirin for the prevention of 
cardiovascular disease: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force rec-
ommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2009;150:396.
 50. Wolff T, Miller T, Ko S. Aspirin for the primary prevention of 
cardiovascular events: an update of the evidence for the U.S. Pre-
ventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2009;150:405.
 51. Goff DC Jr, Lloyd-Jones DM, Bennett G, et al. 2013 ACC/AHA 
guideline on the assessment of cardiovascular risk: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63(25 Pt B): 
2935.
 52. Mosca L, Benjamin EJ, Berra K, et al. Effectiveness-based guide-
lines for the prevention of cardiovascular disease in women—
2011 update: a guideline from the American Heart Association. 
Circulation. 2011;123:1243.
 53. Flack JM, Sica DA, Bakris G, et al. Management of high blood 
pressure in Blacks: an update of the International Society on 
Hypertension in Blacks consensus statement. Hypertension. 
2010;56:780.
 54. Meschia JF, Bushnell C, Boden-Albala B, et al. Guidelines for the 
primary prevention of stroke: a statement for healthcare profes-
sionals from the American Heart Association/American Stroke 
Association. Stroke. 2014;45:3754.
 55. American Diabetes Association. Standards of medical care in dia-
betes—2014. Diabetes Care. 2015;38(Suppl 1):S1.
 56. Greenland P, Alpert JS, Beller GA, et al. 2010 ACCF/AHA guide-
line for assessment of cardiovascular risk in asymptomatic adults: 
executive summary: a report of the American College of Cardiol-
ogy Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Prac-
tice Guidelines. Circulation. 2010;122:2748.
 57. Mosca L, Mochari-Greenberger H, Dolor RJ, et al. Twelve-year 
follow-up of American women’s awareness of cardiovascular dis-
ease risk and barriers to heart health. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Out-
comes. 2010;3:120.
 58. Ford ES, Ajani UA, Croft JB, et al. Explaining the decrease in U.S. 
deaths from coronary disease, 1980–2000. N Engl J Med. 
2007;356:2388.
 59. Towﬁghi A, Zheng L, Ovbiagele B. Sex-speciﬁc trends in midlife 
coronary heart disease risk and prevalence. Arch Intern Med. 
2009;169:1762.
 60. Bushnell C, McCullough LD, Awad IA, et al. Guidelines for the 
prevention of stroke in women: a statement for healthcare profes-
sionals from the American Heart Association/American Stroke 
Association. Stroke. 2014;45:1545.
 61. Stone NJ, Robinson JG, Lichtenstein AH, et al. 2013 ACC/AHA 
guideline on the treatment of blood cholesterol to reduce athero-
sclerotic cardiovascular risk in adults: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129:S1.
 62. Piper MA, Evans CV, Burda BU, et al. Screening for high blood 
pressure in adults: A systematic evidence review for the U.S. Pre-
ventive Services Task Force. Rockville (MD); 2014. http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25632496. Accessed April 19, 2015.
 63. Ritchey MD, Wall HK, Gillespie C, et al. Million hearts: preva-
lence of leading cardiovascular disease risk factors—United 
States, 2005–2012. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2014;63:462.
 64. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for high blood 
pressure: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force reafﬁrmation rec-
ommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2007;147:783.
 65. James PA, Oparil S, Carter BL, et al. 2014 evidence-based guide-
line for the management of high blood pressure in adults: report 
from the panel members appointed to the Eighth Joint National 
Committee (JNC 8). JAMA. 2014;311:507.
 66. Wright JT Jr, Fine LJ, Lackland DT, et al. Evidence supporting a 
systolic blood pressure goal of less than 150 mm Hg in patients 
aged 60 years or older: the minority view. Ann Intern Med. 2014; 
160:499.
 67. Krakoff LR, Gillespie RL, Ferdinand KC, et al. 2014 hypertension 
recommendations from the eighth joint national committee panel 
members raise concerns for elderly black and female populations. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:394.
 68. Weber MA, Schiffrin EL, White WB, et al. Clinical practice guide-
lines for the management of hypertension in the community: A 
statement by the American Society of Hypertension and the Inter-
national Society of Hypertension. J Clin Hypertens. 2014;16:14.
 69. Chobanian AV, Bakris GL, Black HR, et al. The Seventh Report of 
the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evalua-
tion, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure—The JNC 7 Report. 
JAMA. 2003;289:2560–2572. Available at http://www.nhlbi.nih.
gov/health-pro/guidelines/current/hypertension-jnc-7/complete-
report. Accessed January 22, 2015.
 70. Institute of Medicine, Committee on the Consequences of Sodium 
Reduction in Populations; Food and Nutrition Board; Board on 
Population Health and Public Health Practice. Strom BL, Yaktine 
AL, Oria M (eds). Sodium Intake in Populations: Assessment of Evi-
dence. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2013.
 71. Rosendorff C, Lackland DT, Allison M, et al. Treatment of hyper-
tension in patients with coronary artery disease: A scientiﬁc state-
ment from the American Heart Association, American College of 
Cardiology, and American Society of Hypertension. J Am Coll Car-
diol. 2015;65:1998.
 72. Frieden TR, Berwick DM. The “Million Hearts” initiative—pre-
venting heart attacks and strokes. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:e27.
 73. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Diabetes Sta-
tistics Report, Estimates of diabetes and its burden in the United States, 
2014. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices; 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pubs/statsreport14/
national-diabetes report-web.pdf. Accessed April 19, 2105.
 74. American Diabetes Association. Classiﬁcation and diagnosis of 
diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2015;38(Suppl):S8.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
415
REFERENCES
 75. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Final recommendation state-
ment. Lipid disorders in adults (cholesterol, dyslipidemia): 
Screening. 2014. Available at http://www.uspreventiveservices-
taskforce.org/Page/Document/RecommendationStatementFinal/
lipid-disorders-in-adults-cholesterol-dyslipidemia-screening. 
Accessed April 19, 2015.
 76. Keaney JF Jr., Curfman GD, Jarcho JA. A pragmatic view of the 
new cholesterol treatment guidelines. N Engl J Med. 2014;370:275.
 77. Alberti KG, Eckel RH, Grundy SM, et al. Harmonizing the meta-
bolic syndrome: a joint interim statement of the International 
Diabetes Federation Task Force on Epidemiology and Prevention; 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; American Heart Asso-
ciation; World Heart Federation; International Atherosclerosis 
Society; and International Association for the Study of Obesity. 
Circulation. 2009;120:1640.
 78. Ofﬁce of the Surgeon General. The health consequences of smok-
ing—50 years of progress. A report of the Surgeon General. Rock-
ville, MD: Public Health Service; 2014. http://www.
surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/50-years-of-progress/full-
report.pdf. Accessed April 19, 2015.
 79. Institute of Medicine of the National Academies. Leading health 
indicators for Healthy People 2020. Letter Report. Washington, 
DC; 2011. Available at http://www.iom.edu/∼/media/Files/
Report%20Files/2011/Leading-Health-Indicators-for Healthy-
People-2020/Leading%20Health%20Indicators%202011%20R. 
Accessed April 19, 2015.
 80. Norcross JC, Prochaska JO. Using the stages of change. Harv Ment 
Health Lett. 2002;18:5.
 81. LeFevre ML. Behavioral counseling to promote a healthful diet 
and physical activity for cardiovascular disease prevention in 
adults with cardiovascular risk factors: U.S. Preventive Services 
Task Force Recommendation Statement. Ann Intern Med. 2014; 
161:587.
 82. Eckel RH, Jakicic JM, Ard JD, et al. 2013 AHA/ACC guideline on 
lifestyle management to reduce cardiovascular risk: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129:S76.
 83. Fiore MC, Jaen CR, Bakder TB. Treating tobacco use and depen-
dence: 2008 Update. Clinical Practice Guideline. Rockville, MD: 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Public Health 
Service; 2008. Available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK63952/. Accessed April 19, 2015.
 84. Estruch R, Ros E, Salas-Salvado J, et al. Primary prevention of 
cardiovascular disease with a Mediterranean diet. N Engl J Med. 
2013;368:1279.
 85. U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services. Dietary Guidelines for Americans. 7th ed. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce; 2010. Avail-
able at http://www.health.gov/dietaryguidelines/dga2010/
DietaryGuidelines2010.pdf. Accessed March 30, 2015.
 86. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2008 Physical 
Activity Guidelines for Americans. Washington, DC: U.S. Depart-
ment of Health and Human Services; 2008. Available at http://
www.health.gov/paguidelines/pdf/paguide.pdf. Accessed April 
19, 2015.
 87. McGee S. Evidence-based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, 
PA: Saunders; 2012.
 88. The Rational Clinical Examination Series, JAMA. Available at 
http://jamaevidence.mhmedical.com/book.aspx?bookID = 845. 
Accessed June 12, 2015.
 89. Pickering TG, Hall JE, Appel LJ, et al. Recommendations for 
blood pressure measurement in humans and experimental ani-
mals: part 1: blood pressure measurement in humans: a statement 
for professionals from the Subcommittee of Professional and Pub-
lic Education of the American Heart Association Council on High 
Blood Pressure Research. Circulation. 2005;111:697.
 90. McAlister FA, Straus SE. Evidence-based treatment of hyperten-
sion. Measurement of blood pressure: an evidence based review. 
BMJ. 2001;322:908.
 91. Powers BJ, Olsen MK, Smith VA, et al. Measuring blood pressure 
for decision making and quality reporting: where and how many 
measures? Ann Intern Med. 2011;154:781.
 92. Appel LJ, Miller ER 3rd, Charleston J. Improving the measure-
ment of blood pressure: is it time for regulated standards? Ann 
Intern Med. 2011;154;838.
 93. Ray GM, Nawarskas JJ, Anderson JR. Blood pressure monitoring 
technique impacts hypertension treatment. J Gen Intern Med. 
2012;27:623.
 94. Umscheid CA, Townsend RR. Is it time for a blood pressure mea-
surement “bundle”? J Gen Intern Med. 2012;27:615.
 95. Guarracino F, Ferro B, Forfori F, et al. Jugular vein distensibility 
predicts ﬂuid responsiveness in septic patients. Crit Care. 
2014;18:647.
 96. Devine PJ, Sullenberger LE, Bellin DA, et al. Jugular venous pulse: 
window into the right heart. South Med J. 2007;100:1022.
 97. Drazner MH, Hellkamp AS, Leier CV, et al. Value of clinician 
assessment of hemodynamics in advanced heart failure: the 
ESCAPE trial. Circ Heart Fail. 2008;1:170.
 98. Cook DJ, Simel DL. Does this patient have abnormal central 
venous pressure? JAMA. 1996;275:630.
 99. Davison R, Cannon R. Estimation of central venous pressure by 
examination of jugular veins. Am Heart J. 1974;87:279.
 100. Constant J. Using internal jugular pulsations as a manometer for 
right atrial pressure measurements. Cardiology. 2000;93:26.
 101. Meyer P, Ekundayo OJ, Adamopoulos C, et al. A propensity-
matched study of elevated jugular venous pressure and outcomes 
in chronic heart failure. Am J Cardiol. 2009;103:839.
 102. McGee S. Ch. 34, Inspection of the neck veins. In Evidence-based 
Physical Diagnosis, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:296.
 103. Seth R, Magner P, Matzinger F, et al. How far is the sternal angle 
from the mid-right atrium? J Gen Intern Med. 2002;17:852.
 104. Hunt SA, Abraham WT, Chin MH, et al. 2009 focused update 
incorporated into the ACC/AHA 2005 Guidelines for the Diagno-
sis and Management of Heart Failure in Adults: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines: developed in col-
laboration with the International Society for Heart and Lung 
Transplantation. Circulation. 2009;119:e391.
 105. Drazner MH, Prasad A, Ayers C, et al. The relationship of right- 
and left-sided ﬁlling pressures in patients with heart failure and a 
preserved ejection fraction. Circ Heart Fail. 2010;3:202.
 106. Goldberg LR. In the clinic. Heart failure. Ann Intern Med. 2010; 
152:ITC 6–1.
 107. Fahey T, Jeyaseelan S, McCowan C, et al. Diagnosis of left ven-
tricular systolic dysfunction (LVSD): development and validation 
of a clinical prediction rule in primary care. Fam Pract. 2007; 
24:628.
 108. Rame JE, Dries DL, Drazner MH. The prognostic value of the 
physical examination in patients with chronic heart failure. Con-
gest Heart Fail. 2003;9:170.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
416 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
 109. Drazner MH, Rame E, Stevenson LW, et al. Prognostic importance 
of elevated jugular venous pressure and a third heart sound in 
patients with heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2001;345(8):574.
 110. Badgett RG, Lucey CR, Muirow CD. Can the clinical examination 
diagnose left-sided heart failure in adults? JAMA. 1997;277:1712.
 111. Shaheen K, Alraies MC. Superior vena cava syndrome. Cleve Clin 
J Med. 2012;79:410.
 112. Barst RJ, Ertel SI, Beghetti M, et al. Pulmonary arterial hyperten-
sion: a comparison between children and adults. Eur Respir J. 
2011;37:665.
 113. LeWinter MM. Clinical practice. Acute pericarditis. N Engl J Med. 
2014;371:2410.
 114. Meyer T, Shih J, Aurigemma G. In the clinic. Heart failure with 
preserved ejection fraction (diastolic dysfunction). Ann Intern 
Med. 2013;158:ITC 5–1.
 115. Sandercock PA, Kavvadia E. The carotid bruit. Pract Neurol. 
2002;2:221.
 116. Ratchford EV, Jin Z, Di Tullio MR, et al. Carotid bruit for detection 
of hemodynamically signiﬁcant carotid stenosis: the Northern 
Manhattan Study. Neurol Res. 2009;31:748.
 117. Sauve JS, Laupacis A, Feagan B, et al. Does this patient have a 
clinically important carotid bruit? JAMA. 1993;270:2843.
 118. Schorr R, Johnson K, Wan J, et al. The prognostic signiﬁcance of 
asymptomatic carotid bruits in the elderly. J Gen Intern Med. 
1998:13;86.
 119. Jonas DE, Feltner C, Amick HR, et al. Screening for asymptomatic 
carotid artery stenosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis for the 
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161:336.
 120. Pickett CA, Jackson JL, Hemann BA, et al. Carotid bruits as a 
prognostic indicator of cardiovascular death and myocardial 
infarction: a meta-analysis. Lancet. 2008;371:1587.
 121. Pickett CA, Jackson JL, Hemann BA, et al. Carotid bruits and 
cerebrovascular disease risk: A meta-analysis. Stroke. 
2010;41:2295.
 122. de Weerd M, Greving JP, de Jong AW, et al. Prevalence of asymp-
tomatic carotid artery stenosis according to age and sex. Stroke. 
2009;40:1105.
 123. Simel DL, Goldstein L. Update: carotid bruit. In: Simel DL, Ren-
nie D, eds. The Rational Clinical Examination: Evidence-Based Clin-
ical Diagnosis. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2009. Available at http://
jamaevidence.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=845&sectio
nid=61357496. Accessed June 12, 2015.
 124. LeFevre ML. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for 
asymptomatic carotid artery stenosis: U.S. Preventive Services Task 
Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161:356.
 125. de Weerd M, Greving JP, Hedblad B, et al. Prediction of asymp-
tomatic carotid artery stenosis in the general population: identiﬁ-
cation of high-risk groups. Stroke. 2014;45:2366.
 126. Raman G, Moorthy D, Hadar N, et al. Management strategies for 
asymptomatic carotid stenosis. Ann Intern Med. 2013;158:676.
 127. Paraskevas K, Spence JD, Veith FJ, et al. Identifying which patients 
with asymptomatic carotid stenosis could beneﬁt from interven-
tion. Stroke. 2014;45:3720.
 128. Daly C, Rodriguez HE. Carotid artery occlusive disease. Surg Clin 
North Am. 2013;93:813.
 129. McGee S. Ch. 36, Palpation of the heart. In: Evidence-based Physi-
cal Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:311.
 130. Ehara S, Okuyama T, Shirai N. Comprehensive evaluation of the 
apex beat using 64-slice computed tomography: Impact of left 
ventricular mass and distance to chest wall. J Cardiol. 2010;55:256.
 131. Logar HB, Medvescek NR, Rakovec P. Standardization of the apex 
beat in the full left lateral position and its diagnostic value in 
detecting left ventricular dilatation. Acta Cardiol. 2011;66:459.
 132. American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Practice Guidelines; Society of Cardiovascular Anesthe-
siologists; Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interven-
tions; Society of Thoracic Surgeons, et al. ACC/AHA 2006 
guidelines for the management of patients with valvular heart 
disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines developed in 
collaboration with the Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiolo-
gists. Circulation. 2006;114:e84.
 133. McGee S. Ch. 40, Miscellaneous heart sounds. In: Evidence-based 
Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:345.
 134. Kari FA, Beyersdorf F, Siepe M. Pathophysiological implications of 
different bicuspid aortic valve conﬁgurations. Cardiol Res Pract. 
2012;2012:735829.
 135. Siu SC, Silversides CK. Bicuspid aortic valve disease. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2010;55:2789.
 136. Topilsky Y, Michelena H, Bichara V, et al. Mitral valve prolapse 
with mid-late systolic mitral regurgitation: pitfalls of evaluation 
and clinical outcome compared with holosystolic regurgitation. 
Circulation. 2012:125:1643.
 137. Foster E. Mitral regurgitation due to degenerative mitral-valve 
disease. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:156.
 138. Hayek E, Gring CN, Grifﬁn BP. Mitral valve prolapse. Lancet. 
2005;365:507.
 139. McGee S. Ch. 39, The third and fourth heart sounds. In: Evidence-
based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:341.
 140. Chizner MA. Cardiac auscultation: rediscovering the lost art. Curr 
Probl Cardiol. 2008;33:326.
 141. McGee S. Etiology and diagnosis of systolic murmurs in adults. 
Am J Med. 2010;123:913.
 142. Felker GM, Cuculich PS, Gheorghiade M. The Valsalva maneuver: 
a bedside “biomarker” for heart failure. Am J Med. 2006;119:117.
 143. Lembo NJ, Dell’Italia LJ, Crawford MH, et al. Bedside diagnosis of 
systolic murmurs. N Engl J Med. 1988;318:1572.
 144. Otto CM, Prendergast B. Aortic-valve stenosis—from patients at 
risk to severe valve obstruction. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:744.
 145. Manning WJ. Asymptomatic aortic stenosis in the elderly: a clini-
cal review. JAMA. 2013;310:1490.
 146. Ho CY. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in 2012. Circulation. 
2012;125:1432.
 147. Fitzgerald KP, Lim MJ. The pulmonary valve. Cardiol Clin. 
2011;29:223.
 148. Asgar AW, Mack MJ, Stone GW. Secondary mitral regurgitation in 
heart failure: pathophysiology, prognosis, and therapeutic consid-
erations. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;65:1231.
 149. Bonow RO. Chronic mitral regurgitation and aortic regurgitation: 
have indications for surgery changed? J Am coll Cardiol. 
2013;61:693.
 150. Enriquez-Sarano M, Akins CW, Vahanian A. Mitral regurgitation. 
Lancet. 2009;373(9672):1382.
 151. Irwin RB, Luckie M, Khattar RS. Tricuspid regurgitation: contem-
porary management of a neglected valvular lesion. Postgrad Med 
J. 2010:86:648.
 152. Mutlak D, Aronson D, Lessick J, et al.  Functional tricuspid regur-
gitation in patients with pulmonary hypertension: is pulmonary 
artery pressure the only determinant of regurgitation severity? 
Chest. 2009;135:115.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  9 |
 
The Cardiovascular System 
417
REFERENCES
 153. McGee S. Ch. 44, Miscellaneous heart sounds. In: Evidence-
based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 
2012:394.
 154. Pessel C, Bonanno C. Valve disease in pregnancy. Semin Perinatol. 
2014;348:273.
 155. McGee S. Ch. 43, Aortic regurgitation. In: Evidence-based Physical 
Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:379.
 156. Maganti K, Rigolin VH, Sarano ME, et al. Valvular heart disease: 
diagnosis and management. Mayo Clin Proc. 2010;85:483.
 157. Enriquez-Serano M, Tajik AJ. Clinical practice. Aortic regurgita-
tion. N Engl J Med. 2004:351:1539.
 158. Babu AN, Kymes SM, Carpenter Fryer SM. Eponyms and the 
diagnosis of aortic regurgitation: what says the evidence? Ann 
Intern Med. 2003;138:736.
 159. McGee S. Ch. 45, Disorders of the pericardium. In: Evidence-
based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 
2012:400.
 160. McGee S. Ch. 41, Heart murmurs: general principles. In: Evidence-
based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:354.
 161. Levine SA. Notes on the gradation of the intensity of cardiac mur-
murs. JAMA. 1961:177:261.
 162. Freeman RA, Levine SA. The clinical signiﬁcance of the systolic 
murmur: a study of 1000 consecutive “non-cardiac” cases. Ann 
Intern Med. 1933;6:1371.
 163. Opotowsky AR, Ojeda J, Rogers F, et al. Blood pressure response 
to the Valsalva maneuver. A simple bedside test to determine the 
hemodynamic basis of pulmonary hypertension. Am Coll Cardiol. 
2010;56:1352.
 164. Cheng RK, Cox M, Neely ML, et al. Outcomes in patients with 
heart failure with preserved, borderline, and reduced ejection 
fraction in the Medicare population. Am Heart J. 2014;168:721.
 165. Gheorghiade M, Vaduganathan M, Fonarow GC, et al. Rehospital-
ization for heart failure: problems and perspectives. J Am Coll Car-
diol. 2013;61:391.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  10 |
 
The Breasts and Axillae 
419
The Female Breast
The female breast lies against the anterior thoracic wall, extending from the clav-
icle and 2nd rib down to the 6th rib, and from the sternum across to the midaxil-
lary line. Its surface area is generally rectangular rather than round (Fig. 10-1).
C H A P T E R 
10
The Breasts and Axillae
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate 
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 12: Breasts and Axillae)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com
Anatomy and Physiology
Pectoralis major
Serratus anterior
Nipple
Areola
Axillary vein
Subclavian vein
Subclavian 
lymph nodes
Lateral thoracic vein
Axillary 
lymph nodes
Mammary gland lobules
Fat
F I G U R E  1 0 - 1 .  The female breast.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
420 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The breast overlies the pectoralis major and, at its 
inferior margin, the serratus anterior.
To describe clinical ﬁndings, the breast is often divided 
into four quadrants based on horizontal and vertical 
lines crossing at the nipple (Fig. 10-2). A ﬁfth area, an 
axillary tail of breast tissue, sometimes termed the “tail 
of Spence,” extends laterally across the anterior axillary 
fold. Alternatively, ﬁndings can be localized as the 
time on the face of a clock (e.g., 3 o’clock) and the 
distance in centimeters from the nipple.
The breast is a hormonally sensitive tissue, responsive 
to the changes of monthly cycling and aging. Glandu-
lar tissue, consisting of milk-secreting tubuloalveolar 
glands and ductules, forms 15 to 20 septated lobes 
radiating around the nipple (Fig. 10-3). Within each 
lobe are many smaller lobules. The glandular tissue 
within each lobule drains into larger collecting ducts 
and lactiferous sinuses leading to 5 to 10 porous 
openings on the surface of the areola and the nipple. 
Fibrous connective tissue provides structural support in 
the form of ﬁbrous bands or suspensory ligaments, 
also known as Cooper ligaments, connected to both 
the skin and the underlying fascia. Adipose tissue, or 
fat, surrounds the breast, predominantly in the super-
ﬁcial and peripheral areas. The proportions of these 
components vary with age, nutritional status, preg-
nancy, exogenous hormone use, and other factors. 
After menopause, there is atrophy of glandular tissue, 
and a notable decrease in the number of lobules.
The surface of the areola has small, rounded eleva-
tions formed by sebaceous glands, sweat glands, 
and accessory areolar glands (Fig. 10-4). A few hairs 
are often seen on the areola. During pregnancy, the 
sebaceous glands produce an oily secretion that 
serves as a protective lubricant for the areola and 
nipple during lactation.
Both the nipple and the areola are supplied with 
smooth muscle that contracts to express milk from the 
ductal system during breast-feeding. Rich sensory 
innervation, especially in the nipple, triggers “milk 
letdown” following neurohormonal stimulation from 
Tail of
Spence
Upper
outer
quadrant
Lower
outer
quadrant
Upper
inner
quadrant
Lower
inner
quadrant
12
9
6
3
F I G U R E  1 0 - 2 .  Breast quadrants.
Suspensory 
ligament
Pectoral
muscle
Clavicle
Duct
Subcutaneous 
fat
Glandular 
tissue
Ribs
Mammary layer 
fatty tissue
Skin
F I G U R E  1 0 - 3 .  Breast anatomy.
Smooth
muscle
Nipple
Duct
opening
Sebaceous
gland
Areola
F I G U R E  1 0 - 4 .  Nipple and areola.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  10 |
 
The Breasts and Axillae 
421
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
infant sucking. Tactile stimulation of the area, including the breast examination, 
makes the nipple smaller, ﬁrmer, and more erect, whereas the areola puckers and 
wrinkles. These smooth muscle reﬂexes are normal and should not be mistaken for 
signs of breast disease.
The adult breast may be soft, but it often feels granular, nodular, or lumpy. This 
uneven texture is normal physiologic nodularity. It is often bilateral and may occur 
throughout the breast or only in some areas. The nodularity may increase before 
menses, a time when breasts often enlarge and become tender or even painful. For 
breast changes during adolescence and pregnancy, see pp. 896–897 and p. 928.
Occasionally, one or more extra or supernumerary nipples are located along the 
“milk line,” illustrated in Figure 10-5. Usually, only a small nipple and areola are 
present, often mistaken for a common mole. Those containing glandular tissue occa-
sionally show increased pigmentation, swelling, tenderness, or even lactation during 
puberty, menstruation, or pregnancy. Possible associations with renal, urogenital, and 
cardiovascular disorders are under current investigation, but treatment is only 
needed if there is diagnostic ambiguity, cosmetic concerns, or possible pathology.1
The Male Breast
The male breast consists chieﬂy of a small nipple and areola overlying a thin disc 
of undeveloped breast tissue consisting primarily of ducts. Lacking estrogen and 
progesterone stimulation, ductal branching and development of lobules are min-
imal,2,3 making it difﬁcult to distinguish male breast tissue from the surrounding 
muscles of the chest wall. There is a ﬁrm button of breast tissue 2 cm or more in 
diameter in roughly one of three adult men.
Lymphatics
Most lymphatic vessels of the breast drain into the axillary lymph nodes 
(Fig. 10-6). Of these, the central nodes are the most likely to be palpable. They lie 
along the chest wall, usually high in the axilla and midway between the anterior 
and posterior axillary folds. Three other groups of lymph nodes drain into the 
central nodes and are seldom palpable:
■ Pectoral nodes—anterior, located along the lower border of the pectoralis 
major inside the anterior axillary fold. These nodes drain the anterior chest 
wall and much of the breast.
■ Subscapular nodes—posterior, located along the lateral border of the scapula; 
palpated deep in the posterior axillary fold. They drain the posterior chest 
wall and a portion of the arm.
■ Lateral nodes—located along the upper humerus. They drain most of the arm.
Lymph drains from the central axillary nodes to the infraclavicular and supracla-
vicular nodes.
F I G U R E  1 0 - 5 .  Milk lines.
Some men develop benign breast 
enlargement from gynecomastia, a 
proliferation of palpable glandular tis-
sue, or pseudogynecomastia, the accu-
mulation of subareolar fat. Causes of 
gynecomastia include increased estro-
gen, decreased testosterone, and 
medication side effects.4 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
422 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Not all the lymphatics of the breast drain into the axilla. Malignant cells from a 
breast cancer may spread directly to the infraclavicular nodes or into the internal 
mammary chain of lymph nodes within the chest.
Lateral
Central
(deep within axilla)
Subscapular
(posterior)
Pectoral
(anterior)
Supraclavicular
Infraclavicular
F I G U R E  1 0 - 6 .  Direction of lymph ﬂow.
The Health History
Common or Concerning Symptoms
● Breast lump or mass
● Breast discomfort or pain
● Nipple discharge
You can elicit concerns about the breasts during the history or later during the 
physical examination. Ask if the patient has had any lumps, discomfort, or pain in 
her breasts. About 50% of women have palpable lumps or nodularity, and premen-
strual enlargement and tenderness are common.5,6 If your patient reports a lump 
or mass, identify the precise location, how long it has been present, and any change 
in size or variation within the menstrual cycle. Ask if there has been any change in 
breast contour, dimpling, swelling, or puckering of the skin over the breasts.
Breast pain, or mastalgia, is the most common breast symptom prompting ofﬁce 
visits. Breast pain alone (without mass) is not considered a breast cancer risk 
factor. Determine if the pain is diffuse or focal, cyclic or noncyclic, and related 
to medications.
Lumps may be physiologic or patho-
logic, ranging from cysts and fibroade-
nomas to breast cancer. See Table 10-1, 
Common Breast Masses, p. 444, and 
Table 10-2, Visible Signs of Breast  
Cancer, p. 445. 
Clinical breast examination (CBE) is war-
ranted. Focal breast pain is more likely 
to merit diagnostic imaging. Medica-
tions associated with breast pain 
include hormonal therapy; psychotro-
pic drugs such as selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors and haloperiodol; 
spironolactone, and digoxin.6 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  10 |
 
The Breasts and Axillae 
423
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Ask about any discharge from the nipples and when it occurs. Does the discharge 
appear only after compression of the nipple, or is it spontaneous? Physiologic 
hypersecretion is seen in pregnancy, lactation, chest wall stimulation, sleep, and 
stress. If spontaneous, what is the color, consistency, and quantity? Is the color 
milky, brown or greenish, or bloody? Ask if the discharge is unilateral or bilateral. 
Physiologic discharge is usually bilateral, multiductal, prompted by stimulation, 
and ranges in color from white to yellowish or green.
Galactorrhea, or the discharge of milk-
containing fluid unrelated to preg-
nancy or lactation, is more likely to  
be pathologic when it is bloody or 
serous, unilateral, spontaneous, asso-
ciated with a mass, and occurring in 
women aged ≥40 years.6 
Health Promotion and 
Counseling: Evidence and 
Recommendations
Women may experience a wide range of changes in breast tissue and sensation, 
from cyclic swelling and nodularity to a distinct lump or mass. The examination 
of the breast is an important opportunity for exploring key concerns for women’s 
health—what to do if a lump or mass is detected, risk factors for breast cancer, 
and screening measures such as breast self-examination (BSE), the CBE by a 
skilled clinician, and mammography.
Palpable Masses of the Breast and Breast Symptoms. Breast 
cancer occurs in up to 4% of women with breast complaints, in approximately 
5% of women reporting a nipple discharge, and in up to 11% of women 
speciﬁcally complaining of a breast lump or mass.3,5 Breast masses show marked 
variation in etiology, from ﬁbroadenomas and cysts seen in younger women, to 
abscess or mastitis, to primary breast cancer. On initial assessment, the woman’s 
age and the physical characteristics of the mass provide clues about etiology, as 
shown below, but deﬁnitive diagnosis should be pursued and often requires 
further evaluation with ultrasound, mammography, or even biopsy.
Important Topics for Health Promotion  
and Counseling
● Palpable masses of the breast
● Assessing risk of breast cancer
● Breast cancer screening
Palpable Masses of the Breast
Age (in Years)
Common Lesion
Characteristics
15–25
Fibroadenoma
Usually smooth, rubbery, 
round, mobile, nontender
25–50
Cysts
Usually soft to ﬁrm, round, 
mobile; often tender
Fibrocystic changes
Nodular, ropelike
Cancer
Irregular, ﬁrm, may be mobile or 
ﬁxed to surrounding tissue
(continued )
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
424 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Assessing Risk of Breast Cancer. Women are increasingly interested 
in learning about breast cancer. Be familiar with the literature about breast cancer 
risk factors that support recommendations for screening. Key facts and ﬁgures are 
presented here, but further reading will enhance your counseling of female 
patients.
Breast Cancer Facts and Figures. Breast cancer is the most common 
cause of cancer in women worldwide, accounting for more than 10% of cancers 
in women. In the United States, a woman born now has a 12%, or 1 in 8, lifetime 
risk of developing breast cancer.7 Eighty percent of new breast cancer cases occur 
after age 50 years, with a median age at diagnosis of age 61 years. The probabil-
ity of diagnosis increases with each decade.
Palpable Masses of the Breast (continued )
Age (in Years)
Common Lesion
Characteristics
Over 50
Cancer until proven 
otherwise
As above
Pregnancy/
lactation
Lactating adenomas,  
cysts, mastitis, and 
cancer
As above
Adapted from Schultz MZ, Ward BA, Reiss M. Breast diseases. In: Noble J, Greene HL, Levinson W, 
et al. (eds). Primary Care Medicine, 2nd ed. St. Louis: MO; 1996; Venet L, Strax P, Venet W, et al. 
Adequacies and inadequacies of breast examinations by physicians in mass screenings. Cancer. 
1971;28:1546.
Age-Speciﬁc Probabilities of Developing 
Invasive Female Breast Cancera
If Current Age is:
The Probability of 
Developing Breast Cancer 
in the Next 10 Years is:
Or 1 in:
20
0.1%
1,674
30
0.4%
225
40
1.4%
69
50
2.3%
44
60
3.5%
29
70
3.9%
26
Lifetime Risk
12.3%
8
aAmong those free of cancer at beginning of age interval. Based on cases diagnosed 2010–2012. 
Percentages and “1 in” numbers may not be numerically equivalent due to rounding.
Source: American Cancer Society. Breast Cancer Facts and Figures 2013–2014, p 17. Available at  
http://www.cancer.org/acs/groups/content/@research/documents/document/acspc-042725.pdf. 
Accessed May 1, 2015. Updated to 2015–2016, © 2015.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  10 |
 
The Breasts and Axillae 
425
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer death in women following 
lung cancer.7 Five-year survival rates are 99% for local disease, 84% for regional 
disease, and 24% for metastatic disease. In its annual report, Breast Cancer Facts 
and Figures 2013–2014, the American Cancer Society highlights important trends 
in breast cancer statistics.
■ Relatively stable incidence rates since 2004. Incidence dropped 7% in 2002–2003, 
attributed to declining use of hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Subsequent 
incidence rates have been relatively stable, with a small increase between 2006 
and 2010 in both white (0.1%) and African American (0.2%) women.
■ Declining death rates overall, but more advanced disease and higher mortality in 
African American women. Compared to white women, African American women 
have a higher incidence of breast cancer before age 40 years, are more likely to 
have larger and estrogen receptor (ER)–negative tumors at the time of diagnosis, 
and are more likely to die of breast cancer at every age. Although overall breast 
cancer death rates decreased by 34%, or 1.6% per year, between 1990 and 
2010, in 2010 African American women still had a 41% higher mortality rate 
than white women. This major health disparity is attributed to differences in 
use of mammography, more aggressive tumor characteristics, access to and 
response to new treatments, and the presence of coexisting illnesses.
Assessing Risk Factors for Breast Cancer. Be familiar with the breast 
cancer risk factors and their relative risk, as listed below, and discuss them with your 
patients.7,8 The most important risk factor for breast cancer is age. Other non-
modiﬁable risk factors are family history of breast and ovarian cancers, inherited 
genetic mutations, personal history of breast cancer or lobular carcinoma in situ, 
high levels of endogenous hormones,9–11 breast tissue density, proliferative lesions 
with atypia on breast biopsy, and duration of unopposed estrogen exposure related 
to early menarche, age of ﬁrst full-term pregnancy, and late menopause. Note that 
a history of radiation to the chest and diethylstilbestrol (DES) exposure also place 
women at high risk. Modiﬁable risk factors include: breastfeeding for less than 1 year, 
postmenopausal obesity, use of HRT, cigarette smoking, alcohol ingestion, physical 
inactivity, and type of contraception. Nonetheless, over 50% of women with breast 
cancer have no familial or reproductive risk factors.12
Breast Cancer in Women:  
Factors That Increase Relative Risk
Relative Risk
Factor
>4.0
● Age (65+ vs. <65 years, although risk increases across all 
ages until age 80)
● Biopsy-conﬁrmed atypical hyperplasia
● Certain inherited genetic mutations for breast cancer 
(BRCA1 and/or BRCA2)
● Ductal carcinoma in situ
● Lobular carcinoma in situ
● Personal history of early-onset (<40 years) breast cancer
● Two or more ﬁrst-degree relatives with breast cancer 
diagnosed at an early age
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
426 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Male Breast Cancer. Male breast cancer constitutes 1% of breast cancer 
cases, peaking in frequency between ages 60 and 70 years, although men are at 
risk at any age.13 Incidence has been increasing slightly, now at 1.2 cases per 
100,000 men, primarily in situ and local-stage tumors.8,13,14 Incidence increases 
with age and is higher in African American men compared to white men. Risk 
factors include radiation exposure, BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations, Klinefelter 
syndrome, testicular disorders, family history of male or female breast cancer, 
alcohol use, cirrhosis, and obesity.
Using Breast Cancer Risk Assessment Tools. In addition to risk 
factor tables, learn to use several risk assessment tools that clarify breast 
cancer risk for your patients. The Gail and Claus models estimate absolute 
lifetime risk of breast cancer and are used the most commonly. They use 
large population data sets and combinations of risk factors to predict 
Breast Cancer in Women:  
Factors That Increase Relative Risk (continued )
Relative Risk
Factor
2.1–4.0
● High endogenous estrogen or testosterone levels 
(postmenopausal)
● High-dose radiation to chest
● Mammographically extremely dense (>50%) breasts  
compared to less dense (11%–25%)
● One ﬁrst-degree relative with breast cancer
1.1–2.0
● Alcohol consumption
● Ashkenazi Jewish heritage
● Diethylstilbestrol exposure
● Early menarche (<12 years)
● Height (>5 feet 3 inches)
● High socioeconomic status
● Late age at ﬁrst full-term pregnancy (>30 years)
● Late menopause (>55 years)
● Mammographically dense (26%–50%) breasts compared to 
less dense (11%–25%)
● Non-atypical ductal hyperplasia or ﬁbroadenoma
● Never breastfed a child
● No full-term pregnancies
● Obesity (postmenopausal)/adult weight gain
● Personal history of breast cancer (40+ years)
● Personal history of endometrium, ovary, or colon cancer
● Recent and long-term use of menopausal hormone  
therapy containing estrogen and progestin
● Recent oral contraceptive use
Source: American Cancer Society. Breast Cancer Facts & Figures 2015–2016. Atlanta: American  
Cancer Society Inc, 2015. Available at http://www.cancer.org/acs/groups/content/@research/ 
documents/document/acspc-046381.pdf. Accessed May 1, 2015.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  10 |
 
The Breasts and Axillae 
427
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
approximate risk, but are less precise at predicting which individual women 
will get breast cancer.15–18 The BRCAPRO model is one of several models 
used for predicting risk of BRCA1 or BRCA2.19 For more detailed discussion 
of these and other models, turn to the National Cancer Institute’s review of 
the Genetics of Breast and Ovarian Cancer and reports of the American 
Cancer Society.16,20,21 Currently, no single model addresses all of the known 
risk factors or includes all of the genetic details of personal and family his-
tory, so using several tools is advised for individual patients. Devising data-
based personalized management strategies remains an ongoing focus for 
research testing incorporation of biopsy results, breast density, ethnicity, 
and genetic mutations.22,23
The Breast Cancer Risk Assessment Tool (the Gail Model). The Breast Can-
cer Risk Assessment Tool, often called the Gail model, at http://www.cancer 
.gov/bcrisktool/, updated in 2007, provides 5-year and lifetime estimates of 
risk for invasive breast cancer.15 It incorporates age, race, ﬁrst-degree relatives 
with breast cancer, previous breast biopsies and presence of hyperplasia, age 
at menarche, and age at ﬁrst delivery. The Gail model is best used for indi-
viduals over age 50 years who have either no family history of breast cancer 
or one affected ﬁrst-degree relative, and who have annual screening mammo-
grams. It should not be used for women with a past history of breast cancer 
or radiation exposure, or those who are 35 years of age or younger. It does 
not determine risk for noninvasive breast cancer and does not take paternal 
history or disease in second-degree relatives into account, or age of onset of 
disease. This model has been updated to include breast density, but depends 
on use of digital mammography and special software, making it more dif-
ﬁcult to use.24
The Claus Model. The Claus model assesses risk for high-risk women and 
incorporates family history for both female and male ﬁrst- and second-degree 
relatives, including age of onset.25 It is based on the woman’s current age. It is 
best used for individuals with no more than two ﬁrst- or second-degree rela-
tives with breast cancer.16 An expanded version includes family members with 
ovarian cancer. This model does not include personal, lifestyle, or reproductive 
risk factors. Discrepancies in risk assessment between published tables and the 
computerized program have been reported.18
The BRCAPRO Model. The BRCAPRO model at http://bcb.dfci.harvard.edu/
bayesmendel/software.php is used for high-risk women to assess risk of BRCA1 
and BRCA2 mutation in a given family. It incorporates published BRCA1 and 
BRCA2 mutation frequencies, cancer penetration in affected carriers, and age of 
onset in ﬁrst- and second-degree female and male relatives. It does not include 
nonhereditary risk factors.26
Breast Cancer Screening
BRCA1 and BRCA2 Mutations. Begin evaluating a woman’s breast can-
cer risk as early as her 20s by asking about family history, especially the condi-
tions listed below. A pattern of breast or ovarian cancer in maternal or paternal 
family members is suspicious for autosomal dominant genetic mutations. Be sure 
to ask about family history of ovarian cancer.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
428 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
The BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene occur in <1% of the population but account for 
roughly 5% to 10% of female breast cancers.16 However, these mutations repre-
sent only 15% to 20% of the familial breast cancers; they also confer increased 
risk for ovarian cancer. For BRCA1 mutations, the risk of developing breast 
cancer by age 70 years is estimated at 44% to 78%, and for BRCA2, the estimated 
risk is 31% to 51%.7 If family history is suspect, the next steps for clinicians 
include using the BRCAPRO calculator, genetic testing, referral for genetic coun-
seling, consideration of mammography as well as magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) for screening, and appropriate specialty referrals.27 (See p. 431 for recom-
mendations on use of MRI in high-risk women.)
Benign Breast Disease with Proliferative Changes on Biopsy. 
Since the 1980s, increased mammography screening has resulted in greater detec-
tion of benign breast disease, which includes a broad category of diagnoses on 
biopsy. When biopsy ﬁndings are stratiﬁed by cell type and pattern, they carry 
signiﬁcantly different risks of breast cancer, as shown below. Three categories pre-
dominate: nonproliferative changes, proliferative changes without atypia (abnor-
mal cells or patterns of cells), and proliferative changes with atypia.7,28 Presence of 
proliferative changes adds small to moderate increases in risk, depending of the 
absence or presence of atypia.3,29 Proliferative changes with atypia, or atypical 
hyperplasia, increase relative risk from 2 to 4 times higher, with a cumulative inci-
dence of breast cancer at 25 years of follow-up of 30%.28,30
Family History: High-Risk Factors  
for Familial Breast Cancer
● Age 50 years or younger at diagnosis of breast cancer
● Breast cancer in two or more individuals in the same lineage (paternal or maternal)
● Multiple primary or ovarian tumors in one person
● Breast cancer in a male relative
● Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry
● Family member with a known predisposing gene (including Li–Fraumeni and 
Cowden syndromes)
Risk of Breast Cancer and Histology of Benign 
Breast Lesions
No increased risk, relative 
risk ∼1.3
Nonproliferative changes: including cysts and ductal 
ectasia, mild hyperplasia, simple ﬁbroadenoma, 
mastitis, granuloma, diabetic mastopathy
Small increased risk, or 
relative risk 1.5–2.0
Proliferative without atypia: including usual ductal 
hyperplasia, complex ﬁbroadenoma, papilloma
Moderate increased risk, or 
relative risk >2.0 to ∼4.2
Proliferative with atypia: including atypical ductal 
hyperplasia and atypical lobular hyperplasia
Source: Santen RJ, Mansel R. Benign breast disorders. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:275; Hartmann LC, Sellers 
TA, Frost MH, et al. Benign breast disorders and the risk of breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:229.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  10 |
 
The Breasts and Axillae 
429
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Breast Density. Breast density on mammograms commands increasing 
importance as a strong independent risk factor for breast cancer—surpassed 
only by age and BRCA status.7,31–33 On mammograms, stromal and epithelial 
ﬁbroglandular tissue appears white or dense, whereas fat tissue appears dark. 
Studies show that when radiologic density, expressed as a percentage of breast 
area, reaches 60% to 75% of breast tissue, the relative risk of breast cancer 
increases four- to sixfold, in part related to the “masking effect” of breast den-
sity on smaller cancers, which have the same x-ray attenuation as ﬁbroglandu-
lar breast tissue.32,34 Up to 50% of women undergoing mammography have 
either heterogeneously dense or extremely dense breasts.31 Breast density is 
inﬂuenced by a number of variables: inherited genetic factors; reproductive fac-
tors such as pregnancy, lactation, and menopause; height; and endogenous hor-
mone exposure. In women with predominantly fatty tissue, mammograms have 
a sensitivity and speciﬁcity of 88% and 96% for detecting breast cancer, com-
pared to 62% and 89% for women with high density.35
Centers using digital technology include breast density in their mammogra-
phy reports. Counseling women about breast density is important because 
many women are not aware of this risk factor and the need for regular surveil-
lance. Knowledge of breast density may also affect patient decisions about 
using HRT.
Recommendations for Screening and Chemoprevention. Mammog-
raphy combined with the CBE are the most common screening modalities; 
however, recommendations from professional groups vary about how to 
screen, when to start screening, and screening intervals, as shown on the next 
page. The evidence and rationale for decisions about screening bear thoughtful 
review of the balance of beneﬁts and risks. For mammography, experts com-
monly raise concerns about overdiagnosis, deﬁned as detection of lesions on 
mammogram that would not otherwise be detected or pathologic during a 
woman’s lifetime. Estimates of overdiagnosis range from 0% to 50%, although 
some claim that they primarily reﬂect variations in study follow-up time and 
adjustment for screening lead time and incidence trends.36–39 In 2014, the 
Canadian National Breast Screening study reported the same 25-year cumula-
tive mortality from breast cancer in a screening trial of almost 90,000 women 
aged 40 to 59 years randomized to either CBE plus ﬁve annual mammography 
screens or CBE and no mammography, with overdiagnosis of 22%, although 
some have questioned the equivalence of the study and control groups.38,40 Changes 
in the recommended guidelines underscore the need for clinicians to be well 
informed as they counsel individual patients, particularly as more evidence 
emerges to guide risk-based screening.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
430 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Mammography
Women Ages 40 to 50 Years. Use of screening mammography in this age group 
has been controversial due to its lower sensitivity and speciﬁcity, possibly related 
to heterogeneous estrogen exposure in women still premenopausal; high numbers 
of false positives, approaching 9 out of 100 women;12 and the high rate of result-
ing invasive procedures. Citing concerns about the net beneﬁt in reduction of 
mortality, in 2009 and reafﬁrmed in 2016, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force 
(USPSTF) changed its recommendation to individual decision making, stating that 
“the decision to start regular, biennial screening mammography before the age of 
50 years should be an individual one and take patient context into account, 
including the patient’s values regarding speciﬁc beneﬁts and harms.”39,41 The 
American College of Physicians makes the same recommendation.42 The Ameri-
can Cancer Society and the American Medical Association recommend annual 
mammography beginning at age 40 years.38 Digital mammography performs 
better in younger women and women with higher breast density.
Women Ages 50 to 74 Years. The USFSTF recommends biennial screening 
mammograms for women aged 50 to 74 years, stating that changing to biennial 
Breast Cancer Screening Recommendations
Mammography
Clinical Breast 
Examination
Breast Self-
Examination
U.S. Preventative Services 
Task Force—average risk 
women (2016)
50–74 years—biennially
<50 years—individualize 
screening based on 
patient speciﬁc factors
≥75 years—insuﬃcient evi-
dence to recommend
≥40 years—insuﬃcient evi-
dence to assess additional 
beneﬁts and harms of 
CBE beyond screening 
mammography
Recommends against 
teaching BSE
American Cancer Society—
average risk women (2015)
40–45 years—optional 
annual screening
45–54 years—annual  
screening
≥55 years—biennial screen-
ing with option to con-
tinue annual screens 
Continue screening if good 
health and life expectancy 
≥10 years
Not recommended due to 
lack of evidence showing 
clear beneﬁt
Not recommended due 
to lack of evidence 
showing clear beneﬁt
American College of Obstetri-
cians and Gynecologists
≥40 years—annually
20–39 years—every  
1–3 years
≥40 years—annually
Encourage breast self-
awareness
Sources: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Breast Cancer: Screening. January 2016. At http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Document/ 
UpdateSummaryFinal/breast-cancer-screening1?ds=1&s=BREAST CANCER Accessed 2.11.16; Oeﬃnger KC, Fontham ETH, Etzioni R, et al. Breast cancer 
screening for women at average risk: 2015 guideline update from the American Cancer Society. JAMA. 2015;314:1500. See also http://www.cancer.org/ 
cancer/breastcancer/moreinformation/breastcancerearlydetection/breast-cancer-early-detection-acs-recs. Accessed November 14, 2015. American  
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Practice bulletin No. 122: breast cancer screening. Obstet Gynecol. 2011;118(2 pt 1):372.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  10 |
 
The Breasts and Axillae 
431
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
screening would reduce the harms of mammography screening by nearly half. Bien-
nial screening appears to preserve 80% of the beneﬁts of annual screening and 
averts about 40% of the false-positive results of annual testing, with similar late-
stage disease rates at diagnosis and similar 10-year breast cancer-speciﬁc survival 
rates.12 The American Cancer Society and the American Medical Association recom-
mend annual mammography; the World Health Organization recommends mam-
mography every 1 to 2 years. Mammography screening performs best in the 50–74 
year age group, with a sensitivity of 77% to 95% and speciﬁcity of 94% to 97%.42
Women Ages 75 Years and Older. The USPSTF cites insufﬁcient evidence for a 
ﬁrm recommendation, stating that “no women 75 years or older have been 
included in the multiple randomized clinical trials of breast cancer screening.” 
The USPSTF, the American Cancer Society, and the American Geriatrics Society 
support individual decision making about continued screening, depending on 
coexisting conditions and anticipated 5-year survival.
Clinical Breast Examination. The USPSTF states that evidence supporting 
additional CBE beyond screening mammography is insufﬁcient for establishing the 
balance of beneﬁts and harms. This is also the position of the World Health Organiza-
tion and, most recently, the American Cancer Society (2015). The American College 
of Obstetrics and Gynecology recommends CBE. Standardization of CBE technique 
would be helpful for both further research and practice. Sensitivity and speciﬁcity 
of CBE are 40% and 88% to 99% and heavily inﬂuenced by examiner experience, 
technique, and duration of the examination.5,41,43
Breast Self-Examination. The USPSTF recommends against teaching BSE 
due to evidence that it does not reduce mortality and may lead to a higher 
rate of benign breast biopsies.39 The American Cancer Society (2015) recom-
mends against regular BSE but states that all women should be familiar with 
how their breasts normally look and feel and should report changes to their 
health care provider right away. Some advocate BSE as a method for promoting 
breast self-awareness, whereby women report changes in breast appearance or 
texture promptly in place of routine formal examination, particularly in coun-
tries where mammography is not widely available. Some subgroups may be 
more likely to beneﬁt from BSE, such as women at high risk.44
Magnetic Resonance Imaging. 
Studies of contrast-enhanced MRI for 
screening have focused only on high-risk populations; breast MRI has not yet 
been evaluated for screening in the general population. Sensitivity is reported 
at 77%, almost double that of mammograms, but there are twice the number of 
false positives.12,41 The American Cancer Society convened an expert panel in 
2007, which issued new screening recommendations for use of MRI for women 
at high risk for breast cancer.7 The Society recommends annual screening with 
MRI and mammogram beginning at age 30 years for women at high lifetime risk 
of breast cancer, or above 20%, as deﬁned by the criteria below. Women at mod-
erate lifetime risk (15% to 20%) are urged to discuss MRI screening with their 
provider. The USPSTF has concluded that evidence is insufﬁcient to determine 
the utility of MRI for screening. Expertise in reading MRIs varies across centers 
and should be considered when making recommendations about this examina-
tion, which requires special equipment.
See Patient Instructions for the Breast 
Self-Examination—American Cancer 
Society, p. 441. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
432 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
American Cancer Society Criteria for Adjunct 
MRI in High-Risk Women
High Lifetime Risk, or  
≥20–25%
Moderate Lifetime Risk, or 
≥15–20%
● Have a known BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene 
mutation
● Have a ﬁrst-degree relative (mother, 
father, brother, sister, or child) with a 
BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutation, but 
have not had genetic testing themselves
● Had rediation therapy to the chest 
when they were between 10 and  
30 years of age
● Have Li-Fraumeni syndrome or Cowden 
syndrome, or have a ﬁrst-degree relative 
with one of these syndromes
● Have a lifetime risk of breast can-
cer of 15% to 20%, according to 
risk assessment tools that are 
based mainly on family history
● Have a personal history of breast 
cancer, ductal carcinoma in situ 
(DCIS), lobular carcinoma in situ 
(LCIS), atypical ductal hyperplasia, 
or atypical lobular hyperplasia
● Have extremely dense breasts or 
unevenly dense breasts when 
viewed by mammograms
Source: American Cancer Society. Breast Cancer Facts & Figures 2015–2016. Atlanta: American Cancer 
Society Inc, 2015. Available at http://www.cancer.org/acs/groups/content/@research/documents/
document/acspc-046381.pdf. Accessed February 5, 2015.
Chemoprevention
Selective Estrogen-receptor Modulators (SERMs). A growing literature docu-
ments both the efﬁcacy and the underutilization of the SERMs tamoxifen and 
raloxifene for primary prevention of ER-positive breast cancer in breast cancer–free 
women at high risk, usually based on a 5-year Gail risk score ≥1.66%.45,46 A sys-
tematic review of clinical trials found that tamoxifen and raloxifene reduce the 
incidence of ER-positive invasive breast cancer by 7 to 9 events in 1,000 women 
over 5 years, and that the reduction in incidence was greater with tamoxifen.47 
Studies have shown limited impact on the incidence of ER-negative breast can-
cers, noninvasive cancers, and mortality.12,47 Signiﬁcant side effects are higher 
with tamoxifen therapy, including thromboembolic events, endometrial cancer, 
gynecologic and urologic problems, vasomotor symptoms, and cataracts. Since 
2002, and reafﬁrmed in 2014, the USPSTF has recommended discussion of che-
moprevention for asymptomatic women aged ≥35 years at increased risk of breast 
cancer and low risk of adverse events.48,49 Tamoxifen is approved for use in 
women of all ages, whereas raloxifene is approved only for postmenopausal 
women. National Health Survey data from 2010 continue to show that the preva-
lence of chemoprevention among eligible women in the United States is excep-
tionally low, perhaps due to clinician and patient concerns about side effects.50
Aromatase Inhibitors. Another class of drugs that holds promise for chemopre-
vention is currently under investigation—the aromatase inhibitors exemestane, anas-
trazole, and letrozole. In postmenopausal women, these drugs inhibit or inactivate 
the adrenal enzyme aromatase, which catalyzes the ﬁnal step in tissue synthesis of 
estradiol from precursor androgens. Initial studies of exemestane and anastrazole 
have reported signiﬁcant reductions in overall breast cancer incidence in high-risk 
postmenopausal women after 3 and 5 years of follow-up, respectively—0.19% for 
exemestane compared to 0.55% for placebo, a 65% relative reduction, and 2% for 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  10 |
 
The Breasts and Axillae 
433
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
anastrazole compared to 4% for placebo, a hazard ratio of 47%.51,52 Aromatase 
inhibitors do not appear to increase the risk of thromboembolic events or endome-
trial cancers, but do increase the risk of osteoporosis and fractures.
Counseling Women About Breast Cancer
The Challenges of Communicating Risks and Beneﬁts. As breast 
cancer screening and prevention options become more complex, clinicians 
should consider how best to express statistics on risks and beneﬁts in terms that 
patients can easily understand. Framing, or presenting the same information in 
terms of either increased beneﬁt or decreased harm, is one of several ways of 
presenting data that can compromise informed consent. For example, Elmore53 
recommends that, instead of reporting a Gail model risk of diagnosis of breast 
cancer in 5 years as 1.1%, explaining that only 11 out of 1,000 women would 
get such a diagnosis is easier for patients to grasp. Likewise, using the notion of 
absolute risk may be preferable to using relative risk to increase patients’ compre-
hension. For example, relative risk of developing breast cancer among women 
using combined estrogen and progesterone has been reported as 1.26, or a 26% 
increased risk in users compared to nonusers.7,54 Alternatively, among 10,000 
users over 5.2 years, the expected number of breast cancers is 38, compared to 
30 in 10,000 nonusers. The 26% increased risk results in a total of 8 additional 
cases of breast cancer over 5.2 years.
Websites for Breast Cancer Information. Encourage your patients to 
pursue breast cancer–related information from recommended sources to help 
them make informed choices during shared decision making.
Breast Cancer Websites
Calculators for Assessing Risk of Breast Cancer
● Gail model; updated for African American women: http://www.cancer.gov/
bcrisktool/
● BRCAPRO model for probability of BRCA 1 and BRCA2 mutation:  
http://bcb.dfci.harvard.edu/bayesmendel/software.php
● Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Division of Cancer Prevention 
and Control—Know BRCA Tool: https://www.knowbrca.org/
● Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Division of Cancer Prevention and 
Control—Help Women Know: BRCA: https://www.knowbrca.org/Provider
Breast Self-Examination Tutorial
● http://ww5.komen.org/breast-cancer/breatselfawareness.html
National Guidelines for Breast Cancer Screening
● National Guideline Clearinghouse: http://www.guidelines.gov (enter “breast 
cancer”)
Randomized Clinical Trials of New Modalities in Breast  
Cancer Screening
● National Institutes of Health: https://clinicaltrials.gov/
All websites accessed May 6, 2015.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
434 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The Female Breast
Clinical investigation has shown that examiner experience and technique sig-
niﬁcantly affect the efﬁcacy of the CBE. Clinicians are advised to adopt a more 
standardized approach, especially for palpation, and to use a systemic up-and-
down search pattern, varying palpation pressure, and a circular motion with the 
ﬁngerpads.5,41,55 For screening examinations, the length of time spent on palpa-
tion is one of the most important factors in detecting suspicious changes, with 
highest sensitivity when examiners spend 5 to 10 minutes for the examination 
of both breasts.56,57 When examination time falls, especially for clinicians in 
practice compared to trained examiners in clinical trials, sensitivity for detection 
of breast cancer drops from the 65% range to 28% to 35%, with the attendant 
hazards of high numbers of false positives.55,56,58 Experts concur on the impor-
tance of the CBE for women with symptoms or a palpable mass, as mammogra-
phy in women with self-reported or palpable masses may miss up to 13% of 
invasive cancers.59
As you begin the examination, take a courteous gentle approach. Let the patient 
know that you are about to examine her breasts. This may be a good time to ask 
if she has noticed any lumps or other breast problems and enhance her aware-
ness of screening guidelines, including techniques for self-examination, if 
requested. Because breasts tend to swell and become more nodular before men-
ses from increasing estrogen stimulation, the best time for examination is 5 to 
7 days after the onset of menstruation. Nodules appearing during the premen-
strual phase should be re-evaluated at this later time.
Inspection. Adequate inspection initially requires full exposure of the chest, 
but later in the examination, cover one breast while you are palpating the other. 
Inspect the breasts and nipples with the patient in the sitting position and 
disrobed to the waist (Fig. 10-7). A thorough examination of the breasts 
includes careful inspection for skin changes, symmetry, contours, and retraction 
in four views—arms at sides, arms over head, arms pressed against hips, and 
leaning forward. When examining an adolescent girl, assess her breast 
development according to the Tanner sex maturity ratings described on 
pages 896–897.
Arms at Sides. Note the clinical features listed below.
■ The appearance of the skin, including:
■ Color
■ Thickening of the skin and unusually prominent pores, which may 
accompany lymphatic obstruction
Techniques of Examination
The most significant risk factors for 
breast cancer are age, BRCA status, 
and breast density on mammogram. 
Personal history of breast cancer, fam-
ily history, and reproductive factors 
affecting duration of uninterrupted 
estrogen exposure are also important. 
For numerous additional risk factors, 
see also Breast Cancer in Women:  
Factors That Increase Relative Risk,  
pp. 425–426. 
See Patient Instructions for the Breast 
Self-Examination, p. 442. 
Redness suggests local infection or 
inflammatory carcinoma. 
Thickening and prominent pores  
suggest breast cancer. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  10 |
 
The Breasts and Axillae 
435
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Size and symmetry of the breasts. Some differences in the size of the breasts 
and areolae are common and usually normal, as shown in the photo-
graph below.
■ Contour of the breasts. Look for changes such as masses, dimpling, or ﬂat-
tening. Compare one side with the other.
■ The characteristics of the nipples, including size and shape, direction in 
which they point, any rashes or ulceration, or any discharge.
Occasionally, the nipple is inverted, or 
points inward, depressed below the areo-
lar surface. It may be enveloped by folds 
of areolar skin, as shown in Figure 10-8, 
but can be moved out from its sulcus. It is 
usually a normal variant of no clinical 
consequence, except for possible difﬁ-
culty when breastfeeding.
F I G U R E  1 0 - 7 .  Inspect with arms at sides.
Flattening of the normally convex 
breast suggests cancer. See Table 10-2, 
Visible Signs of Breast Cancer, p. 445. 
Asymmetry due to change in nipple 
direction suggests an underlying can-
cer. Eczematous changes with rash, 
scaling, or ulceration on the nipple 
extending to the areola occurs in 
Paget disease of the breast, associated 
with underlying ductal or lobular car-
cinoma (see p. 445).60
F I G U R E  1 0 - 8 .  Inverted nipple.
A nipple pulled inward, tethered by 
underlying ducts signals nipple retrac-
tion from a possible underlying cancer. 
The retracted nipple may be depressed, 
flat, broad, or thickened. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
436 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Arms Over Head; Hands Pressed Against Hips; Leaning Forward. To 
bring out dimpling or retraction that may otherwise be invisible, ask the patient 
to raise her arms over her head (Fig. 10-9), then press her hands against her hips 
to contract the pectoral muscles (Fig. 10-10). Inspect the breast contours care-
fully in each position. If the breasts are large or pendulous, it may be useful to 
have the patient stand and lean forward (Fig. 10-11), supported by the back of 
the chair or the examiner’s hands.
F I G U R E  1 0 - 9 .  Inspect with arms over head.
F I G U R E  1 0 - 1 0 .  Inspect with hands pressed against hips.
F I G U R E  1 0 - 1 1 .  Inspect while leaning forward.
Breast dimpling or retraction in these 
positions suggests an underlying  
cancer. Cancers with fibrous strands 
attached to the skin and fascia over 
the pectoral muscles may cause 
inward dimpling of the skin during 
muscle contraction. 
Occasionally, these signs accompany 
benign conditions such as posttrau-
matic fat necrosis or mammary duct 
ectasia, but should always be further 
evaluated. 
This position may reveal asymmetry 
or retraction of the breast, areola, or 
nipple that is not otherwise visible, 
suggesting an underlying cancer. See 
Table10-2, Visible Signs of Breast  
Cancer, p. 445. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  10 |
 
The Breasts and Axillae 
437
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Palpation. Palpation is best performed when the breast tissue is ﬂattened. 
The patient should be supine. Palpate the rectangular area extending from the 
clavicle to the inframammary fold or bra line, and from the midsternal line to the 
posterior axillary line and well into the axilla to ensure that you examine the tail 
of the breast.
A thorough examination takes at least 3 minutes for each breast. Use the pads of the 
2nd, 3rd, and 4th ﬁngers, keeping the ﬁngers slightly ﬂexed. It is important to be 
systematic. The vertical strip pattern shown in Figure 10-12 is currently the best 
validated technique for detecting breast masses.55 Palpate in small, concentric circles 
applying light, medium, and deep pressure at each examining point. Press more 
ﬁrmly to reach the deeper tissues of a large breast. Examine the entire breast, includ-
ing the periphery, tail, and axilla.
When pressing deeply on the breast, a 
normal rib can be mistaken for a hard 
breast mass. 
F I G U R E  1 0 - 1 2 .  Vertical strip pattern—lateral breast.
■ Examining the lateral portion of the breast. To examine the lateral portion of the 
breast, ask the patient to roll onto the opposite hip, placing her hand on her 
forehead but keeping the shoulders pressed against the bed or examining 
table. This ﬂattens the lateral breast tissue. Begin palpation in the axilla, 
moving in a straight line down to the bra line, then move the ﬁngers medially 
and palpate in a vertical strip up the chest to the clavicle. Continue in verti-
cal overlapping strips until you reach the nipple, then reposition the patient 
to ﬂatten the medial portion of the breast.
■ Examining the medial portion of the breast. To examine the medial portion of the 
breast, ask the patient to lie with her shoulders ﬂat against the bed or exam-
ining table, placing her hand at her neck and lifting up her elbow until it is 
even with her shoulder (Fig. 10-13). Palpate in a straight line down from the 
nipple to the bra line, then back to the clavicle, continuing in vertical over-
lapping strips to the midsternum.
Nodules in the tail of the breast in the 
axilla (the tail of Spence) are some-
times mistaken for enlarged axillary 
lymph nodes. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
438 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Examine the breast tissue carefully for:
■ Consistency of the tissues. Normal consistency varies widely, depending on the 
proportions of ﬁrmer glandular tissue and soft fat. Physiologic nodularity may 
be present, increasing before menses. Note the ﬁrm inframammary ridge, which 
is the transverse ridge of compressed tissue along the lower margin of the breast, 
especially in large breasts. This ridge is sometimes mistaken for a tumor.
■ Tenderness that may occur prior to menses.
■ Nodules. Palpate carefully for any lump or mass that is qualitatively different 
from or larger than the rest of the breast tissue. This is sometimes called a 
dominant mass that may be pathologic when evaluated by mammogram, as-
piration, or biopsy. Assess and describe the characteristics of any nodule:
■ Location—by quadrant or clock, with centimeters from the nipple
■ Size—in centimeters
■ Shape—round or cystic, disclike, or irregular in contour
■ Consistency—soft, ﬁrm, or hard
■ Delimitation—well circumscribed or not
■ Tenderness
■ Mobility—in relation to the skin, pectoral fascia, and chest wall. Gently 
move the breast near the mass and watch for dimpling.
F I G U R E  1 0 - 1 3 .  Vertical strip pattern—medial breast.
Tender cords suggest mammary duct 
ectasia, a benign but sometimes pain-
ful condition of dilated ducts with sur-
rounding inflammation and, at times, 
with associated masses. 
See Table 10-1, Common Breast 
Masses, p. 444. 
Hard irregular poorly circumscribed 
nodules, fixed to the skin or underly-
ing tissues, strongly suggest cancer. 
Check for cysts and inflamed areas; 
some cancers may be tender. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  10 |
 
The Breasts and Axillae 
439
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Next, try to move the nodule or mass while the patient relaxes her arm and then 
while she presses her hand against her hip.
Palpate each nipple, noting its elasticity (Fig. 10-14).
A mobile mass that becomes fixed 
when the arm relaxes is attached to the 
ribs and intercostal muscles; if fixed 
when the hand is pressed against the 
hip, it is attached to the pectoral fascia. 
F I G U R E  1 0 - 1 4 .  Palpate the nipple.
Thickening of the nipple and loss of 
elasticity suggest an underlying cancer. 
If there is a history of nipple discharge, try to determine its origin by compressing 
the areola with your index ﬁnger placed in radial positions around the nipple 
(Fig. 10-15). Watch for discharge expressed from any of the duct openings on 
the nipple surface. Note the color, consistency, and quantity of any discharge and 
the exact location where it appears.
F I G U R E  1 0 - 1 5 .  Compress the areola for nipple discharge.
Milky discharge unrelated to a prior 
pregnancy and lactation is nonpuer-
peral galactorrhea. Causes include 
hyperthyroidism, pituitary prolactinoma, 
and dopamine antagonists, including 
psychotropics and phenothiazines. 
Spontaneous unilateral bloody  
discharge from one or two ducts  
warrants further evaluation for intra-
ductal papilloma, shown in Figure 10-16, 
ductal carcinoma in situ, or Paget dis-
ease of the breast. Clear, serous, green, 
black, or nonbloody discharges that 
are multiductal are usually benign.3,6,61 
Papilloma
F I G U R E  1 0 - 1 6 .  Intraductal 
papilloma.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
440 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The Male Breast
Examination of the male breast may be brief, but is important. Inspect the nipple and 
areola for nodules, swelling, or ulceration. Palpate the areola and breast tissue for 
nodules. If the breast appears enlarged (>2 cm), distinguish between the soft fatty 
enlargement of obesity (pseudogynecomastia) and the benign ﬁrm disc of glandular 
enlargement (gynecomastia). Breast tissue in gynecomastia is often tender.
The Axillae
Although the axillae may be examined with the patient lying down, a sitting 
position is preferable.
Inspection. Inspect the skin of each axilla, noting evidence of:
■ Rash
■ Infection
■ Unusual pigmentation
Palpation
Left Axilla. To examine the left 
axilla, ask the patient to relax with the left 
arm down and warn the patient that the 
examination may be uncomfortable. Sup-
port the patient’s left wrist or hand with 
your left hand. Cup together the ﬁngers of 
your right hand and reach as high as you 
can toward the apex of the axilla 
(Fig. 10-17). Place your ﬁngers directly 
behind the pectoral muscles, pointing 
toward the midclavicle. Now press your 
ﬁngers in toward the chest wall and slide 
them downward, trying to palpate the 
central nodes against the chest wall. Of 
the axillary nodes, the central nodes are 
most likely to be palpable. One or more 
soft, small (<1 cm), nontender nodes are 
frequently felt.
Gynecomastia arises from an imbal-
ance of estrogens and androgens, 
sometimes drug related; it is not a risk 
factor for male breast cancer. A hard, 
irregular, eccentric, or ulcerating pain-
less dominant mass suggests breast 
cancer.4,62,63 
Sweat gland infection from follicular 
occlusion (hidradenitis suppurativa) 
may be present. 
Deeply pigmented velvety axillary 
skin suggests acanthosis nigricans—
associated with diabetes; obesity; 
polycystic ovary syndrome; and, 
rarely, malignant paraneoplastic  
disorders. 
Enlarged axillary nodes may result 
from infection of the hand or arm, 
recent immunizations or skin tests, or 
generalized lymphadenopathy. Check 
the epitrochlear nodes medial to the 
elbow and other groups of lymph 
nodes. 
F I G U R E  1 0 - 1 7 .  Palpate the left 
axilla.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  10 |
 
The Breasts and Axillae 
441
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Right Axilla. Use your left hand to examine the right axilla.
If the central nodes feel large, hard, or tender, or if there is a suspicious lesion in 
the drainage areas for the axillary nodes, palpate for the other groups of axillary 
lymph nodes:
■ Pectoral nodes—grasp the anterior axillary fold between your thumb and 
ﬁngers, and with your ﬁngers, palpate inside the border of the pectoral 
muscle.
■ Lateral nodes—from high in the axilla, feel along the upper humerus.
■ Subscapular nodes—step behind the patient and, with your ﬁngers, feel inside 
the muscle of the posterior axillary fold.
■ Infraclavicular and supraclavicular nodes—Also re-examine the infraclavicular 
and supraclavicular nodes.
Special Techniques
Examination of the Mastectomy or Breast Augmentation 
Patient. The woman with a mastectomy warrants special care on examination.
Inspection. Inspect the mastectomy scar and axilla carefully for any 
masses, unusual nodularity, or signs of inﬂammation or infection. Lymphedema 
may be present in the axilla and upper arm from lymph drainage interrupted by 
surgery.
Palpation. Palpate gently along the scar—these tissues may be unusually 
sensitive. Palpate the breast tissue and incision lines bordering breast augmenta-
tion or reconstruction. Use a circular motion with two or three ﬁngers. Pay 
special attention to the upper outer quadrant and axilla. Note any enlarged 
lymph nodes.
Instructions for the Breast Self-Examination. For interested or 
high-risk patients, instruct the patient about how to perform the BSE. A high 
proportion of breast masses are detected by women examining their own breasts. 
For screening, the BSE has not been shown to reduce breast cancer mortality, but 
may promote health awareness and earlier reporting of breast changes or masses, 
which may reduce unnecessary testing and biopsies compared to monthly self-
examination.7,41 The BSE is best timed 5 to 7 days after menses, when hormonal 
stimulation of breast tissue is low.
Nodes that are large (≥1 to 2 cm) and 
firm or hard, matted together, or fixed 
to the skin or underlying tissues sug-
gest malignancy. 
Masses, nodularity, and change in 
color or inflammation, especially in 
the incision line, suggest recurrence 
of breast cancer. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
442 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Patient Instructions for the Breast Self-Examination— 
American Cancer Society
Lying Supine
1. Lie down with a pillow under your right shoulder. Place 
your right arm behind your head.
2. Use the ﬁnger pads of the three middle ﬁngers on your 
left hand to feel for lumps in the right breast. The ﬁnger 
pads are the top third of each ﬁnger. Make overlapping, 
dime-sized circular motions to feel the breast tissue.
3. Apply three levels of pressure in each spot: light, me-
dium, and ﬁrm, using ﬁrmer pressure for tissue closest 
to the chest and ribs. A ﬁrm ridge in the lower curve 
of each breast is normal. If you’re not sure how hard to 
press, talk with your health care provider, or try to copy 
the way the doctor or nurse does it.a
4. Examine the breast in an up-and-down or “strip” pat-
tern. Start at an imaginary straight line under the arm, 
moving up and down across the entire breast, from the 
ribs to the collarbone, until you reach the middle of the 
chest bone (the sternum). Remember how your breast 
feels from month to month.
5. Repeat the examination on your left breast, using the 
ﬁnger pads of the right hand.
6. If you ﬁnd any masses, lumps, or skin changes, see your 
clinician right away.
Standing
1. While standing in front of a mirror with your hands 
pressing ﬁrmly down on your hips, look at your breasts 
for any changes of size, shape, contour, or dimpling, or 
redness or scaliness of the nipple or breast skin. (The 
pressing down on the hips position contracts the chest 
wall muscles and enhances any breast changes.)
2. Examine each underarm while sitting up or standing and 
with your arm only slightly raised so you can easily feel 
in this area. Raising your arm straight up tightens the 
tissue in this area and makes it harder to examine.
Adapted from the American Cancer Society. American Cancer Society. Breast awareness and self-exam. Updated April 9, 2015. Available at http://www.
cancer.org/cancer/breastcancer/moreinformation/breastcancerearlydetection/breast-cancer-early-detection-acs-recs-bse. Accessed May 7, 2015.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  10 |
 
The Breasts and Axillae 
443
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
Note that initially you may use sentences to describe your ﬁndings; later you will 
use phrases.
Recording Your Findings
These findings suggest possible 
breast cancer. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Recording the Breasts and Axillae Examination
“Breasts symmetric and smooth without nodules or masses. Nipples without 
discharge.” (Axillary adenopathy usually included after Neck in section on 
Lymph Nodes; see p. 266.)
OR
“Breasts pendulous with diﬀuse ﬁbrocystic changes. Single ﬁrm 1 × 1 cm mass, 
mobile and nontender, with overlying peau d’orange appearance in right breast, 
upper outer quadrant at 11 o’clock, 2 cm from the nipple.”
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
444 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
444 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 10-1 Common Breast Masses
The three most common breast masses are ﬁbroadenoma (a benign tumor), cysts, and breast cancer. The clinical characteristics  
of these masses are listed below. However, any breast mass should be carefully evaluated and usually warrants further 
investigation by ultrasound, aspiration, mammography, or biopsy. The masses depicted below are large for purposes of 
illustration. Fibrocystic changes, not illustrated, are also commonly palpable as nodular, rope-like densities in women aged 25 to  
50 years. They may be tender or painful. They are considered benign and not a risk factor for breast cancer.
Fibroadenoma
Cysts
Cancer
Usual Age (in 
Years)
15–25 years, usually puberty 
and young adulthood, but up 
to age 55 years
30–50 years, regress after 
menopause except with 
estrogen therapy
30–90 years, most common 
over age 50 years
Number
Usually single, may be multiple
Single or multiple
Usually single, although may 
coexist with other nodules
Shape
Round, disclike, or lobular; 
typically small (1–2 cm)
Round
Irregular or stellate
Consistency
May be soft, usually ﬁrm
Soft to ﬁrm, usually elastic
Firm or hard
Delimitation
Well delineated
Well delineated
Not clearly delineated from 
surrounding tissues
Mobility
Very mobile
Mobile
May be ﬁxed to skin or 
underlying tissues
Tenderness
Usually nontender
Often tender
Usually nontender
Retraction Signs
Absent
Absent
May be present
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  10 |
 
The Breasts and Axillae 
445
Table 10-2 Visible Signs of Breast Cancer
Cancer
Dimpling
Retracted
nipple
Retraction Signs
As breast cancer advances, it causes ﬁbrosis (scar tissue). 
Shortening of this tissue produces dimpling, changes in contour, 
and retraction or deviation of the nipple. Other causes of 
retraction include fat necrosis and mammary duct ectasia.
Abnormal Contours
Look for any variation in the normal convexity of each breast, 
and compare one side with the other. Special positioning may 
again be useful. Shown here is marked ﬂattening of the lower 
outer quadrant of the left breast.
Skin Dimpling
Look for this sign with the patient’s arm at rest, during special 
positioning, and on moving or compressing the breast, as 
illustrated here.
Nipple Retraction and Deviation
A retracted nipple is ﬂattened or pulled inward, as illustrated 
here. It may also be broadened, and feels thickened. When 
involvement is radially asymmetric, the nipple may deviate or 
point in a different direction from its normal counterpart, 
typically toward the underlying cancer.
Edema of the Skin
Edema of the skin is produced by lymphatic blockade. It 
appears as thickened skin with enlarged pores—the so-called 
peau d’orange (orange peel) sign. It is often seen ﬁrst in the 
lower portion of the breast or areola.
Dermatitis of
areola
Erosion of
nipple
Paget Disease of the Nipple
This uncommon form of breast cancer usually starts as a scaly, 
eczema-like lesion on the nipple that may weep, crust, or 
erode. A breast mass may be present. Suspect Paget disease  
in any persisting dermatitis of the nipple and areola. Often 
(>60%) presents with an underlying in situ or invasive ductal 
or lobular carcinoma.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
446 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
References
 1. Loukas M, Clarke P, Tubbs RS. Accessory breasts: A historical and 
current perspective. Am Surg. 2007;73:525.
 2. Carlson HE. Approach to the patient with gynecomastia. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab. 2011;96:15.
 3. Santen RJ, Mansel R. Benign breast disorders. N Engl J Med. 2005; 
353:275.
 4. Johnson RE, Murad MH. Gynecomastia: pathophysiology, evalua-
tion, and management. Mayo Clin Proc. 2009;84:1010.
 5. Barton MB, Harris R, Fletcher SW. Does this patient have breast 
cancer? The screening clinical breast examination: should it be 
done? How? JAMA. 1999;282:1270.
 6. Salzman B, Fleegle S, Tully AS. Common breast problems. Am Fam 
Physician. 2012;86:343.
 7. American Cancer Society. Breast Cancer Facts & Figures 2013–2014. 
Atlanta, GA: American Cancer Society Inc; 2013. Available at 
http://www.cancer.org/acs/groups/content/@research/documents/
document/acspc-042725.pdf. Accessed May 1, 2015.
 8. National Cancer Institute. Breast Cancer–Breast cancer treatment 
(updated April 8, 2015). Breast cancer prevention (updated Febru-
ary 27, 2015). Breast cancer screening (updated April 2, 2015). 
Available at http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/types/breast. 
Accessed May 2, 2015.
 9. Walker K, Bratton DJ, Frost C. Premenopausal endogenous oestro-
gen levels and breast cancer risk: a meta-analysis. Br J Cancer. 
2011;105:1451.
 10. Key TJ. Endogenous oestrogens and breast cancer risk in premeno-
pausal and postmenopausal women. Steroids. 2011;76:812.
 11. Zeleniuch-Jacquotte A, Afanasyeva Y, Kaaks R, et al. Premeno-
pausal serum androgens and breast cancer risk: a nested case-con-
trol study. Breast Cancer Res. 2012;14:R32.
 12. Nattinger A. In the clinic: breast cancer screening and prevention. 
Ann Intern Med. 2010;152:ITC4.
 13. National Cancer Institute. Male breast cancer treatment (updated 
March 27, 2015). Available at http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/
pdq/treatment/malebreast/HealthProfessional. Accessed May 2, 2015.
 14. Johansen Taber KA, Morisy LR, Osbahr AJ 3rd. Male breast cancer: 
risk factors, diagnosis, and management (review). Oncol Rep. 2010; 
24:1115.
 15. National Cancer Institute. Breast Cancer Risk Assessment Tool. 
Available at http://www.cancer.gov/bcrisktool. Accessed May 2, 
2015.
 16. National Cancer Institute. Genetics of breast and gynecologic can-
cers (updated April 3, 2015). Available at http://www.cancer.gov/
cancertopics/pdq/genetics/breast-and-ovarian/HealthProfessional. 
Accessed May 3, 2015.
 17. Gail MH, Costantino JP, Pee D, et al. Projecting individualized 
absolute invasive breast cancer risk in African American women. 
J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007;99:1782.
 18. Evans DG, Howell A. Review: breast cancer risk-assessment tools. 
Breast Cancer Res. 2007;9:213.
 19. Parmigiani G, Chen S, Iversen ES Jr, et al. Validity of models for 
predicting BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations. Ann Intern Med. 2007; 
147:441.
 20. Smith RA, Manassaram-Baptiste D, Brooks D, et al. Cancer screen-
ing in the United States, 2015: a review of current American cancer 
society guidelines and current issues in cancer screening. CA Cancer 
J Clin. 2015;65:30.
 21. American Cancer Society. American Cancer Society recommenda-
tions for early breast cancer detection in women without breast 
symptoms. Updated April 9, 2015. Available at http://www. 
cancer.org/cancer/breastcancer/moreinformation/breastcancerear-
lydetection/breast-cancer-early-detection-acs-recs. Accessed May 3, 
2015.
 22. Tice JA, O’Meara ES, Weaver DL, et al. Benign breast disease, mam-
mographic breast density, and the risk of breast cancer. J Natl Cancer 
Inst. 2013;105:1043.
 23. Boggs DA, Rosenberg L, Adams-Campbell LL, et al. Prospective 
approach to breast cancer risk prediction in African American 
women: The Black Women’s Health Study model. J Clin Oncol. 
2015;33:1038.
 24. Chen J, Pee D, Ayyagari R, et al. Projecting absolute invasive breast 
cancer risk in white women with a model that includes mammo-
graphic density. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2006;98:1215.
 25. Claus EB, Risch N, Thompson WD. Autosomal dominant inheri-
tance of early-onset breast cancer. Cancer. 1994;73:643.
 26. BaysMendel Lab. BRCAPRO. Available at http://bcb.dfci.harvard.
edu/bayesmendel/software.php. Accessed May 3, 2015.
 27. Nelson HD, Pappas M, Zakher B, et al. Risk assessment, genetic 
counseling, and genetic testing for BRCA-related cancer in women: 
a systematic review to update the U.S. Preventive Services Task 
Force recommendation. Ann Intern Med. 2014;160:255.
 28. Hartmann LC, Degnim AC, Santen RJ, et al. Atypical hyperplasia 
of the breast—risk assessment and management options. N Engl J 
Med. 2015;372:78.
 29. Hartmann LC, Sellers TA, Frost MH, et al. Benign breast disorders 
and the risk of breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:229.
 30. Dyrstad SW, Yan Y, Fowler AM, et al. Breast cancer risk associated 
with benign breast disease: systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015;149:569.
 31. Wang AT, Vachon CM, Brandt KR, et al. Breast density and breast 
cancer risk: a practical review. Mayo Clin Proc. 2014;89:548.
 32. Boyd NF, Marting LJ, Yaffe MJ, et al. Mammographic density and 
breast cancer risk: current understanding and future prospects. 
Breast Cancer Res. 2011;13:223.
 33. Nelson HD, Zakher B, Cantor A, et al. Risk factors for breast cancer 
for women aged 40 to 49 years: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2012;156:635.
 34. Boyd NF, Guo H, Li M, et al. Mammographic density and the risk 
and detection of breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:227.
 35. Carney PA, Miglioretti DL, Yankaskas BC, et al. Individual and 
combined effects of age, breast density, and hormone replacement 
therapy use on the accuracy of screening mammography. Ann 
Intern Med. 2005;138:168.
 36. Loburg M, Lousdal ML, Bretthauer M, et al. Beneﬁts and harms of 
mammography screening. Breast Cancer Res. 2015;17:63.
 37. Kalager M, Adami HO, Bretthauer M. Too much mammography. 
BMJ. 2014;348:g1403.
 38. Smith RA, Saslow D, Sawyer KA, et al; American Cancer Society 
High-Risk Work Group; American Cancer Society Screening Older 
Women Work Group; American Cancer Society Mammography 
Work Group; American Cancer Society Physical Examination Work 
Group; American Cancer Society New Technologies Work Group; 
American Cancer Society Breast Cancer Advisory Group. American 
Cancer Society guidelines for breast cancer screening: update 2003. 
CA Cancer J Clin. 2003;53:141. Available at http://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/10.3322/canjclin.53.3.141/full. Accessed May 4, 
2015.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  10 |
 
The Breasts and Axillae 
447
REFERENCES
 39. Nelson HD, Tyne K, Haik A, et al. Screening for breast cancer: an 
update for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 
2009;151:727.
 40. Miller AB, Wall C, Baines CJ, et al. Twenty ﬁve year follow-up for 
breast cancer incidence and mortality of the Canadian National 
Breast Screening Study: randomized screening trial. BMJ. 2014; 
348:g366.
 41. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for breast cancer: 
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. 
Ann Intern Med. 2009;151:716.
 42. Qaseem A, Snow SV, Aronson M, et al. Screening mammography 
for women 40 to 49 years of age: a clinical practice guideline from 
the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2007;146:511.
 43. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Practice 
bulletin No. 122: breast cancer screening. Obstet Gynecol. 2011; 
118(2 pt 1):372.
 44. Wilke LG, Broadwater G, Rabiner S, et al. Breast self-examination: 
deﬁning a cohort still in need. Am J Surg. 2009;198:575.
 45. Vogel VG, Constantino JP, Wickerham DL, et al. Effects of tamoxi-
fen vs. raloxifene on the risk of developing invasive breast cancer 
and other disease outcomes: the NSABP study of tamoxifen and 
raloxifene (STAR) P-2 trial. JAMA. 2006;295:2727.
 46. Vogel VG, Constantino JP, Wickerham D, et al. Update of the 
National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project Study of 
Tamoxifen and Raloxifene (STAR) P-2 Trail. Cancer Prev Res. 2010; 
3:696.
 47. Nelson HD, Smith ME, Grifﬁn JC, et al. Use of medications to 
reduce risk for primary breast cancer: a systematic review for the 
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2013;158:604.
 48. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Breast Cancer—Recommen-
dations of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. The Guide to 
Clinical Preventive Services 2014, p. 15. Available at http://www.
uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name/tools-and-
resources-for-better-preventive-care. Accessed May 6, 2015.
 49. Moyer VA, on behalf of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. 
Medications for Risk Reduction of Primary Breast Cancer in 
Women: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation 
Statement. Ann Intern Med. 2013;159:698.
 50. Waters EA, McNeel TS, Stevens WM, et al. Use of tamoxifen and 
raloxifene for breast cancer chemoprevention in 2010. Breast Cancer 
Res Treat. 2012;134:875.
 51. Goss PE, Ingle JN, Ales-Martinez JE, et al. Exemestane for breast 
cancer prevention in postmenopausal women. N Engl J Med. 2011; 
364:2381.
 52. Cuzick J, Sestak I, Forbes JF, et al. Anastrozole for prevention of 
breast cancer in high-risk postmenopausal women (IBIS-II): an 
international, double-blind, randomised placebo-controlled trial. 
Lancet. 2014;383(9922):1041.
 53. Elmore JG, Gigerenzer G. Benign breast disease: the risks of com-
municating risk (editorial). N Engl J Med. 2005;353:297.
 54. Roussouw JE, Anderson GL, Prentice RL, et al. Risks and beneﬁts 
of estrogen plus progestin in healthy postmenopausal women: 
principal results from the Women’s Health Initiative randomized 
controlled trial. JAMA. 2002;288:321.
 55. Barton MB, Elmore JG. Pointing the way to informed medical deci-
sion making: test characteristics of clinical breast examination. 
J Natl Cancer Inst. 2009;101:1223.
 56. Fenton JJ, Barton MB, Geiger AM, et al. Screening clinical breast 
examination: how often does it miss lethal breast cancer? J Natl 
Cancer Inst Monogr. 2005;(35):67.
 57. Miller AB, Baines CJ. The role of clinical breast examination and 
breast self-examination. Prev Med. 2011;53:118.
 58. Chiarelli AM, Majpruz V, Brown P, et al. The contribution of clinical 
breast examination to the accuracy of breast screening. J Natl Cancer 
Inst. 2009;101:1236.
 59. Bryan T, Snyder E. The clinical breast exam: a skill that should not 
be abandoned. J Gen Intern Med. 2013;28:719.
 60. Sandoval-Leon AC, Drews-Elger K, Gomez-Fernandez CR, et al. 
Paget’s disease of the nipple. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013;141:1.
 61. Pearlman MD, Grifﬁn JL. Benign breast disease. Obstet Gynecol. 
2010;116:747.
 62. Hines SL, Tan W, Larson JM, et al. A practical approach to guide 
clinicians in the evaluation of male patients with breast masses. 
Geriatrics. 2008;63:19.
 63. Morcos RN, Kizy T. Gynecomastia: when is treatment indicated?  
J Fam Pract. 2012;61:719.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
449
Visualize or palpate the bony landmarks of the abdominal wall and pelvis, as 
shown in Figure 11-1: the xiphoid process, iliac crest, anterior superior iliac spine, 
pubic tubercle, and symphysis pubis. The rectus abdominis muscles become more 
prominent when the patient raises the head and shoulders or lifts the legs from 
the supine position.
C H A P T E R 11
The Abdomen
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate 
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 13: Abdomen)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com
Anatomy and Physiology
Rectus abdominis
muscle
Umbilicus
Inguinal ligament
Pubic tubercle
Xiphoid process
Costal margin
Midline, overlying
linea alba
Anterior superior
iliac spine
Symphysis pubis
Iliac crest
F I G U R E  1 1 - 1 .  Landmarks of the abdomen.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
450 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
For descriptive purposes, the 
abdomen is often divided by 
imaginary lines crossing at the 
umbilicus, forming the right 
upper, right lower, left upper, and 
left lower quadrants (Fig. 11-2). 
Another system divides the abdo-
men into nine sections. Terms for 
three of them are commonly used: 
epigastric, umbilical, and hypogas-
tric or suprapubic (Fig. 11-3).
The abdomen, or the abdominopelvic 
cavity, lies between the thoracic dia-
phragm and the pelvic diaphragm 
and contains two continuous cavities, 
the abdominal cavity and the pelvic 
cavity, enclosed by a ﬂexible multilay-
ered wall of muscles and sheet-like 
tendons. This extended cavity houses 
most of the digestive organs, the 
spleen, and parts of the urogenital 
system (Fig. 11-4). Lining this cavity 
and folding over viscera such as the 
stomach and intestines are the pari-
etal and visceral peritoneum.
Examine the abdomen, moving in a 
clockwise rotation; several organs 
are often palpable. Exceptions are 
the stomach and much of the liver 
and spleen which lie high in the 
abdominal cavity close to the dia-
phragm, where they are protected 
by the thoracic ribs beyond the 
reach of the palpating hand. The 
dome of the diaphragm lies at about 
the ﬁfth anterior inter costal space.
RUQ
LUQ
RLQ
LLQ
F I G U R E  1 1 - 2 .  Quadrants of the 
abdomen.
Epigastric
Umbilical
Hypogastric
or
suprapubic
F I G U R E  1 1 - 3 .  Sections of the 
abdomen.
Liver
Lower pole of
right kidney
Ascending colon
Cecum
Full bladder
Xiphoid
process
Aorta
Transverse colon
Descending and
sigmoid colon
Iliac artery
Gallbladder
Duodenum
Spleen
Stomach
Pancreas
F I G U R E  1 1 - 4 .  Abdominal viscera.
Abdominal Structures by Quadrant
Right upper quadrant
Liver, gallbladder, pylorus, duodenum, hepatic 
ﬂexure of colon, and head of pancreas
Left upper quadrant
Spleen, splenic ﬂexure of colon, stomach, body 
and tail of pancreas, and transverse colon
Left lower quadrant
Sigmoid colon, descending colon, left ovary
Right lower quadrant
Cecum, appendix, ascending colon, right ovary
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
451
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
■ In the right upper quadrant (RUQ), the soft consistency of the liver makes 
it difﬁcult to palpate through the abdominal wall. The lower margin of the 
liver, the liver edge, is often palpable at the right costal margin. The gall-
bladder, which rests against the inferior surface of the liver, and the more 
deeply lying duodenum are generally not palpable. Moving medially, the 
examiner encounters the rib cage with its xiphoid process, which protects 
the stomach. The abdominal aorta often has visible pulsations and is usu-
ally palpable in the upper abdomen, or epigastrium. At a deeper level, the 
lower pole of the right kidney and the tip of the 12th ﬂoating rib may be 
palpable, especially in children and thin individuals with relaxed abdom-
inal muscles.
■ In the left upper quadrant (LUQ), the spleen is lateral to and behind the stom-
ach, just above the left kidney in the left midaxillary line. Its upper margin 
rests against the dome of the diaphragm. The 9th, 10th, and 11th ribs protect 
most of the spleen. The tip of the spleen may be palpable below the left cos-
tal margin in a small percentage of adults (in contrast to readily palpable 
splenic enlargement, or splenomegaly). In healthy people the pancreas cannot 
be detected.
■ In the left lower quadrant (LLQ), you can often palpate the ﬁrm, narrow, tu-
bular sigmoid colon. Portions of the transverse and descending colon may 
also be palpable, especially if stool is present. In the lower midline are the 
bladder, the sacral promontory consisting of the bony anterior edge of the S1 
vertebra (sometimes mistaken for a tumor), and, in women, the uterus and 
ovaries.
■ In the right lower quadrant (RLQ) are bowel loops and the appendix at the base 
of the cecum near the junction of the small and large intestines. In healthy 
people, these are not palpable.
The kidneys are retroperitoneal (poste-
rior) organs. The ribs protect their 
upper poles (Fig. 11-5). The costoverte-
bral angle (CVA), formed by the lower 
border of the 12th rib and the trans-
verse processes of the upper lumbar 
vertebrae, deﬁnes where to examine for 
kidney tenderness, called costoverte-
bral angle tenderness (CVAT).
Continuous with the abdominal cavity, 
but angulated posteriorly, lies the fun-
nel-shaped pelvic cavity, which contains 
the terminal ureters, bladder, pelvic 
genital organs, and, at times, loops of 
small and large intestine. These organs 
are partially protected by the surround-
ing pelvis.
Costovertebral
angle
Kidney
11th rib
12th rib
F I G U R E  1 1 - 5 .  Kidneys and costovertebral angle.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
452 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The bladder is a hollow reservoir with strong smooth muscle walls composed 
chieﬂy of detrusor muscle. It accommodates roughly 400 to 500 mL of urine ﬁl-
tered by the kidneys into the renal pelvis and the ureters. Bladder expansion 
stimulates parasympathetic innervation at relatively low pressures, resulting in 
detrusor contraction and inhibition (relaxation) of the internal urethral sphincter, 
also under autonomic control. Voiding further requires relaxation of the external 
urethral sphincter, composed of striated muscle under voluntary control. Rising 
pressure triggers the conscious urge to void, but can be overcome by increased 
intraurethral pressure that prevents incontinence. Intraurethral pressure is 
related to smooth muscle tone in the internal urethral sphincter, the thickness of 
the urethral mucosa, and, in women, sufﬁcient support to the bladder and prox-
imal urethra from pelvic muscles and ligaments to maintain proper anatomical 
relationships. Striated muscle around the urethra can also contract voluntarily to 
interrupt voiding (Fig. 11-6).
Internal 
urethral 
sphincter
External 
urethral 
sphincter
Detrusor 
muscle
Uterus
Bladder
Urethra
Vagina
Rectum
F I G U R E  1 1 - 6 .  Pelvic anatomy.
A distended bladder may be palpable 
above the symphysis pubis. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Neuroregulatory control of the bladder functions at several levels. In infants, the 
bladder empties by reﬂex mechanisms in the sacral spinal cord. Voluntary con-
trol of the bladder depends on higher centers in the brain and motor and sen-
sory pathways connecting the brain and the reﬂex arcs of the sacral spinal cord. 
When voiding is inconvenient, higher centers in the brain can inhibit detrusor 
contractions until the capacity of the bladder, approximately 400 to 500 mL, is 
exceeded. The integrity of the sacral nerves that innervate the bladder can be 
tested by assessing perirectal and perineal sensation in the S2, S3, and S4 der-
matomes (see p. 764).
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
453
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Gastrointestinal (GI) complaints rank high among reasons for ofﬁce and emergency 
room visits. You will encounter a wide variety of upper GI symptoms, including 
abdominal pain, heartburn, nausea and vomiting, difﬁculty or pain with swallow-
ing, vomiting of stomach contents or blood, loss of appetite, and jaundice. 
Abdominal pain alone accounted for more than 1.5 million outpatient visits and 
11 million emergency room visits in 2011.1,2 Lower GI complaints are also com-
mon: diarrhea, constipation, change in bowel habits, and blood in the stool, often 
described as either bright red or dark and tarry.
Numerous symptoms also originate in the genitourinary tract: difﬁculty urinating, 
urgency and frequency, hesitancy and decreased stream in men, high urine vol-
ume, urinating at night, incontinence, blood in the urine, and ﬂank pain and 
colic from renal stones or infection. These are often accompanied by GI symp-
toms such as abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting.
Your skills in history taking and examination, and clustering your ﬁndings, are 
important determinants of sound clinical reasoning and an astute differential 
diagnosis.
Patterns and Mechanisms of  
Abdominal Pain
Before exploring common symptoms, review the mechanisms and clinical pat-
terns of abdominal pain. There are three broad categories of abdominal pain:
■ Visceral pain occurs when hollow abdominal organs such as the intestine 
or biliary tree contract unusually forcefully or are distended or stretched 
(Fig. 11-7). Solid organs such as the liver can also become painful when their 
capsules are stretched. Visceral pain may be difﬁcult to localize. It is typically 
palpable near the midline at levels that vary according to the structure 
involved, as illustrated on the next page. Ischemia also stimulates visceral 
pain ﬁbers. 
The Health History
Common or Concerning Symptoms
Gastrointestinal Disorders
Urinary and Renal Disorders
Abdominal pain, acute and chronic
Indigestion, nausea, vomiting includ-
ing blood (hematemesis), loss of 
appetite (anorexia), early satiety
Diﬃculty swallowing (dysphagia) and/
or painful swallowing (odynophagia)
Change in bowel function
Diarrhea, constipation
Jaundice
Suprapubic pain
Diﬃculty urinating (dysuria), urgency, 
or frequency
Hesitancy, decreased stream in males
Excessive urination (polyuria) or 
excess urination at night (nocturia)
Urinary incontinence
Blood in the urine (hematuria)
Flank pain and ureteral colic
See Table 11-1, Abdominal Pain,  
pp. 488–489. 
Visceral pain in the RUQ suggests liver 
distention against its capsule from the 
various causes of hepatitis, including 
alcoholic hepatitis. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
454 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
 
Visceral pain varies in quality and may be gnawing, burning, cramping, or 
aching. When it becomes severe, sweating, pallor, nausea, vomiting, and 
restlessness may follow.
Visceral periumbilical pain suggests 
early acute appendicitis from disten-
tion of an inflamed appendix. It grad-
ually changes to parietal pain in the 
RLQ from inflammation of the adja-
cent parietal peritoneum. For pain 
disproportionate to physical findings, 
suspect intestinal mesenteric ischemia. 
Epigastric pain from
the stomach, duodenum,
or pancreas
Periumbilical pain
from the small
intestine, appendix,
or proximal colon
Hypogastric pain
from the colon,
bladder, or uterus.
Colon pain may
be more diffuse
than illustrated.
Right upper quadrant or
epigastric pain from the
biliary tree and liver
Suprapubic or sacral
pain from the rectum
F I G U R E  1 1 - 7 .  Types of visceral pain.
■ Parietal pain originates from inﬂammation of the parietal peritoneum, called 
peritonitis. It is a steady, aching pain that is usually more severe than visceral 
pain and more precisely localized over the involved structure. It is typically 
aggravated by movement or coughing. Patients with parietal pain usually 
prefer to lie still.
■ Referred pain is felt in more distant sites which are innervated at approxi-
mately the same spinal levels as the disordered structures. Referred pain 
often develops as the initial pain becomes more intense and seems to radiate 
or travel from the initial site. It may be palpated superﬁcially or deeply but 
is usually localized.
Pain may also be referred to the abdomen from the chest, spine, or pelvis, 
further complicating the assessment of abdominal pain.
In contrast to peritonitis, patients with 
colicky pain from a renal stone move 
around frequently trying to find a 
comfortable position. 
Pain of duodenal or pancreatic origin 
may be referred to the back, pain 
from the biliary tree, to the right 
scapular region or the right posterior 
thorax. 
Pain from pleurisy or inferior wall myo-
cardial infarction may be referred to 
the epigastric area. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
455
THE HEALTH HISTORY
The Gastrointestinal Tract
Upper Abdominal Pain, Discomfort, and Heartburn. The prevalence 
of recurrent upper abdominal discomfort or pain is approximately 25% in the 
United States and other Western countries.3 In recent years, consensus statements 
from expert societies have clariﬁed the deﬁnitions and classiﬁcation of numerous 
abdominal symptoms, particularly the 2006 Rome III criteria for functional GI 
disorders.4,5 Understanding carefully deﬁned terminology will help you identify 
the patient’s underlying condition.
Acute Upper Abdominal Pain or Discomfort. For patients with 
abdominal pain, causes range from benign to life threatening, so take the time to 
conduct a careful history.
■ First determine the timing of the pain. Is it acute or chronic? Acute abdominal 
pain has many patterns. Did the pain start suddenly or gradually? When did 
it begin? How long does it last? What is its pattern over a 24-hour period? 
Over weeks or months? Is the illness acute, or chronic and recurring?
■ Ask patients to describe the pain in their own words. Pursue important details: 
“Where does the pain start?” “Does it radiate or travel anywhere?” “What is 
the pain like?” If the patient has trouble describing the pain, try offering 
several choices: “Is it aching, burning, gnawing . . . ?”
■ Then ask the patient to point to the pain. Patients cannot always clearly 
describe the location of pain in words. The quadrant where the pain is lo-
cated helps identify the underlying organs that may be involved. If clothes 
interfere, repeat the question during the physical examination.
■ Ask the patient to rank the severity of the pain on a scale of 1 to 10. Note 
that severity does not always help identify the cause. Sensitivity to 
abdominal pain varies widely and tends to diminish in older adults, 
masking acute abdominal conditions. Individual differences in pain 
thresholds and accommodation to pain during daily activities also affect 
ratings of severity.
■ As you explore factors that aggravate or relieve the pain, pay special attention 
to body position, association with meals, alcohol, medications (including 
aspirin and aspirin-like drugs and any over-the-counter medications), 
stress, and use of antacids. Ask if indigestion or discomfort is related to 
exertion and relieved by rest.
Chronic Upper Abdominal Discomfort or Pain. Dyspepsia is deﬁned 
as chronic or recurrent discomfort or pain centered in the upper abdomen, char-
acterized by postprandial fullness, early satiety, and epigastric pain or burning.3,5 
Discomfort is deﬁned as a subjective negative feeling that is nonpainful. It can 
include various symptoms such as bloating, nausea, upper abdominal fullness, 
and heartburn.
Studies suggest that neuropeptides 
such as 5-hydroxytryptophan and 
substance P mediate interconnected 
symptoms of pain, bowel dysfunction, 
and stress.4 
In emergency rooms, 40% to 45% of 
patients have nonspecific pain, but 
15% to 30% need surgery, usually for 
appendicitis, intestinal obstruction,  
or cholecystitis.6 
Doubling over with cramping colicky 
pain signals a renal stone. Sudden knife-
like epigastric pain often radiating to 
the back is typical of pancreatitis.7–9 
Epigastric pain occurs with gastro-
esophageal reflex disease (GERD), pan-
creatitis, and perforated ulcers. RUQ 
and upper abdominal pain are com-
mon in cholecystitis and cholangitis.10 
Note that angina from inferior wall 
coronary artery disease may present 
as “indigestion,” but is precipitated by 
exertion and relieved by rest. See 
Table 8-1, Chest Pain, pp. 330–331. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
456 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
■ Note that bloating, nausea, or belching can occur alone but also can accom-
pany other disorders. If these conditions occur alone, they do not meet the 
criteria for dyspepsia.
■ Many patients with upper abdominal discomfort or pain will have functional, 
or nonulcer, dyspepsia, deﬁned as a 3-month history of nonspeciﬁc upper 
abdominal discomfort or nausea not attributable to structural abnormalities 
or peptic ulcer disease. Symptoms are usually recurring and present for more 
than 6 months.5
Many patients with chronic upper abdominal discomfort or pain complain of 
heartburn, dysphagia, or regurgitation. If patients report heartburn and regurgita-
tion together more than once a week, the accuracy of diagnosing GERD is over 
90%.3,11,12
■ Heartburn is a rising retrosternal burning pain or discomfort occurring 
weekly or more often. It is typically aggravated by foods such as alcohol, 
chocolate, citrus fruits, coffee, onions, and peppermint; or positions like 
bending over, exercising, lifting, or lying supine.
■ Some patients with GERD have atypical respiratory symptoms such as 
chest pain, cough, wheezing, and aspiration pneumonia. Others complain 
of pharyngeal symptoms, such as hoarseness chronic sore throat, and lar-
yngitis.13
■ Some patients may have “alarm symptoms,” such as 
■ Difﬁculty swallowing (dysphagia)
■ Pain with swallowing (odynophagia)
■ Recurrent vomiting
■ Evidence of GI bleeding
■ Early satiety
■ Weight loss
■ Anemia
■ Risk factors for gastric cancer
■ Palpable mass
■ Painless jaundice.
Multifactorial causes include delayed 
gastric emptying (20% to 40%), gas-
tritis from Helicobacter pylori (20% to 
60%), peptic ulcer disease (up to 15% 
if H. pylori is present), irritable bowel 
disease, and psychosocial factors.3 
These symptoms or mucosal damage 
on endoscopy are the diagnostic crite-
ria for GERD. Risk factors include 
reduced salivary flow, which prolongs 
acid clearance by damping action of 
the bicarbonate buffer; obesity; 
delayed gastric emptying; selected 
medications; and hiatal hernia. 
Angina from inferior wall coronary 
ischemia along the diaphragm may 
also present as heartburn. See  
Table 8-1, Chest Pain, pp. 330–331. 
A total of 30% to 90% of patients with 
asthma and 10% with specialty referral 
for throat conditions have GERD-like 
symptoms.
Patients who have uncomplicated 
GERD that fails empiric therapy, age 
>55 years, and “alarm symptoms” war-
rant endoscopy to evaluate possible 
esophagitis, peptic strictures, Barrett 
esophagus, or esophageal cancer. Of 
those with suspected GERD, ∼50% to 
85% have no disease on endoscopy.14,15 
Approximately 10% of patients with 
chronic heartburn have Barrett esopha-
gus, a metaplastic change in the esoph-
ageal lining from normal squamous to 
columnar epithelium. In those affected, 
dysplasia on endoscopy increases the 
risk of esophageal cancer from 0.1% to 
0.5% (no dysplasia) to 6% to 19% per 
patient year (high-grade dysplasia).14 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Bloating may occur with lactose intol-
erance, inflammatory bowel disease, or 
ovarian cancer; belching results from 
aerophagia, or swallowing air. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
457
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Lower Abdominal Pain and Discomfort. Lower abdominal pain and 
discomfort may be acute or chronic. Asking the patient to point to the pain and 
characterize all its features, combined with ﬁndings on the physical examination, 
is key to identifying possible causes. Some acute pain, especially in the suprapubic 
area or radiating from the ﬂank, originates in the genitourinary tract (see p. 463).
Acute Lower Abdominal Pain. Patients may complain of acute pain 
localized to the RLQ. Find out if it is sharp and continuous, or intermittent and 
cramping, causing them to double over.
When patients report acute pain in the LLQ or diffuse abdominal pain, investigate 
associated symptoms such as fever and loss of appetite.
Chronic Lower Abdominal Pain. If there is chronic pain in the quadrants 
of the lower abdomen, ask about change in bowel habits and alternating diar-
rhea and constipation.
Abdominal Pain and Associated Gastrointestinal Symptoms. 
Patients often experience abdominal pain in conjunction with other symptoms. 
Begin by asking “How is your appetite?” then pursue symptoms such as indigestion, 
nausea, vomiting, and anorexia. Indigestion is a general term for distress associated 
with eating that can have many meanings. Urge your patient to be more speciﬁc.
■ Nausea, often described as “feeling sick to my stomach,” may progress to 
retching and vomiting. Retching describes involuntary spasm of the stomach, 
diaphragm, and esophagus that precedes and culminates in vomiting, the 
forceful expulsion of gastric contents out of the mouth.
RLQ pain or pain that migrates from the 
periumbilical region, combined with 
abdominal wall rigidity on palpation, is 
suspicious for appendicitis. In women, 
consider pelvic inflammatory disease, 
ruptured ovarian follicle, and ectopic 
pregnancy. Combining signs with labo-
ratory inflammatory markers and CT 
scans markedly reduces misdiagnosis 
and unnecessary surgery.16–19 
Cramping pain radiating to the right 
or LLQ or groin may be a renal stone. 
LLQ pain, especially with a palpable 
mass, signals diverticulitis. Diffuse 
abdominal pain with abdominal dis-
tention, hyperactive high-pitched 
bowel sounds, and tenderness on pal-
pation marks small or large bowel 
obstruction (see pp. 488–489); pain 
with absent bowel sounds, rigidity, 
percussion tenderness, and guarding 
points to peritonitis. 
Change in bowel habits with a mass 
lesion warns of colon cancer. Intermit-
tent pain for 12 weeks of the preceding 
12 months with relief from defecation, 
change in frequency of bowel move-
ments, or change in form of stool 
(loose, watery, pellet-like), linked to 
luminal and mucosal irritants that alter 
motility, secretion, and pain sensitivity 
suggests irritable bowel syndrome.20 
Anorexia, nausea, and vomiting accom-
pany many GI disorders, including 
pregnancy, diabetic ketoacidosis, adre-
nal insufficiency, hypercalcemia, uremia, 
liver disease, emotional states, and 
adverse drug reactions. Induced vomit-
ing without nausea is more indicative 
of anorexia/bulimia. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
458 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
 
Some patients may not actually vomit but raise esophageal or gastric con-
tents without nausea or retching, called regurgitation.
 
Ask about any vomitus or regurgitated material and inspect it if possible, 
noting the color, odor, and quantity. Help the patient to specify the amount: 
a teaspoon? Two teaspoons? A cupful?
 
Ask speciﬁcally if the vomitus contains any blood, and quantify the amount. 
Gastric juice is clear and mucoid. Small amounts of yellowish or greenish 
bile are common and have no special signiﬁcance. Brownish or blackish 
vomitus with a “coffee grounds” appearance suggests blood altered by gastric 
acid. Coffee ground emesis or red blood is called hematemesis.
 
Is there any dehydration or electrolyte imbalance from prolonged vomiting 
or signiﬁcant blood loss? Do the patient’s symptoms suggest any complica-
tions of vomiting, such as aspiration into the lungs, seen in debilitated, 
obtunded, or elderly patients?
■ Anorexia is loss or lack of appetite. Find out if it arises from intolerance to 
certain foods, fear of abdominal discomfort (or “food fear”), or distortions in 
self-image. Check for associated nausea and vomiting.
Patients may complain of unpleasant abdominal fullness after light or moderate 
meals, or early satiety, the inability to eat a full meal. A dietary assessment or 
recall may be warranted (see Chapter 4, General Survey, Vital Signs, and Pain, 
pp. 117–118).
Other Gastrointestinal Symptoms
Difﬁculty Swallowing (Dysphagia) and/or Painful Swallowing (Ody-
nophagia). Less commonly, patients may report difﬁculty swallowing from 
impaired passage of solid foods or liquids from the mouth to the stomach, or 
dysphagia. Food seems to stick or “not go down right,” suggesting motility disor-
ders or structural anomalies. The sensation of a lump or foreign body in the 
throat unrelated to swallowing, called a globus sensation, is not true dysphagia.
Ask the patient to point to where the dysphagia occurs.
Pursue which types of foods provoke symptoms: solids, or solids and liquids? 
Establish the timing. When does the dysphagia start? Is it intermittent or persis-
tent? Is it progressing? If so, over what time period? Are there associated symp-
toms and clinical conditions?
Regurgitation occurs in GERD, esopha-
geal stricture, and esophageal cancer. 
Vomiting and pain indicate small 
bowel obstruction. Fecal odor occurs 
with small bowel obstruction and  
gastrocolic fistula. 
Hematemesis may accompany esoph-
ageal or gastric varices, Mallory–Weiss 
tears, or peptic ulcer disease. 
Symptoms of blood loss such as light-
headedness or syncope depend on the 
rate and volume of bleeding and are 
rare until blood loss exceeds 500 cm3. 
“Food fear” with abdominal pain and 
a slightly distended soft nontender 
abdomen are hallmarks of mesenteric 
ischemia. 
If fullness or early satiety, consider 
diabetic gastroparesis, anticholinergic 
medications, gastric outlet obstruction, 
and gastric cancer; if early satiety, also 
consider hepatitis. 
For types of dysphagia, see Table 11-2, 
Dysphagia, p. 490. 
Indicators of oropharyngeal dysphagia 
include drooling, nasopharyngeal 
regurgitation, and cough from aspira-
tion. Gurgling or regurgitation of undi-
gested food occurs in GERD, motility 
disorders, and structural disorders like 
esophageal stricture and Zenker diver-
ticulum. Causes are generally mechani-
cal/obstructive in younger adults and 
neurologic/muscular in older adults 
(stroke, Parkinson disease).21 
Pointing to below the sternoclavicular 
notch suggests esophageal dysphagia. 
If solid foods, consider structural 
causes like esophageal stricture, web-
bing or Schatzki ring, and neoplasm; if 
solids and liquids, a motility disorder 
like achalasia is more likely. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
459
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Is there odynophagia, or pain on swallowing?
Change in Bowel Function. To assess bowel function, start with open-
ended questions: “How are your bowel movements?” “How often do they occur 
in a week?” “Do you have any difﬁculties?” “Have you noticed any change in stool 
pattern or appearance?” The range of normal frequency is broad, and can be as 
low as three bowel movements per week.
Some patients may complain of passing excessive gas, or ﬂatus, normally about 
600 mL/d.
Diarrhea. Diarrhea is deﬁned as painless loose or watery stools during 
≥75% of defecations for the prior 3 months, with symptom onset at least 
6 months prior to diagnosis.22,23 Stool volume may increase to >200 g in 24 hours.
■ Ask about the duration. Acute diarrhea lasts up to 2 weeks. Chronic diarrhea 
is deﬁned as lasting 4 weeks or more.
■ Ask about the characteristics of the diarrhea, including volume, frequency, 
and consistency.
■ Is there mucus, pus, or blood? Is there associated tenesmus, a constant urge 
to defecate, accompanied by pain, cramping, and involuntary straining?
■ Does diarrhea occur at night?
■ Are the stools greasy or oily? Frothy? Foul-smelling? Floating on the surface 
because of excessive gas?
■ Explore associated features that are important in identifying possible causes. 
These include current and alternative medications, especially antibiotics, 
recent travel, diet patterns, baseline bowel habits, and risk factors for immu-
nocompromise.
Constipation. Ask about stool characteristics identiﬁed by the Rome III 
criteria, which stipulate that constipation should be present for the last 3 months 
Consider esophageal ulceration from 
ingestion of aspirin or nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory agents, caustic ingestion, 
radiation, or infection with Candida, 
cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex, or HIV. 
Causes include aerophagia, ingestion 
of legumes or other gas-producing 
foods, intestinal lactase deficiency, and 
irritable bowel syndrome. 
See Table 11-3, Diarrhea, pp. 491–493. 
Acute diarrhea, especially foodborne, 
is usually caused by infection.20 
Chronic diarrhea is typically noninfec-
tious in origin, as in Crohn disease and 
ulcerative colitis. 
High-volume frequent watery stools are 
usually from the small intestine; small-
volume stools with tenesmus, or diar-
rhea with mucus, pus, or blood occur in 
rectal inflammatory conditions. 
Nocturnal diarrhea is usually pathologic. 
Oily residue, sometimes frothy or 
floating, occurs with steatorrhea (fatty 
diarrheal stools) from malabsorption 
in celiac sprue, pancreatic insufficiency, 
and small bowel bacterial overgrowth. 
Diarrhea is common with use of peni-
cillins and macrolides, magnesium-
based antacids, metformin, and 
herbal and alternative medicines. If 
recent hospitalization, consider  
Clostridium difficile infection.24 
See Table 11-4, Constipation,  
p. 494. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
460 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
with symptom onset at least 6 months prior to diagnosis and meet at least two 
of the following conditions: fewer than three bowel movements per week; 25% 
or more defecations with either straining or sensation of incomplete evacuation; 
lumpy or hard stools; or manual facilitation.22,23
■ Check if the patient actually looks at the stool and can describe its color and 
bulk.
■ What remedies has the patient tried? Do medications or stress play a role? 
Are there associated systemic disorders?
■ Occasionally, there is no passage of either feces or gas, or obstipation.
■ Inquire about the color of stools. Is there melena, or black tarry stools, or 
hematochezia, stools that are red or maroon-colored? Determine the quantity 
and frequency of any blood.
■ Is the blood mixed in with stool or on the surface? Does the blood appear as 
streaks on the toilet paper or is it more copious?
Jaundice. Jaundice or icterus, is a striking yellowish discoloration of the 
skin and sclerae from increased levels of bilirubin, a bile pigment derived chieﬂy 
from the breakdown of hemoglobin. Normally, the hepatocytes conjugate 
unconjugated bilirubin with other substances, making the bile water soluble, 
and then excrete the conjugated bilirubin into the bile. The bile passes through 
the cystic duct into the common bile duct, which also drains the extrahepatic 
ducts from the liver. More distally, the common bile duct and the pancreatic 
ducts empty into the duodenum at the ampulla of Vater. Mechanisms of jaun-
dice are listed on next page.
Types of primary or functional consti-
pation are normal transit, slow transit, 
impaired expulsion (from pelvic floor 
disorders), and constipation-predomi-
nant irritable bowel syndrome. Sec-
ondary causes include medications 
and conditions like amyloidosis, diabe-
tes, and CNS disorders.25,26
Thin, pencil-like stool occurs in an 
obstructing “apple-core” lesion of the 
sigmoid colon. 
Anticholinergic agents, calcium channel 
blockers, iron supplements, and opiates 
can cause constipation. Constipation 
also occurs with diabetes, hypothyroid-
ism, hypercalcemia, multiple sclerosis, 
Parkinson disease, and systemic sclerosis. 
Obstipation signifies intestinal 
obstruction. 
See Table 11-5, Black and Bloody 
Stools, p. 495. 
Melena may appear with as little as 
100 mL of blood from upper GI bleed-
ing; hematochezia, if more than  
1,000 mL of blood, is usually from 
lower GI bleeding, but if massive can 
have an upper GI source.
Blood on the surface or toilet paper 
points to hemorrhoids. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
461
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Mechanisms of Jaundice
● Increased production of bilirubin
● Decreased uptake of bilirubin by the hepatocytes
● Decreased ability of the liver to conjugate bilirubin
● Decreased excretion of bilirubin into the bile, resulting in absorption of conju-
gated bilirubin back into the blood
Intrahepatic jaundice can be hepatocellular, from damage to the hepatocytes, 
or cholestatic, from impaired excretion as a result of damaged hepatocytes or 
intrahepatic bile ducts. Extrahepatic jaundice arises from obstruction of the 
extrahepatic bile ducts, most commonly the common bile ducts.
In patients with jaundice, pay special attention to the associated symptoms and 
setting in which the illness occurred. What was the color of the urine as the patient 
became ill? When the level of conjugated bilirubin increases in the blood, it may 
be excreted into the urine, turning the urine a dark yellowish brown or tea color. 
Unconjugated bilirubin is not water-soluble, so it is not excreted into urine. Is 
there any associated pain?
Ask also about the color of the stools. When excretion of bile into the intestine is 
completely obstructed, the stools become gray or light colored, or acholic, 
without bile.
Does the skin itch without other obvious explanation? Is there associated pain? 
What is its pattern? Has it been recurrent in the past?
Ask about risk factors for liver diseases, such as the following.
Predominantly unconjugated biliru-
bin occurs from the first three mecha-
nisms, as in hemolytic anemia 
(increased production) and Gilbert 
syndrome. 
Impaired excretion of conjugated 
bilirubin is seen in viral hepatitis, cir-
rhosis, primary biliary cirrhosis, and 
drug-induced cholestasis from drugs 
such as oral contraceptives, methyl 
testosterone, and chlorpromazine. 
Gallstones or pancreatic, cholangio-, 
or duodenal carcinoma may obstruct 
the common bile duct. 
Dark urine indicates impaired excre-
tion of bilirubin into the GI tract. 
Painless jaundice points to malig-
nant obstruction of the bile ducts, 
seen in duodenal or pancreatic carci-
noma; painful jaundice is commonly 
infectious in origin, as in hepatitis A 
and cholangitis. 
Acholic stools may occur briefly in 
viral hepatitis; they are common in 
obstructive jaundice. 
Itching occurs in cholestatic or 
obstructive jaundice. 
Risk Factors for Liver Disease
● Hepatitis: Travel or meals in areas of poor sanitation, ingestion of contami-
nated water or foodstuﬀs (hepatitis A); parenteral or mucous membrane expo-
sure to infectious body ﬂuids such as blood, serum, semen, and saliva, 
especially through sexual contact with an infected partner or use of shared 
needles for injection drug use (hepatitis B); illicit injection drug use or blood 
transfusion (hepatitis C)
● Alcoholic hepatitis or alcoholic cirrhosis (screen patients carefully about  
alcohol use)
● Toxic liver damage from medications, industrial solvents, environmental toxins, 
or some anesthetic agents
● Gallbladder disease or surgery that may result in extrahepatic biliary obstruction
● Hereditary disorders in the Family History
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
462 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
The Urinary Tract
General questions include: “Do you have any difﬁculty passing urine?” “How 
often do you go?” “Do you have to get up at night? How often?” “How much urine 
do you pass at a time?” “Is there any pain or burning?” “Do you ever rush to uri-
nate in time?” “Do you ever leak any urine? Or ﬁnd yourself wet unintentionally?” 
Does the patient sense when the bladder is full and when voiding occurs?
Ask women if sudden coughing, sneezing, or laughing causes loss of urine. 
Roughly half of young women report this experience even before bearing chil-
dren. Occasional leakage is not necessarily signiﬁcant. Ask older men, “Do you 
have trouble starting your stream?” “Do you have to stand close to the toilet to 
void?” “Is there a change in the force or size of your stream, or straining to void?” 
“Do you hesitate or stop in the middle of voiding?” “Is there dribbling when 
you’re through?”
Suprapubic Pain. Disorders in the urinary tract may cause pain in either 
the abdomen or the back. Bladder disorders may cause suprapubic pain. In 
bladder infection, pain in the lower abdomen is typically dull and pressure-like. 
In sudden overdistention of the bladder, pain is often agonizing; in contrast, 
chronic bladder distention is usually painless.
Dysuria, Urgency, or Frequency. Infection or irritation of the bladder or 
urethra frequently leads to pain on urination, usually felt as a burning sensation. 
Some clinicians refer to this as dysuria, whereas others use the term dysuria to refer 
to difﬁculty voiding. Women may report internal urethral discomfort, sometimes 
described as a pressure, or an external burning from the ﬂow of urine across irritated 
or inﬂamed labia. Men typically feel a burning sensation proximal to the glans penis. 
In contrast, prostatic pain is felt in the perineum and occasionally in the rectum.
Other commonly associated urinary symptoms are urgency, an unusually intense 
and immediate desire to void, sometimes leading to involuntary voiding or urge 
incontinence, and frequency, or abnormally frequent voiding. Ask about any 
related fever or chills, blood in the urine, or any pain in the abdomen, ﬂank, or 
back (see Fig. 11-8). Men with partial obstruction to urinary outﬂow often report 
hesitancy in starting the urine stream, straining to void, reduced caliber and force of 
the urinary stream, or dribbling as voiding is completed.27
Polyuria or Nocturia. Two additional terms describe important changes 
in patterns of urination. Polyuria refers to a signiﬁcant increase in 24-hour 
urine volume, roughly deﬁned as exceeding 3 L. It should be distinguished 
from urinary frequency, which can be either the high volume (polyuria) or low 
volume (infection). Nocturia refers to urinary frequency at night, sometimes 
deﬁned as awakening the patient more than once; urine volumes may be large 
or small. Clarify the patient’s daily total ﬂuid intake and how much occurs in 
the evening.
See Table 11-6, Frequency, Nocturia, 
and Polyuria, p. 496. 
Involuntary voiding or lack of aware-
ness suggests cognitive or neurosen-
sory deficits. 
Stress incontinence arises from 
decreased intraurethral pressure  
(see pp. 497–498).
These problems are common in men 
with partial bladder outlet obstruc-
tion from benign prostatic hyperplasia 
or urethral stricture. 
Pain from sudden overdistention 
accompanies acute urinary retention. 
Painful urination accompanies cystitis 
(bladder infection), urethritis, and uri-
nary tract infections, bladder stones, 
tumors, and, in men, acute prostatitis. 
Women report internal burning in  
urethritis, and external burning in  
vulvovaginitis. 
Urgency suggests urinary tract infec-
tion or irritation from possible urinary 
calculi. Frequency is common in uri-
nary tract infection and bladder neck 
obstruction. In men, painful urination 
without frequency or urgency sug-
gests urethritis. Associated flank or 
back pain suggests pyelonephritis.28,29 
See Table 15-3, Abnormalities of the 
Prostate, p. 623. 
Causes of polyuria include the high 
fluid intake of psychogenic polydipsia 
and poorly controlled diabetes, the 
decreased secretion of antidiuretic 
hormone (ADH) of central diabetes 
insipidus, and the decreased renal 
sensitivity to ADH of nephrogenic  
diabetes insipidus. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
463
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Urinary Incontinence. Up to 30% of older adults are concerned about 
urinary incontinence, an involuntary loss of urine that can be socially restricting and 
cause problems with hygiene. If the patient reports incontinence, ask if the 
patient is leaking small amounts of urine due to increased intra-abdominal 
pressure from coughing, sneezing, laughing, or lifting. Or following an urge to 
void, is there an involuntary loss of large amounts of urine? Is there a sensation 
of bladder fullness, frequent leakage, or voiding of small amounts but difﬁculty 
emptying the bladder?
Bladder control involves complex neuroregulatory and motor mechanisms 
(see p. 452). Several central or peripheral nerve lesions affecting S2 to S4 can 
affect normal voiding. Does the patient sense when the bladder is full? And 
when voiding occurs? There are ﬁve broad categories of incontinence, includ-
ing functional and mixed incontinence.
In addition, the patient’s functional status may affect voiding behaviors even 
when the urinary tract is intact. Is the patient mobile? Alert? Able to respond to 
voiding cues and reach the bathroom? Is alertness or voiding affected by medica-
tions?
Hematuria. Blood in the urine, or hematuria, is a major cause for concern. 
When visible to the naked eye, it is called gross hematuria; the urine may appear 
obviously bloody. Blood may be detected only during microscopic urinalysis, 
known as microscopic hematuria; smaller amounts of blood may tinge the urine 
with a pinkish or brownish cast. In women, be sure to distinguish menstrual 
blood from hematuria. If the urine is reddish, ask about medications that might 
discolor the urine. Test the urine with a dipstick and microscopic examination 
before you diagnose hematuria.
Flank Pain and Ureteral Colic. Disorders of the urinary tract may also 
cause kidney pain, often reported as ﬂank pain, at or below the posterior costal 
margin near the CVA. It may radiate anteriorly toward the umbilicus. Kidney 
pain is a visceral pain usually produced by distention of the renal capsule and 
typically dull, aching, and steady. Ureteral colic is a dramatically different severe 
colicky pain radiating around the trunk into the lower abdomen and groin, or 
possibly into the upper thigh, testicle, or labium. Ureteral pain results from 
sudden distention of the ureter and the renal pelvis. Ask about any associated 
fever, chills, or hematuria (Fig. 11-8).
See Table 11-7, Urinary Incontinence, 
pp. 497–498. 
In stress incontinence, increased 
abdominal pressure causes bladder 
pressure to exceed urethral resis-
tance—there is poor urethral sphinc-
ter tone or poor support of bladder 
neck. In urge incontinence, urgency is 
followed by involuntary leakage due 
to uncontrolled detrusor contractions 
that overcome urethral resistance. In 
overflow incontinence, neurologic dis-
orders or anatomic obstruction from 
pelvic organs or the prostate limit 
bladder emptying until the bladder 
becomes overdistended.30–32 
Myoglobin from rhabdomyolosis can 
also tinge the urine pink in the 
absence of red cells. 
Flank pain, fever, and chills signal 
acute pyelonephritis. 
Renal or ureteral colic is caused by 
sudden obstruction of a ureter, for 
example, from renal or urinary stones 
or blood clots.
Functional incontinence arises from 
impaired cognition, musculoskeletal 
problems, or immobility. Combined 
stress and urge incontinence is mixed 
incontinence. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
464 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Kidney pain
Ureteral pain
F I G U R E  1 1 - 8 .  Radiation of renal and ureteral pain.
Health Promotion and 
Counseling: Evidence and 
Recommendations
Important Topics for Health Promotion  
and Counseling
● Screening for alcohol abuse
● Viral hepatitis: risk factors, vaccines, and screening
● Screening for colon cancer
Screening for Alcohol Abuse. The 2013 National Survey on Drug Use 
and Health (NSDUH) estimated that over 130 million Americans ages 12 years 
and older, or 52.2%, were current alcohol users based on consumption of 
alcoholic beverages in the past 30 days; 16.5 million, or 6.3%, were classiﬁed as 
heavy drinkers and 60.1 million, or 22.9%, were classiﬁed as binge drinkers.33
Addictions are increasingly viewed as chronic relapsing behavioral disorders 
with substance-induced alterations of brain neurotransmitters resulting in 
tolerance, physical dependence, sensitization, craving, and relapse. The 
NSDUH data showed that about 17 million persons ages 12 years or older met 
criteria for alcohol use disorder (dependence or abuse), though only 1.4 million, 
or 7.9%, underwent treatment at a specialized facility.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
465
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Alert clinicians often notice clues of unhealthy alcohol use from social pat-
terns and behavioral issues that are elicited during the history. The patient 
may report a family history of substance abuse, unstable relationships, dif-
ﬁculty holding jobs, or legal problems related to violent behaviors or driving 
under the inﬂuence.34,35 Many clinical conditions are associated with chronic 
excessive alcohol use, including GI diseases, malignancies, cardiovascular 
diseases, mental health problems, nutritional deﬁciencies, and neurologic 
disorders. Excessive alcohol use has numerous short-term health risks, 
including injuries, violence (homicide, suicide, sexual assault, intimate part-
ner violence), alcohol poisoning, and adverse effects on reproductive health 
(risky sexual behaviors, miscarriage, and fetal alcohol disorders). The 
abdominal examination may reveal classic ﬁndings of liver disease such as 
hepatosplenomegaly, ascites, or caput medusae (dilated abdominal veins).
Because early detection of at-risk behaviors may be challenging, the U.S. 
Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommends screening for risky 
or hazardous alcohol use and brief behavioral counseling interventions 
when indicated for all adults in primary care settings, including pregnant 
women (grade B).36 Learn the approach to identifying problem drinking. If 
your patient reports drinking alcoholic beverages, ask the initial screening 
question about heavy drinking (see below) and follow up with the well- 
validated CAGE questionnaire, the Alcohol Use Disorders Identiﬁcation Test 
(AUDIT), or the shorter AUDIT-C questionnaire.35 Keep in mind cutoffs for 
problem drinking.
See Chapter 3, Interviewing and the 
Health History, Alcohol and Illicit Drugs, 
pp. 65–108, and Chapter 5, Behavior 
and Mental Status, pp. 157–158. 
Other classic findings include jaun-
dice, spider angiomas, palmar ery-
thema, Dupuytren contractures, 
asterixis, and gynecomastia.
See Chapter 3, Interviewing and  
the Health History, for the CAGE 
questions, p. 97. 
Screening for Problem Drinking
Standard Drink Equivalents: 1 standard drink is equivalent to 12 oz of regular 
beer or wine cooler, 8 ounces of malt liquor, 5 ounces of wine, or 1.5 ounces of 
80-proof spirits.
Initial Screening Question: “How many times in the past year have you had 4 or 
more drinks a day (women), or 5 or more drinks a day (men)?”
Deﬁnitions of Drinking Levels for Adults—National Institute of Alcohol Abuse 
and Alcoholism37
Women
Men
Moderate drinking
≤1 drink/d
≤2 drinks/d
Unsafe drinking levels (increased 
risk for developing an alcohol 
use disorder)a
>3 drinks/d and  
>7 drinks/wk
>4 drinks/d and 
>14 drinks/wk
Binge drinkingb
≥4 drinks on one 
occasion
≥5 drinks on one 
occasion
aPregnant women and those with health problems that could be worsened by drinking should not 
drink any alcohol.
bBrings blood alcohol level to 0.08 g%, usually within 2 hrs.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
466 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Tailor your recommendations to the severity of the drinking problem, ranging 
from brief behavioral counseling interventions to clinical therapy and/or long-
term rehabilitation programs. Use the helpful National Institute of Alcohol Abuse 
and Alcoholism publications, “Clinician’s Guide for Helping Patients Who Drink 
Too Much,”38 and “Prescribing Medications for Alcohol Dependence.”39
Viral Hepatitis: Risk Factors, Screening, and Vaccination. The 
best strategy for preventing infection and transmission of hepatitis A and B is 
vaccination. Also, educate patients about how the hepatitis viruses spread and 
behavioral strategies to reduce the risk of infection. Screen high-risk groups for 
hepatitis B.
Hepatitis A. Transmission of hepatitis A virus (HAV) is through a fecal–
oral route. Fecal shedding followed by poor hand washing contaminates water 
and foods, leading to infection of household and sexual contacts. Infected chil-
dren are often asymptomatic, contributing to spread of infection. To reduce 
transmission, advise hand washing with soap and water after bathroom use or 
changing diapers, and before preparing or eating food. Diluted bleach can be 
used to clean environmental surfaces.40 HAV infection is rarely fatal—fewer 
than 100 deaths occur each year—and usually only in people with other liver 
diseases; it does not cause chronic hepatitis.41
CDC Recommendations for Hepatitis A 
Vaccination
● All children at age 1 year
● Individuals with chronic liver disease
● Groups at increased risk of acquiring HAV: travelers to areas with high 
endemic rates of infection, men who have sex with men, injection and illicit 
drug users, individuals working with nonhuman primates, and persons who 
have clotting factor disorders.42
The vaccine alone may be administered at any time before traveling to endemic 
areas.
Postexposure Prophylaxis. Healthy unvaccinated individuals should receive 
either a hepatitis A vaccine or a single dose of immune globulin (preferred for 
those ≥age 40 years) within 2 weeks of being exposed to HAV. These recommen-
dations apply to close personal contacts of persons with conﬁrmed HAV, cowork-
ers of infected food handlers, and staff and attendees (and their household 
members) of child care centers where HAV has been diagnosed in children, staff, 
or households of attendees.
Hepatitis B. Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a more serious threat than 
infection with hepatitis A. The fatality rate for acute infection can be up to 1% 
and HBV infection can become chronic.43 Approximately 95% of infections in 
healthy adults are self-limited, with elimination of the virus and development of 
immunity. Risk of chronic HBV infection is highest when the immune system 
is immature—chronic infection occurs in 90% of infected infants and 30% of 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
467
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
children infected before age 5 years. About 15% to 25% of those with chronic 
HBV infection die from cirrhosis or liver cancer, accounting for nearly 3,000 
deaths each year in the United States. Most persons with chronic infection are 
asymptomatic until the onset of advanced liver disease.
Screening. The USPSTF recommends screening for HBV in persons at high 
risk for infection (grade B), including those born in countries with a high endemic 
prevalence of HBV infection, persons with HIV, injection drug users, men who 
have sex with men, and household contacts or sexual partners of HBV-infected 
persons.44 The CDC recommends screening all pregnant women, ideally in the 
ﬁrst trimester, and universal vaccination for all infants beginning at birth.43 For 
adults, vaccine recommendations also target high-risk groups, including those 
in high-risk settings (see below).
CDC Recommendations for Hepatitis B 
Vaccination: High-Risk Groups and Settings
● Sexual contacts, including sex partners of hepatitis B surface antigen-positive 
persons, people with more than one sex partner in the prior 6 months, people 
seeking evaluation and treatment for sexually transmitted infections, and 
men who have sex with men
● People with percutaneous or mucosal exposure to blood, including injection drug 
users, household contacts of antigen-positive persons, residents and staﬀ of 
facilities for the developmentally disabled, health care workers, and people 
on dialysis
● Others, including travelers to endemic areas, people with chronic liver 
disease and HIV infection, and people seeking protection from hepatitis B 
infection
● All adults in high-risk settings, such as sexually transmitted disease (STD) clin-
ics, HIV testing and treatment programs, drug-abuse treatment programs and 
programs for injection drug users, correctional facilities, programs for men 
having sex with men, chronic hemodialysis facilities and end-stage renal dis-
ease programs, and facilities for people with developmental disabilities
Hepatitis C. There is no vaccination for hepatitis C, so prevention targets 
counseling to avoid risk factors. Screening should be recommended for high-risk 
groups.
Hepatitis C virus (HCV), transmitted mainly by percutaneous exposures, is the 
most prevalent chronic bloodborne pathogen in the United States. Anti-HCV 
antibody is detectable in just under 2% of the population, though prevalence is 
markedly increased in high-risk groups, particularly injection drug users.45 Addi-
tional risk factors for HCV infection include blood transfusion or organ transplan-
tation before 1992, transfusion with clotting factors before 1987, hemodialysis, 
health care workers with needle stick injury or mucosal exposure to HCV-positive 
blood, HIV infection, and birth from an HCV-positive mother. Sexual transmission 
is rare. Hepatitis C becomes a chronic illness in over 75% of those infected and 
is a major risk factor for subsequent cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma, and 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
468 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
need for liver transplant for end-stage liver disease.45–47 However, the major-
ity of persons with chronic HCV are unaware of being infected. Response to 
antiviral therapy (undetectable HCV RNA 24 weeks after completing treat-
ment) ranges from 40% to over 90% depending on the viral genotype and the 
combination of drugs used for treatment. Consequently, the USPSTF has con-
cluded that screening for hepatitis C infection is of moderate beneﬁt for per-
sons at high risk for infection as well as those born between 1945 and 1965 
(grade B).48
Screening for Colorectal Cancer
Epidemiology. Colorectal cancer is the third most frequently diagnosed 
cancer among both men and women (over 140,000 new cases) and the third 
leading cause of cancer death (nearly 50,000 deaths) each year in the United 
States.49 The lifetime risk of diagnosis with colorectal cancer is about 5%, while 
the lifetime risk for dying from colorectal cancer is about 2%.50 The good news 
is that U.S. incidence and mortality rates have been gradually but steadily declin-
ing over the past three decades. These trends are attributed to changes in risk 
factor prevalence, such as decreased tobacco use; increased screening, which 
both prevents cancers and increases detection of early-stage curable cancers; and 
improved treatment.51
Risk Factors. The strongest risk factors for colorectal cancer are: increas-
ing age; personal history of colorectal cancer, adenomatous polyps, or long-
standing inﬂammatory bowel disease; and family history of colorectal 
neoplasia—particularly those with affected multiple ﬁrst-degree relatives, a sin-
gle ﬁrst-degree relative diagnosed before age 60 years, or a hereditary colorectal 
cancer syndrome. Weaker risk factors include male sex, African American race, 
tobacco use, excessive alcohol use, red meat consumption, and obesity. Aside 
from age, persons without any strong risk factors are considered average risk—
even if they have some of the weak risk factors. Overall, 90% of new cases and 
94% of deaths occur after age 50 years52; the median age at diagnosis is 68 years 
and the median age at death is 74 years.50 While the lifetime risk of colorectal 
cancer is extremely high in patients with hereditary syndromes, about 75% of 
colorectal cancers arise in people without any obvious hereditary risk or com-
mon exposures among family members.53
Prevention. The most effective prevention strategy is to screen for and 
remove pre-cancerous adenomatous polyps. Screening programs using fecal 
blood testing or ﬂexible sigmoidoscopy have been shown in randomized trials 
to reduce the risk of developing colorectal cancer by about 15% to 20%.54,55 
Physical activity, aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs), 
and postmenopausal combined hormone replacement therapy (estrogen and 
progestin) are also associated with decreased risk of colorectal cancer.46–59 How-
ever, the USPSTF recommends against routinely using aspirin and NSAIDs for 
prevention in average-risk persons because the potential harms, including GI 
bleeding, hemorrhagic stroke, and renal impairment, outweigh the beneﬁts 
(grade D).60 Hormone therapy for cancer chemoprevention is not advised; 
women receiving combined therapy were actually more likely to present with 
advanced-staged colorectal cancers and appear to have a higher risk for colorec-
tal cancer mortality.61 Furthermore, hormone therapy is associated with increased 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
469
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
risk of breast cancer, cardiovascular events, and venous thromboembolism.62–64 
There has been no convincing evidence that dietary changes or taking supple-
ments can prevent colorectal cancer.53
Screening Tests. Screening tests include stool tests that detect occult fecal 
blood, such as fecal immunochemical tests, high-sensitivity guaiac-based tests, 
and tests that detect abnormal DNA. Endoscopic tests are also used for screening, 
including colonoscopy, which visualizes the entire colon and can remove polyps, 
and ﬂexible sigmoidoscopy, which visualizes the distal 60 cm of the bowel. Imag-
ing tests include the double-contrast barium enema and CT colonography. Any 
abnormal ﬁnding on a stool test, imaging study, or ﬂexible sigmoidoscopy war-
rants further evaluation with colonoscopy. Screening programs using fecal blood 
testing or ﬂexible sigmoidoscopy have been shown in randomized trials to reduce 
the risk colorectal cancer death by about 15% to 30%.54,55 Although colonoscopy 
is the gold standard diagnostic test for screening, there is no direct evidence from 
randomized trials that screening with colonoscopy reduces colorectal cancer inci-
dence or mortality. Complications of colonoscopy include perforation and bleed-
ing;65 patients are usually sedated during the procedure, but many are averse to 
the extensive bowel preparation required.
Guidelines. The USPSTF and a collaborative multiorganizational group, 
consisting of the American Cancer Society, the U.S. Multi-Society Task Force on 
Colorectal Cancer, and the American College of Radiology, both strongly endorse 
colorectal cancer screening and have issued screening guidelines.66,67 The 
USPSTF, which gives a grade A recommendation for colorectal cancer screening 
in average-risk adults ages 50 to 75 years, suggests several screening options, and 
advises that routine screening stop at age 75 years (see below). The multiorgani-
zational group additionally recommends using double-contrast barium enema 
or CT colonography every 5 years as well as the fecal DNA test. However, there 
is no evidence that screening with these tests will reduce colorectal cancer inci-
dence or mortality. Performing digital rectal examination is not recommended 
for colorectal cancer screening.
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: 2008 
Screening Recommendations for  
Colorectal Cancer
● Adults ages 50 to 75 years—options (grade A recommendation)
● High-sensitivity fecal occult blood testing (FOBT) annually, either a guaiac-
based or fecal immunochemical test
● Sigmoidoscopy every 5 years with high-sensitivity FOBT every 3 years
● Screening colonoscopy every 10 years
● Adults ages 76 to 85 years—do not screen routinely (grade C recommendation)
● Screening not advised because the beneﬁts are small in comparison to the 
risks
● Use individual decision making if screening an adult for the ﬁrst time
● Adults older than age 85 years—do not screen (grade D recommendation)
● Screening not advised because “competing causes of mortality preclude a 
mortality beneﬁt that outweighs harms”
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
470 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Although screening reduces colorectal cancer incidence and mortality, only 
about two thirds of the adult U.S. population has complied with recommended 
screening guidelines, and over a quarter has never been screened.68 Colonoscopy 
is the most commonly used test, though people may prefer other tests like FOBTs 
because they are safer and easier to perform.69 Keep in mind that the best screen-
ing test is the one that gets done!
Higher-risk persons, based on personal history of colorectal neoplasia or long-
standing inﬂammatory bowel disease, or a family history of colorectal neopla-
sia, should begin screening at a younger age, usually with colonoscopy, and get 
more frequent testing than average-risk adults.70
Techniques of Examination
To begin, explain the steps for examining the abdomen to the patient and locate 
a good light. The patient should have an empty bladder. Pay special attention 
when draping to expose the abdomen, as pictured and detailed below.
Tips for Examining the Abdomen
● Make the patient comfortable in the supine position, with a pillow under the 
head and perhaps under the knees. Slide your hand under the low back to see 
if the patient is relaxed and lying ﬂat on the table.
● Ask the patient to keep the arms at the sides or folded across the chest. When 
the arms are above the head, the abdominal wall stretches and tightens, 
which hinders palpation.
● Draping the patient. To expose the abdomen, place the drape or sheet at the 
level of the symphysis pubis, then raise the gown to below the nipple line 
just above the xiphoid process. The groin should be visible but the genitalia 
should remain covered. The abdominal muscles should be relaxed to enhance 
all aspects of the examination, especially palpation.
● Before you begin, ask the patient to point to any areas of pain so that you 
can examine these areas last.
● Warm your hands and stethoscope. To warm your hands, rub them together or 
place them under hot water.
● Approach the patient calmly and avoid quick unexpected movements. Avoid 
having long ﬁngernails which can scratch or scrape the patient’s skin.
● Stand at the patient’s right side and proceed in a systematic fashion with 
inspection, auscultation, percussion, and palpation. Visualize each organ in 
the region you are examining. Watch the patient’s face for any signs of pain 
or discomfort.
● If necessary, distract the patient with conversation or questions. If the 
patient is frightened or ticklish, begin palpation with the patient’s hand 
under yours. After a few moments, slip your hand underneath to palpate 
directly.
Arching the back pushes the  
abdomen forward and tightens  
the abdominal muscles. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
471
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The Abdomen
Inspection. First, observe the general appearance of the patient—lying 
quietly, writhing with discomfort, or gripping one side.
From the right side of the bed, inspect the surface, contours, and movements of 
the abdomen. Watch for bulges or peristalsis. Try to sit or bend down so that you 
can view the abdomen tangentially (Fig. 11-9).
Umbilicus
Groin
F I G U R E  1 1 - 9 .  Inspect the contours of the abdomen.
Note especially:
■ The skin, including:
■ Temperature. Check if the skin is warm, or cool and clammy.
■ Color. Note any bruises, erythema, or jaundice.
■ Scars. Describe or diagram their location.
■ Striae. Old silver striae or stretch marks are normal.
■ Dilated veins. A few small veins may be visible normally.
■ Rashes or ecchymoses
■ The umbilicus. Observe its contour and location and any inﬂammation or 
bulges suggesting a ventral hernia.
Pink–purple striae are a hallmark of 
Cushing syndrome. 
Dilated veins suggest portal hyper-
tension from cirrhosis (caput medusae) 
or inferior vena cava obstruction. 
Ecchymosis of the abdominal wall is 
seen in intraperitoneal or retroperito-
neal hemorrhage. 
See Table 11-8, Localized Bulges in the 
Abdominal Wall, p. 499. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
472 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ The contour of the abdomen
■ Is it ﬂat, rounded, protuberant, or scaphoid (markedly concave or hollowed)?
■ Do the ﬂanks bulge, or are there any local bulges? Also survey the inguinal 
and femoral areas.
■ Is the abdomen symmetric?
■ Are there visible organs or masses? An enlarged liver or spleen may 
descend below the rib cage.
■ Peristalsis. Observe the abdomen for several minutes if you suspect intestinal 
obstruction. Normally, peristalsis is visible in very thin people.
■ Pulsations. The normal aortic pulsation is frequently visible in the epigas-
trium.
Auscultation. Auscultation provides important information about bowel 
motility. Auscultate the abdomen before performing percussion or palpation, 
maneuvers which may alter the characteristics of the bowel sounds. Learn to 
identify variations in normal bowel sounds, the changed sounds suggestive of 
peritoneal inﬂammation or obstruction, and bruits, which are vascular sounds 
resembling heart murmurs over the aorta or other arteries in the abdomen.
Place the diaphragm of your stethoscope gently on the abdomen. Listen for bowel 
sounds and note their frequency and character. Normal sounds consist of clicks and 
gurgles, occurring at an estimated frequency of 5 to 34 per minute. Occasionally 
you may hear the prolonged gurgles of hyperperistalsis from “stomach growling,” 
called borborygmi. Because bowel sounds are widely transmitted through the abdo-
men, listening in one spot, such as the RLQ, is usually sufﬁcient.
Abdominal Bruits and Friction Rub. If the patient has hypertension, 
auscultate the epigastrium and in each upper quadrant for bruits. Later in the 
examination, when the patient sits up, listen also in the CVAs.
Auscultate for bruits over the aorta, the iliac arteries, and the femoral arteries 
(Fig. 11-10).
Auscultate over the liver and spleen for friction rubs.
See Table 11-9, Protuberant  
Abdomens, p. 500. 
Observe for the bulging flanks of asci-
tes, the suprapubic bulge of a distended 
bladder or pregnant uterus, and ven-
tral, femoral, or inguinal hernias. 
Asymmetry suggests a hernia, an 
enlarged organ, or a mass. 
Inspect for the lower abdominal mass 
of an ovarian or a uterine cancer. 
Inspect for the increased peristaltic 
waves of intestinal obstruction. 
Inspect for the increased pulsations of 
an abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) 
or increased pulse pressure. 
See Table 11-10, Sounds in the  
Abdomen, p. 501. 
Bruits suggest vascular occlusive  
disease.
Altered bowel sounds are common  
in diarrhea, intestinal obstruction, 
paralytic ileus, and peritonitis. 
A bruit in one of these areas that has 
both systolic and diastolic compo-
nents strongly suggests renal artery 
stenosis as the cause of hypertension. 
A total of 4% to 20% of healthy indi-
viduals have abdominal bruits.71 
Bruits with both systolic and diastolic 
components suggest turbulent blood 
flow from atherosclerotic arterial disease. 
Friction rubs are present in hepatoma, 
gonococcal infection around the liver, 
splenic infarction, and pancreatic  
carcinoma. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
473
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Percussion. Percussion helps you assess the amount and distribution of gas 
in the abdomen, viscera and masses that are solid or ﬂuid-ﬁlled, and the size of 
the liver and spleen.
Percuss the abdomen lightly in all four quadrants to determine the distribution 
of tympany and dullness. Tympany usually predominates because of gas in the GI 
tract, but scattered areas of dullness from ﬂuid and feces are also common.
■ Note any dull areas suggesting an underlying mass or enlarged organ. This 
observation will guide subsequent palpation.
■ On each side of a protuberant abdomen, note where abdominal tympany 
changes to the dullness of solid posterior structures.
■ Brieﬂy percuss the lower anterior chest above the costal margins. On the 
right, you will usually ﬁnd the dullness of the liver; on the left, the tympany 
that overlies the gastric air bubble and the splenic ﬂexure of the colon.
Palpation
Light Palpation. Gentle palpation aids detection of abdominal tender-
ness, muscular resistance, and some superﬁcial organs and masses. It also reas-
sures and relaxes the patient.
Keeping your hand and forearm on a horizontal plane, with ﬁngers together and 
ﬂat on the abdominal wall, palpate the abdomen with a light gentle dipping 
motion. As you move your hand to different quadrants, raise it just off the skin. 
Gliding smoothly, palpate in all four quadrants (Fig. 11-11).
Aorta
Renal artery
Iliac artery
Femoral artery
F I G U R E  1 1 - 1 0 .  Auscultate for bruits.
A protuberant abdomen that is tym-
panitic throughout suggests intestinal 
obstruction or paralytic ileus. See  
Table 11-9, Protuberant Abdomens,  
p. 500. 
Dull areas characterize a pregnant 
uterus, an ovarian tumor, a distended 
bladder, or a large liver or spleen. 
Dullness in both flanks prompts  
further assessment for ascites (see  
pp. 484–485). 
In the rare condition of situs inversus, 
organs are reversed—air bubble on 
the right, liver dullness on the left. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
474 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
F I G U R E  1 1 - 1 1 .  Begin with light palpation of the abdomen.
Identify any superﬁcial organs or masses and any area of tenderness or increased 
resistance to palpation. If resistance is present, try to distinguish voluntary 
guarding from involuntary rigidity or muscular spasm. Voluntary guarding usu-
ally decreases with the techniques listed below.
■ Use the methods described earlier to help the patient relax (see p. 470).
■ Palpate after asking the patient to exhale, which usually relaxes the abdomi-
nal muscles.
■ Ask the patient to mouth-breathe with the jaws wide open.
Deep Palpation. Deep palpation is usually required to delineate the liver 
edge, the kidneys, and abdominal masses. Again using the palmar surfaces of 
your ﬁngers, press down in all four quadrants (Fig. 11-12). Identify any masses; 
note their location, size, shape, consistency, tenderness, pulsations, and any 
mobility with respiration or pressure from the examining hand. Correlate your 
ﬁndings from palpation with their percussion notes.
Involuntary rigidity typically persists 
despite these maneuvers, suggesting 
peritoneal inflammation. 
F I G U R E  1 1 - 1 2 .  Use two hands for deep palpation.
Abdominal masses may be catego-
rized in several ways: physiologic 
(pregnant uterus), inflammatory 
(diverticulitis), vascular (an AAA), neo-
plastic (colon cancer), or obstructive 
(a distended bladder or dilated loop 
of bowel). 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
475
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Assessing Possible Peritonitis. Inﬂammation of the parietal perito-
neum, or peritonitis, signals an acute abdomen.72 Signs of peritonitis include a 
positive cough test, guarding, rigidity, rebound tenderness, and percussion ten-
derness. Even before palpation, ask the patient to cough and identify where the 
cough produces pain. Then palpate gently, starting with one ﬁnger then with 
your hand, to localize the area of pain. As you palpate, check for the peritoneal 
signs of guarding, rigidity, and rebound tenderness.
When positive, these signs roughly 
double the likelihood of peritonitis; 
rigidity makes peritonitis almost four 
times more likely.73 Causes include 
appendicitis, cholecystitis, and a  
perforation of the bowel wall. 
See also Table 11-11, Tender  
Abdomens, pp. 502–503. 
Signs of Peritonitis
● Guarding is a voluntary contraction of the abdominal wall, often accompanied 
by a grimace that may diminish when the patient is distracted.
● Rigidity is an involuntary reﬂex contraction of the abdominal wall from perito-
neal inﬂammation that persists over several examinations.
● Rebound tenderness refers to pain expressed by the patient after the examiner 
presses down on an area of tenderness and suddenly removes the hand. To 
assess rebound tenderness, ask the patient “Which hurts more, when I press 
or let go?” Press down with your ﬁngers ﬁrmly and slowly, then withdraw your 
hand quickly. The maneuver is positive if withdrawal produces pain. Percuss 
gently to check for percussion tenderness.
The Liver
Because the rib cage shelters most of the liver, direct assessment is limited. Liver 
size and shape can be estimated by percussion and palpation. Pressure from your 
palpating hand helps you to evaluate the surface, consistency, and tenderness of 
the liver.
Percussion. Measure the vertical span of liver dullness in the right 
midclavicular line after carefully locating the midclavicular line to improve 
accurate measurement. Use a light to moderate percussion strike, because a 
heavier strike can lead to underestimates of liver size.74 Starting at a level well 
below the umbilicus in the RLQ (in an area of tympany, not dullness), percuss 
upward toward the liver. Identify the lower border of dullness in the midclavicular 
line.
Next, identify the upper border of liver dullness. Starting at the nipple line, 
percuss downward in the midclavicular line until lung resonance shifts to liver 
dullness. Gently displace a woman’s breast as necessary to be sure that you start 
in a resonant area. The directions of percussion are shown in Figure 11-13.
Estimates of liver span by percussion 
have a 60% to 70% correlation with 
actual span. 
The span of liver dullness is increased 
when the liver is enlarged. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
476 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Now, measure in centimeters the distance between your two points—the verti-
cal span of liver dullness. Normally, the liver span, shown in Figure 11-14, is 
greater in men than in women and in taller compared to shorter individuals. If 
the liver seems enlarged, outline the lower edge by percussing medially and 
laterally.
F I G U R E  1 1 - 1 3 .  Percuss for liver dullness.
Liver dullness may be displaced 
downward by the low diaphragm of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
Span, however, remains normal.
4–8 cm in
midsternal line
6–12 cm
in right
midclavicular
line
F I G U R E  1 1 - 1 4 .  Measure the liver span.
Dullness from a right pleural effusion 
or consolidated lung, if adjacent to 
liver dullness, may falsely increase 
estimated liver size. 
Gas in the colon may produce tym-
pany in the RUQ, obscure liver dull-
ness, and falsely decrease estimated 
liver size.
Measurements of liver span by percussion are more accurate when the liver is 
enlarged with a palpable edge.75–77
Palpation. Place your left hand behind the patient, parallel to and supporting 
the right 11th and 12th ribs and adjacent soft tissues below. Remind the patient 
to relax on your hand. By pressing your left hand upward, the patient’s liver may 
be felt more easily by your examining hand (Fig. 11-15).
In chronic liver disease, finding an 
enlarged palpable liver edge roughly 
doubles the likelihood of cirrhosis.74 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
The span of liver dullness is decreased 
when the liver is small, or when there 
is free air below the diaphragm, as 
from a perforated bowel or hollow vis-
cus. Liver span may decrease with res-
olution of hepatitis or heart failure or, 
less commonly, with progression of 
fulminant hepatitis.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
477
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Place your right hand on the patient’s right abdomen lateral to the rectus muscle, 
with your ﬁngertips well below the lower border of liver dullness (Fig. 11-16). Start-
ing palpation too close to the right costal margin risks missing the lower edge 
of an enlarged liver that extends into the RLQ (Fig. 11-17). Some examiners 
point their ﬁngers up toward the patient’s head, whereas others prefer a some-
what more oblique position. In either case, press gently in and up.
F I G U R E  1 1 - 1 5 .  Palpate the liver edge.
F I G U R E  1 1 - 1 6 .  Palpate in steps toward the costal margin.
F I G U R E  1 1 - 1 7 .  Palpating ﬁrst at 
the costal margin may miss the liver edge.
Ask the patient to take a deep breath. Try to feel the liver edge as it slides down to 
meet your ﬁngertips. When palpable, the normal liver edge is soft, sharp, and regu-
lar with a smooth surface. If you feel the edge, slightly lighten the pressure of your 
palpating hand so that the liver can slip under your ﬁnger pads and you can feel its 
anterior surface. Note any tenderness (the normal liver may be slightly tender).
Firmness or hardness of the liver, 
bluntness or rounding of its edge, and 
surface irregularity are suspicious for 
liver disease. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
478 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
On inspiration, the liver is palpable about 3 cm below the right costal margin 
in the midclavicular line. Some patients breathe more with the chest than with 
the diaphragm. It may be helpful to train such patients to “breathe with the abdo-
men,” which brings the liver, as well as the spleen and kidneys, into a palpable 
position during inspiration.
To palpate the liver edge, you may have to adapt your examining pressure to the 
thickness and resistance of the abdominal wall. If you cannot feel the edge, move 
your palpating hand closer to the costal margin and try again.
A palpable liver edge does not reliably indicate hepatomegaly.
Trace the liver edge both laterally and medially. Palpation through the rectus 
muscles is especially difﬁcult. Describe the liver edge, and measure its distance 
from the right costal margin in the midclavicular line.
The “hooking technique”. The “hooking technique” may be helpful, 
especially when the patient is obese. Stand to the right of the patient’s chest. Place 
both hands, side by side, on the right abdomen below the border of liver dull-
ness. Press in with your ﬁngers and up toward the costal margin (Fig. 11-18). 
Ask the patient to take a deep breath. The liver edge shown in Figure 11-19 is 
palpable with the ﬁngerpads of both hands.
An obstructed distended gallbladder 
may merge with the liver, forming a 
firm oval mass below the liver edge 
and an area that is dull to percussion. 
See Table 11-12, Liver Enlargement: 
Apparent and Real, p. 504. 
F I G U R E  1 1 - 1 8 .  The hooking technique.
F I G U R E  1 1 - 1 9 .  “Hooking” the 
liver edge.
Assessing Percussion Tenderness of a Nonpalpable Liver. Place your 
left hand ﬂat on the lower right rib cage and gently strike your hand with the 
ulnar surface of your right ﬁst. Ask the patient to compare the sensation with that 
produced by a similar strike on the left side.
Tenderness over the liver suggests 
inflammation, found in hepatitis, or 
congestion from heart failure. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
479
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The Spleen
When a spleen enlarges, it expands anteriorly, downward, and medially, often 
replacing the tympany of stomach and colon with the dullness of a solid organ. 
It then becomes palpable below the costal margin. Dullness to percussion sug-
gests splenic enlargement, but may be absent when enlarged spleens lie above 
the costal margin. Continue to examine the patient from the patient’s right side.
Percussion. Two techniques may help you to detect splenomegaly, an 
enlarged spleen:
■ Percuss the left lower anterior chest wall roughly from the border of cardiac 
dullness at the 6th rib to the anterior axillary line and down to the costal 
margin, an area termed Traube space. As you percuss along the routes marked 
by the arrows in the Figures 11-20 and 11-21, note the lateral extent of tym-
pany. Percussion is moderately accurate in detecting splenomegaly (sensitiv-
ity, 60% to 80%; speciﬁcity, 72% to 94%).78
Anterior axillary
line
Midaxillary
line
Normal spleen
F I G U R E  1 1 - 2 0 .  Percuss for splenic dullness.
F I G U R E  1 1 - 2 1 .  Identify splenic 
enlargement.
If tympany is prominent, especially laterally, splenomegaly is unlikely. The 
dullness of a normal spleen is usually masked by the dullness of other 
posterior tissues.
■ Check for a splenic percussion sign. Percuss the lowest interspace in the left 
anterior axillary line (Fig. 11-22). This area is usually tympanitic. Then ask 
the patient to take a deep breath, and percuss again. When spleen size is 
normal, the percussion note usually remains tympanitic.
If either or both of these tests is positive, pay extra attention to palpation of the 
spleen.
If percussion dullness is present, pal-
pation correctly detects splenomeg-
aly more than 80% of the time.78 
Fluid or solids in the stomach or colon 
may also cause dullness in Traube’ 
space. 
A change in percussion note from 
tympany to dullness on inspiration is 
a positive splenic percussion sign, but 
this sign is only moderately useful for 
detecting splenomegaly (Fig. 11-23). 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
480 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Palpation. To enhance relaxation of the abdominal wall, the patient should 
keep arms at the sides and, if needed, ﬂex the neck and legs. With your left hand, 
reach over and around the patient to support and press forward the lower left rib 
cage and adjacent soft tissue. With your right hand below the left costal margin, 
press in toward the spleen. Begin palpation low enough so that you can detect 
an enlarged spleen. If your hand is too close to the costal margin, you will not 
be able to reach up under the rib cage.
■ Ask the patient to take a deep breath. Try to feel the tip or edge of the spleen as 
it comes down to meet your ﬁngertips (Fig. 11-24). Note any tenderness, 
assess the splenic contour, and measure the distance between the spleen’s 
lowest point and the left costal margin. Approximately 5% of normal adults 
have a palpable spleen tip.
Anterior axillary
  line
Midaxillary
  line
Inspiratory
  movement
Percuss
here
F I G U R E  1 1 - 2 2 .  Negative splenic percussion sign.
F I G U R E  1 1 - 2 3 .  Positive splenic 
percussion sign.
F I G U R E  1 1 - 2 4 .  Palpate for the splenic edge.
The examiner may miss an enlarged 
spleen by starting palpation too high 
in the abdomen. 
Splenomegaly is eight times more 
likely when the spleen is palpable.74 
Causes include portal hypertension, 
hematologic malignancies, HIV infec-
tion, infiltrative diseases like amyloi-
dosis, and splenic infarct or hematoma.
The spleen tip, illustrated in Figure 11-25, 
is just palpable deep to the left costal 
margin.
F I G U R E  1 1 - 2 5 .  Spleen tip 
(purple) palpable below costal margin.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
481
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Repeat with the patient lying on the right side with legs somewhat ﬂexed at 
the hips and knees (Fig. 11-26). In this position, gravity may bring the 
spleen forward and to the right into a palpable location (Fig. 11-27).
Umbilicus
F I G U R E  1 1 - 2 6 .  Palpate the splenic edge with patient lying on right side.
F I G U R E  1 1 - 2 7 .  Edge of 
enlarged spleen palpable about 2 cm 
below the left costal margin on deep 
inspiration.
The Kidneys
Palpation. The kidneys are retroperitoneal and usually not palpable, but 
learning the techniques for examination helps you distinguish enlarged kidneys 
from other organs and abdominal masses.
Palpation of the Left Kidney. Move to the patient’s left side. Place your 
right hand behind the patient, just below and parallel to the 12th rib, with your 
ﬁngertips just reaching the CVA. Lift, trying to displace the kidney anteriorly. 
Place your left hand gently in the LUQ, lateral and parallel to the rectus muscle. 
Ask the patient to take a deep breath. At the peak of inspiration, press your left 
hand ﬁrmly and deeply into the LUQ, just below the costal margin. Try to “cap-
ture” the kidney between your two hands. Ask the patient to breathe out and 
then to stop breathing brieﬂy. Slowly release the pressure of your left hand, feel-
ing at the same time for the kidney to slide back into its expiratory position. If 
the kidney is palpable, describe its size, contour, and any tenderness.
Alternatively, try to palpate the left kidney using the deep palpation tech-
nique similar to palpation of the spleen. Standing at the patient’s right side, 
with your left hand, reach over and around the patient to lift up beneath the 
left kidney, and with your right hand, feel deep in the LUQ. Ask the patient 
to take a deep breath, and feel for a mass. A normal left kidney is rarely pal-
pable.
A left flank mass can represent either 
splenomegaly or an enlarged left kid-
ney. Suspect splenomegaly if there is a 
palpable notch on medial border, the 
edge extends beyond the midline, 
percussion is dull, and your fingers can 
probe deep to the medial and lateral 
borders but not between the mass and 
the costal margin. Confirm these find-
ings with further evaluation. 
Suspect an enlarged kidney if there is 
normal tympany in the LUQ and you 
can probe with your fingers between 
the mass and the costal margin, but not 
deep to its medial and lower borders.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
482 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Palpation of the Right Kidney. A normal right kidney may be palpable, 
especially when the patient is thin and the abdominal muscles are relaxed. To 
capture the right kidney, return to the patient’s right side. Use your left hand to lift 
up from the back, and your right hand to feel deep in the RUQ (Fig. 11-28). 
Proceed as before. The kidney may be slightly tender. The patient is usually 
aware of a capture and release.
F I G U R E  1 1 - 2 8 .  Palpate the right kidney.
Occasionally, a right kidney is more anterior and must be distinguished from the 
liver. The lower pole of the kidney is rounded, and the liver edge, if palpable, 
tends to be sharper, and extends farther medially and laterally. The liver itself 
cannot be captured.
Percussion Tenderness of the 
Kidneys. If the kidneys are tender to pal-
pation, assess percussion tenderness over 
the CVAs. Pressure from your ﬁngertips 
may be enough to elicit tenderness; if not, 
use ﬁst percussion. Place the ball of one 
hand in the CVA and strike it with the ulnar 
surface of your ﬁst (Fig. 11-29). Use enough 
force to cause a perceptible but painless jar 
or thud.
To save the patient from repositioning, 
integrate this assessment into your exami-
nation of the posterior lungs or back.
Causes of kidney enlargement include 
hydronephrosis, cysts, and tumors. 
Bilateral enlargement suggests poly-
cystic kidney disease. 
F I G U R E  1 1 - 2 9 .  Percuss for 
costovertebral angle tenderness.
Pain with pressure or fist percussion 
supports pyelonephritis if associated 
with fever and dysuria, but may also 
be musculoskeletal. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
483
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The Bladder
Normally, the bladder is not palpable unless it is distended above the symphy-
sis pubis. Percuss for dullness and the height of the bladder above the symphysis 
pubis. Bladder volume must be 400 to 600 mL before dullness appears.74 On 
palpation, the dome of the distended bladder feels smooth and round. Check for 
tenderness.
The Aorta
Press ﬁrmly deep in the epigastrium, slightly to the left of the midline, and 
identify the aortic pulsations. In adults over age 50 years, assess the width of 
the aorta by pressing deeply in the upper abdomen with one hand on each side 
of the aorta (Figs. 11-30 to 11-32). In this age group, a normal aorta is not more 
than 3 cm wide (average, 2.5 cm, excluding the thickness of the skin and 
abdominal wall). Detection of pulsations is affected by abdominal girth and the 
diameter of the aorta.
Causes of bladder distention are out-
let obstruction from a urethral stric-
ture or prostatic hyperplasia, 
medication side effects, and neuro-
logic disorders such as stroke or multi-
ple sclerosis. 
Suprapubic tenderness is common in 
bladder infection. 
F I G U R E  1 1 - 3 0 .  Press ﬁrmly to 
detect aortic pulsations.
F I G U R E  1 1 - 3 1 .  Identify 
expanded aortic width.
F I G U R E  1 1 - 3 2 .  Palpate on both sides of the aorta.
Risk factors for AAA are age ≥65 years, 
history of smoking, male gender, and 
a first-degree relative with a history of 
AAA repair.79 
A periumbilical or upper abdominal 
mass with expansile pulsations that is 
≥3 cm in diameter suggests an AAA. 
Sensitivity of palpation increases  
as AAAs enlarge: for widths of 3 to  
3.9 cm, 29%; 4 to 4.9 cm, 50%; ≥5 cm, 
76%.79,80 
Screening by palpation followed by 
ultrasound decreases mortality, espe-
cially in male smokers 65 years or 
older. Pain may signal rupture. Rup-
ture is 15 times more likely in AAAs  
>4 cm than in smaller aneurysms,  
and carries an 85% to 90% mortality 
rate.79,80 
Note that the USPSTF recommends 
ultrasound screening for men over  
65 years who have “ever smoked.”81 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
484 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Special Techniques
Assessment Techniques for
● Ascites
● Appendicitis
● Acute cholecystitis
● Ventral hernia
● Mass in abdominal wall
Assessing 
Possible 
Ascites. A 
protuberant 
abdomen with bulging ﬂanks is 
suspicious for ascites, the most 
common 
complication 
of 
cirrhosis.82 Because ascitic ﬂuid 
characteristically sinks with 
gravity, whereas gas-ﬁlled loops of 
bowel rise, dullness appears in 
the dependent areas of the 
abdomen. Percuss for dullness 
outward in several directions 
from the central area of tympany. 
Map the border between tympany 
and dullness (Fig. 11-33).
Two additional techniques help to conﬁrm ascites, although both signs may be 
misleading.
■ Test for shifting dullness. Percuss the border of tympany and dullness with the 
patient supine, then ask the patient to roll onto one side. Percuss and mark 
the borders again (Fig. 11-34). In a person without ascites, the border 
between tympany and dullness usually stays relatively constant.
Tympany
Dullness
F I G U R E  1 1 - 3 3 .  Percuss outward to map 
dullness from ascites.
Ascites reflects the increased hydro-
static pressure in cirrhosis (the most 
common cause of ascites), heart fail-
ure, constrictive pericarditis, or inferior 
vena cava or hepatic vein obstruction. 
It may signal decreased osmotic pres-
sure in nephrotic syndrome, malnutri-
tion, or ovarian cancer. 
Tympany
Shifting dullness
F I G U R E  1 1 - 3 4 .  Percuss for shifting dullness (here patient turned to right side).
In ascites, dullness shifts to the more 
dependent side, whereas tympany 
shifts to the top. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
485
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Test for a ﬂuid wave. Ask the patient or an assistant to press the edges of both 
hands ﬁrmly down the midline of the abdomen. This pressure helps to stop 
the transmission wave through fat. While you tap one ﬂank sharply with 
your ﬁngertips, feel on the opposite ﬂank for an impulse transmitted through 
the ﬂuid (Fig. 11-35). Unfortunately, this sign is often negative until ascites 
is obvious, and it is sometimes positive in people without ascites.
F I G U R E  1 1 - 3 5 .  Test for a ﬂuid wave.
Identifying an Organ or a Mass in an Ascitic Abdomen. Try to ballotte 
the organ or mass, exempliﬁed here by an enlarged liver (Fig. 11-36). Straighten 
and stiffen the ﬁngers of one hand together, place them on the abdominal surface, 
and make a brief jabbing movement directly toward the anticipated structure. 
This quick movement often displaces the ﬂuid so that your ﬁngertips can brieﬂy 
touch the surface of the structure through the abdominal wall (Fig. 11-37).
An easily palpable impulse suggests 
ascites. A positive fluid wave, shifting 
dullness, and peripheral edema makes 
the presence of ascites to three to six 
times more likely.83
F I G U R E  1 1 - 3 6 .  Note the 
enlarged liver.
F I G U R E  1 1 - 3 7 .  Ballotte 
the liver.
Assessing Possible Appendicitis. Appendicitis is a common cause of 
acute abdominal pain. Assess carefully for the peritoneal signs of acute abdomen 
and the additional signs of McBurney point tenderness, Rovsing sign, the psoas 
sign, and the obturator sign described on the next page.
Appendicitis is twice as likely in the 
presence of RLQ tenderness, Rovsing 
sign, and the psoas sign; it is three 
times more likely if there is McBurney 
point tenderness.73 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
486 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Ask the patient to point to where the pain began and where it is now. Ask the 
patient to cough to see where pain occurs.
■ Palpate carefully for an area of local tenderness. Classically, “McBurney 
point” lies 2 inches from the anterior superior spinous process of ilium on 
a line drawn from that process to the umbilicus (Fig. 11-38).
Just below the
middle of a line
joining the
umbilicus and the
anterior superior
iliac spine
(McBurney point)
F I G U R E  1 1 - 3 8 .  McBurney point.
■ Palpate the tender area for guarding, rigidity, and rebound tenderness.
■ Palpate for Rovsing sign and referred rebound tenderness. Press deeply and 
evenly in the LLQ. Then quickly withdraw your ﬁngers.
■ Assess the psoas sign. Place your hand just above the patient’s right knee and ask 
the patient to raise that thigh against your hand. Alternatively, ask the patient to 
turn onto the left side. Then extend the patient’s right leg at the hip. Flexion of 
the leg at the hip makes the psoas muscle contract; extension stretches it.
■ Though less helpful, assess the obturator sign. Flex the patient’s right thigh at 
the hip, with the knee bent, and rotate the leg internally at the hip. This 
maneuver stretches the internal obturator muscle. Internal rotation of the 
hip is described on p. 681.
■ Perform a rectal examination and, in women, a pelvic examination. These ma-
neuvers have low sensitivity and speciﬁcity, but they may identify an in-
ﬂamed appendix atypically located within the pelvic cavity or other causes 
of the abdominal pain.
Assessing Possible Acute Cholecystitis. When RUQ pain and 
tenderness suggest acute cholecystitis, assess Murphy sign. Hook your left thumb 
or the ﬁngers of your right hand under the costal margin at the point where the 
lateral border of the rectus muscle intersects with the costal margin. Alternatively, 
palpate the RUQ with the ﬁngers of your right hand near the costal margin. If the 
liver is enlarged, hook your thumb or ﬁngers under the liver edge at a comparable 
point. Ask the patient to take a deep breath, which forces the liver and gall 
Localized tenderness anywhere in the 
RLQ, even in the right flank, suggests 
appendicitis. 
Early voluntary guarding may be 
replaced by involuntary muscular 
rigidity and signs of peritoneal inflam-
mation. There may also be RLQ pain 
on quick withdrawal or deferred 
rebound tenderness. 
Pain in the RLQ during left-sided pres-
sure is a positive Rovsing sign. 
Increased abdominal pain on either 
maneuver is a positive psoas sign, sug-
gesting irritation of the psoas muscle 
by an inflamed appendix. 
Right hypogastric pain is a positive obtu-
rator sign, from irritation of the obtura-
tor muscle by an inflamed appendix. 
This sign has very low sensitivity. 
Right-sided rectal tenderness may 
also be caused by an inflamed adnexa 
or seminal vesicle. 
A sharp increase in tenderness with 
inspiratory effort is a positive Mur-
phy sign. When positive, Murphy 
sign triples the likelihood of acute 
cholecystitis.73 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
The pain of appendicitis classically 
begins near the umbilicus, then 
migrates to the RLQ. Older adults are 
less likely to report this pattern.17 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
487
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
Recording Your Findings
bladder down toward the examining ﬁngers. Watch the patient’s breathing and 
note the degree of tenderness.
Assessing Ventral Hernias. Ventral hernias are hernias in the abdominal 
wall exclusive of groin hernias. If you suspect but do not see an umbilical or 
incisional hernia, ask the patient to raise both head and shoulders off the table.
Inguinal and femoral hernias are discussed in Chapter 13, Male Genitalia and 
Hernias.
Strangulated inguinal, femoral, or scrotal hernias merit prompt surgical evalua-
tion. See discussion of strangulated scrotal hernias on pp. 554–555.
Mass in the Abdominal Wall. Occasionally, there are masses in the 
abdominal wall rather than inside the abdominal cavity. Ask the patient either to 
raise the head and shoulders or to strain down, thus tightening the abdominal 
muscles. Feel for the mass again.
The bulge of a hernia will usually 
appear with this action, but should 
not be confused with diastasis recti, 
which is a benign 2- to 3-cm gap in 
the rectus muscles often seen in 
obese and postpartum patients. 
A mass in the abdominal wall remains 
palpable; an intra-abdominal mass is 
obscured by muscular contraction. 
Note that initially you may use sentences to describe your ﬁndings; later you will 
use phrases. The style below contains phrases appropriate for most write-ups.
Recording the Abdominal Examination
“Abdomen is protuberant with active bowel sounds. It is soft and nontender; no 
palpable masses or hepatosplenomegaly. Liver span is 7 cm in the right midcla-
vicular line; edge is smooth and palpable 1 cm below the right costal margin. 
Spleen and kidneys not felt. No costovertebral angle (CVA) tenderness.”
OR
“Abdomen is ﬂat. No bowel sounds heard. It is ﬁrm and boardlike, with 
increased tenderness, guarding, and rebound in the right midquadrant. Liver 
percusses to 7 cm in the midclavicular line; edge not felt. Spleen and kidneys 
not felt. No palpable masses. No CVA tenderness.
These findings suggest peritonitis 
from possible appendicitis (see  
pp. 485–486 and pp. 488–489). 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
488 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
488 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 11-1 Abdominal Pain 
Problem84
Process
Location
Quality
Gastroesophageal 
Reﬂux Disease 
(GERD)11,14
Prolonged exposure of esophagus to 
gastric acid due to impaired esopha-
geal motility or excess relaxations of 
the lower esophageal sphincter; Helico-
bacter pylori may be present
Chest or epigastric
Heartburn, regurgitation
Peptic Ulcer and 
Dyspepsia3,5
Mucosal ulcer in stomach or duode-
num >5 mm, covered with ﬁbrin, ex-
tending through the muscularis mu-
cosa; H. pylori infection present in 
90% of peptic ulcers
Epigastric, may radiate straight to the 
back
Variable: epigastric gnawing 
or burning (dyspepsia); 
may also be boring, aching, 
or hungerlike 
No symptoms in up to 
20%
Gastric Cancer
Adenocarcinoma in 90%–95%, either  
intestinal (older adults) or diffuse 
(younger adults, worse prognosis)
Increasingly in “cardia” and GE junc-
tion; also in distal stomach
Variable
Acute Appendicitis17,18
Acute inﬂammation of the appendix 
with distention or obstruction
Poorly localized periumbilical pain, 
usually migrates to the right lower 
quadrant
Mild but increasing, possi-
bly cramping
Steady and more severe
Acute Cholecystitis10
Inﬂammation of the gallbladder, from 
obstruction of the cystic duct by gall-
stone in 90%
Right upper quadrant or epigastrium; 
may radiate to right shoulder or inter-
scapular area
Steady, aching
Biliary Colic
Sudden obstruction of the cystic duct 
or common bile duct by a gallstone
Epigastric or right upper quadrant; 
may radiate to the right scapula and 
shoulder
Steady, aching; not colicky 
Usually last longer than  
3 hrs
Acute Pancreatitis7,9
Intrapancreatic trypsinogen activation 
to trypsin and other enzymes, result-
ing in autodigestion and inﬂammation 
of the pancreas
Epigastric, may radiate straight to the 
back or other areas of the abdomen; 
20% with severe sequelae of organ 
failure
Usually steady
Chronic Pancreatitis
Irreversible destruction of the pancreatic 
parenchyma from recurrent inﬂamma-
tion of either large ducts or small ducts
Epigastric, radiating to the back
Severe, persistent, deep
Pancreatic Cancer85,86
Predominantly adenocarcinoma 
(95%); 5% 5-yr survival
If cancer in body or tail, epigastric, in 
either upper quadrant, often radiates to 
the back
Steady, deep
Acute Diverticulitis87
Acute inﬂammation of colonic diver-
ticula, outpouchings 5–10 mm in di-
ameter, usually in sigmoid or descend-
ing colon
Left lower quadrant
May be cramping at ﬁrst, 
then steady
Acute Bowel 
Obstruction
Obstruction of the bowel lumen, most 
commonly caused by (1) adhesions or 
hernias (small bowel), or (2) cancer or 
diverticulitis (colon)
Small bowel: periumbilical or upper  
abdominal
Colon: lower abdominal or generalized
Cramping
Cramping
Mesenteric 
Ischemia88,89
Occlusion of blood ﬂow to small 
bowel, from arterial or venous throm-
bosis (especially superior mesenteric 
artery), cardiac embolus, or hypoper-
fusion; can be colonic
May be periumbilical at ﬁrst, then 
diffuse; may be postprandial, 
classically inducing “food fear”
Cramping at ﬁrst, then 
steady; pain disproportion-
ate to examination ﬁndings
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
489
Timing
Aggravating Factors
Relieving Factors
Associated Symptoms 
and Setting
After meals, especially spicy 
foods
Lying down, bending over; 
physical activity; diseases such 
as scleroderma, gastroparesis; 
drugs like nicotine that relax the 
lower esophageal sphincter
Antacids, proton pump inhibi-
tors; avoiding alcohol, smoking, 
fatty meals, chocolate, selected 
drugs such as theophylline, cal-
cium channel blockers
Wheezing, chronic cough, short-
ness of breath, hoarseness, choking 
sensation, dysphagia, regurgitation, 
halitosis, sore throat; increases risk 
of Barrett esophagus and esopha-
geal cancer
Intermittent; duodenal ulcer is 
more likely than gastric ulcer  
or dyspepsia to cause pain that 
(1) wakes the patient at night, 
and (2) occurs intermittently 
over a few wks, disappears for 
months, then recurs
Variable
Food and antacids may bring re-
lief (less likely in gastric ulcers)
Nausea, vomiting, belching, bloating; 
heartburn (more common in duodenal 
ulcer); weight loss (more common in 
gastric ulcer); dyspepsia is more com-
mon in the young (20–29 yrs), gastric 
ulcer in those over 50 yrs, and duodenal 
ulcer in those 30–60 yrs
Pain is persistent, slowly pro-
gressive; duration of pain is typi-
cally shorter than in peptic ulcer
Often food; H. pylori infection
Not relieved by food or antacids
Anorexia, nausea, early satiety, weight 
loss, and sometimes bleeding; most 
common in ages 50–70 yrs
Lasts roughly 4–6 hrs, depend-
ing on intervention
Movement or cough
If it subsides temporarily,  
suspect perforation of the  
appendix.
Anorexia, nausea, possibly vomiting, 
which typically follow the onset of 
pain; low fever
Gradual onset; course longer 
than in biliary colic
Jarring, deep breathing
Anorexia, nausea, vomiting, fever; 
no jaundice
Rapid onset over a few min, lasts 
one to several hrs and subsides 
gradually; often recurrent
Fatty meals but also fasting; 
often precedes cholecystitis, 
cholangitis, pancreatitis
Anorexia, nausea, vomiting, rest-
lessness
Acute onset, persistent pain
Lying supine; dyspnea if pleural 
effusions from capillary leak syn-
drome; selected medications, 
high triglycerides may exacerbate
Leaning forward with trunk 
ﬂexed
Nausea, vomiting, abdominal dis-
tention, fever; often recurrent; 80% 
with history of alcohol abuse or 
gallstones
Chronic or recurrent course
Alcohol, heavy or fatty meals
Possibly leaning forward with 
trunk ﬂexed; often intractable
Pancreatic enzyme insufﬁciency,  
diarrhea with fatty stools (steator-
rhea) and diabetes mellitus
Persistent pain; relentlessly  
progressive illness
Smoking, chronic pancreatitis
Possibly leaning forward with 
trunk ﬂexed; often intractable
Painless jaundice, anorexia, weight 
loss; glucose intolerance, depres-
sion
Often gradual onset
Analgesia, bowel rest, antibiotics
Fever, constipation. Also nausea, 
vomiting, abdominal mass with  
rebound tenderness
Paroxysmal; may decrease as 
bowel mobility is impaired
Paroxysmal, though typically 
milder
Ingestion of food or liquids
Vomiting of bile and mucus (high 
obstruction) or fecal material (low 
obstruction); obstipation develops 
(early); vomiting late if at all; prior 
symptoms of underlying cause
Usually abrupt in onset, then 
persistent
Underlying cardiac disease
Vomiting, bloody stool, soft dis-
tended abdomen with peritoneal 
signs, shock; age >50 yrs
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
490 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
490 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 11-2 Dysphagia
Process and 
Problem
Timing
Factors That 
Aggravate
Factors That 
Relieve
Associated 
Symptoms and 
Conditions
Oropharyngeal 
Dysphagia
Acute or gradual onset 
and a variable course, 
depending on the 
underlying disorder
Attempts to start the 
swallowing process
Aspiration into the 
lungs or regurgitation 
into the nose with 
attempts to swallow; 
from motor disorders 
affecting the 
pharyngeal muscles 
such as stroke, bulbar 
palsy, or other 
neuromuscular 
conditions
Esophageal Dysphagia
Mechanical Narrowing
Mucosal rings and webs
Intermittent
Solid foods
Regurgitation of the 
bolus of food
Usually none
Esophageal stricture
Intermittent; may 
become slowly 
progressive
Solid foods
Regurgitation of the 
bolus of food
A long history of 
heartburn and 
regurgitation
Esophageal cancer
May be intermittent at 
ﬁrst; progressive over 
months
Solid foods, with 
progression to liquids
Regurgitation of the 
bolus of food
Pain in the chest and 
back and weight loss, 
especially late in the 
course of illness
Motor Disorders
Diffuse esophageal 
spasm
Intermittent
Solids or liquids
Maneuvers described 
below; sometimes 
nitroglycerin
Chest pain that mimics 
angina pectoris or 
myocardial infarction 
and lasts min to hrs; 
possibly heartburn
Scleroderma
Achalasia
Intermittent; may 
progress slowly
Intermittent; may 
progress
Solids or liquids
Solids or liquids
Repeated swallowing; 
movements such as 
straightening the back, 
raising the arms, or a 
Valsalva maneuver 
(straining down 
against a closed 
glottis)
Heartburn; other 
manifestations of 
scleroderma
Regurgitation, often at 
night when lying 
down, with nocturnal 
cough; possibly chest 
pain precipitated by 
eating
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
491
Table 11-3 Diarrhea
Problem
Process
Characteristics 
of Stool
Timing
Associated 
Symptoms
Setting, 
Persons at 
Risk
Acute Diarrhea90 (Ä14 days)
Secretory  
Infection (Non-
inﬂammatory)
Infection by vi-
ruses, preformed 
bacterial toxins 
(such as Staphylo-
coccus aureus, Ba-
cillus cereus, Clos-
tridium perfringens, 
toxigenic Esche-
richia coli, Vibrio 
cholerae), crypto-
sporidium, Giardia 
lamblia, rotavirus
Watery, without blood, 
pus, or mucus
Duration of a few 
days, possibly lon-
ger; lactase deﬁ-
ciency may lead to 
a longer course
Nausea, vomiting, 
periumbilical 
cramping pain; 
temperature nor-
mal or slightly  
elevated
Often travel, a 
common food 
source, or an 
epidemic
Inﬂammatory  
Infection
Colonization or in-
vasion of intestinal 
mucosa (nonty-
phoid Salmonella, 
Shigella, Yersinia, 
Campylobacter, en-
teropathic E. coli, 
Entamoeba histolyt-
ica, C. difﬁcile)
Loose to watery, often 
with blood, pus, or 
mucus
An acute illness of 
varying duration
Lower abdominal 
cramping pain and 
often rectal ur-
gency, tenesmus; 
fever
Travel, contami-
nated food or 
water; frequent 
anal intercourse
Drug-Induced 
Diarrhea
Action of many 
drugs, such as 
magnesium-con-
taining antacids, 
antibiotics, anti-
neoplastic agents, 
and laxatives
Loose to watery
Acute, recurrent, 
or chronic
Possibly nausea; 
usually little if any 
pain
Prescribed or 
over-the-counter 
medications
Chronic Diarrhea (ê30 days)
Diarrheal Syndrome
Irritable bowel 
syndrome20
Altered motility or 
secretion from lu-
minal and mucosal 
irritants that 
change mucosal 
permeability, im-
mune activation, 
and colonic transit, 
including maldi-
gested carbohy-
drates, fats, excess 
bile acids, gluten 
intolerance, entero-
endocrine signal-
ing, and changes in 
microbiomes
Loose; ∼50% with 
mucus; small to mod-
erate volume. Small, 
hard stools with con-
stipation. May be 
mixed pattern.
Worse in the 
morning; rarely at 
night.
Crampy lower ab-
dominal pain, ab-
dominal disten-
tion, ﬂatulence, 
nausea; urgency, 
pain relieved with 
defecation
Young and  
middle-aged 
adults, espe-
cially women
(continued)
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
492 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
492 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 11-3 Diarrhea (Continued )
Problem
Process
Characteristics 
of Stool
Timing
Associated 
Symptoms
Setting, 
Persons at 
Risk
Chronic Diarrhea (ê30 days) (continued)
Fecal impaction/
motility disorders
Partial obstruction 
by impacted stool 
only allowing pas-
sage of loose feces
Loose, small volume
Variable
Crampy abdomi-
nal pain, incom-
plete evacuation
Older adults, 
immobilized 
and institution-
alized patients; 
ensues from se-
lected medica-
tions
Cancer of the sig-
moid colon
Partial obstruction 
by a malignant 
neoplasm
May be blood-streaked
Variable
Change in usual 
bowel habits, 
crampy lower ab-
dominal pain, con-
stipation
Middle-aged 
and older 
adults, espe-
cially older than 
55 yrs
Inﬂammatory Bowel Disease
Ulcerative colitis
Mucosal inﬂam-
mation typically 
extending proxi-
mally from the rec-
tum (proctitis) to 
varying lengths of 
the colon (colitis to 
pancolitis), with 
microulcerations 
and, if chronic, in-
ﬂammatory polyps
Frequent, watery, often 
containing blood
Onset typically 
abrupt; often re-
current, persisting, 
and may awaken 
at night
Cramping, with 
urgency, tenesmus; 
fever, fatigue, 
weakness; abdomi-
nal pain if compli-
cated by toxic 
megacolon; may 
include episcleri-
tis, uveitis, arthri-
tis, erythema no-
dosum
Often young 
adults, Ashke-
nazi Jewish de-
scendants; 
linked to altered 
CD4+ T-cell Th2 
response; in-
creases risk of 
colon cancer
Crohn disease of 
the small bowel 
(regional enteritis) 
or colon (granulo-
matous colitis)
Chronic transmu-
ral inﬂammation 
of the bowel wall, 
with skip pattern 
involving the ter-
minal ileum and/
or proximal colon 
(and rectal spar-
ing); may cause 
strictures
Small, soft to loose or 
watery, with bleeding 
if colitis, obstructive 
symptoms, if enteritis
More insidious 
onset; chronic or 
recurrent
Crampy perium-
bilical, right lower 
quadrant (enteritis) 
or diffuse (colitis) 
pain, with an-
orexia, fever, and/
or weight loss; 
perianal or peri-
rectal abscesses 
and ﬁstulas; may 
cause small or 
large bowel ob-
struction
Often teens or 
young adults, 
but also adults 
of middle age; 
more common 
in Ashkenazi 
Jewish descen-
dants; linked to 
altered CD4+ T-
cell helper Th1 
and 17 re-
sponse; in-
creases risk of 
colon cancer
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
493
Problem
Process
Characteristics 
of Stool
Timing
Associated 
Symptoms
Setting, 
Persons at 
Risk
Chronic Diarrhea (ê30 days) (continued)
Voluminous Diarrhea
Malabsorption 
syndrome
Defective mem-
brane transport or 
absorption of in-
testinal epithelium 
(Crohn, celiac dis-
ease, surgical resec-
tion); impaired lu-
minal digestion 
(pancreatic insufﬁ-
ciency); epithelial 
defects at brush 
border (lactose in-
tolerance)
Typically bulky, soft, 
light yellow to gray, 
mushy, greasy or oily, 
and sometimes frothy; 
particularly foul-smell-
ing; usually ﬂoats in 
toilet (steatorrhea)
Onset of illness 
typically insidious
Anorexia, weight 
loss, fatigue, ab-
dominal disten-
tion, often crampy 
lower abdominal 
pain. Symptoms of 
nutritional deﬁ-
ciencies such as 
bleeding (vitamin 
K), bone pain and 
fractures (vitamin 
D), glossitis (vita-
min B), and edema 
(protein)
Variable, de-
pending on 
cause
Osmotic diarrhea
■ Lactose 
intolerance
Intestinal lactase 
deﬁciency
Watery diarrhea of 
large volume
Follows the inges-
tion of milk and 
milk products; re-
lieved by fasting
Crampy abdomi-
nal pain, abdomi-
nal distention, ﬂat-
ulence
In >50% of Afri-
can Americans, 
Asians, Native 
Americans,  
Hispanics; in 
5–20% of  
Caucasians
■ Abuse of 
osmotic 
purgatives
Laxative habit, 
often surreptitious
Watery diarrhea of 
large volume
Variable
Often none
Persons with an-
orexia nervosa 
or bulimia ner-
vosa
Secretory diarrhea
Variable: bacterial 
infection, secreting 
villous adenoma, 
fat or bile salt 
malabsorption, 
hormone-mediated 
conditions (gastrin 
in Zollinger–Ellison 
syndrome, 
vasoactive 
intestinal peptide)
Watery diarrhea of 
large volume
Variable
Weight loss, 
dehydration, 
nausea, vomiting, 
and cramping 
abdominal pain
Variable 
depending on 
cause
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
494 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
494 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 11-4 Constipation
Problem
Process
Associated Symptoms  
and Setting
Life Activities and Habits
Inadequate Time or Setting for  
the Defecation Reﬂex
Ignoring the sensation of a full rectum 
inhibits the defecation reﬂex
Hectic schedules, unfamiliar 
surroundings, bed rest
False Expectations of Bowel  
Habits
Expectations of “regularity” or more 
frequent stools than a person’s norm
Beliefs, treatments, and advertisements 
that promote the use of laxatives
Diet Deﬁcient in Fiber
Decreased fecal bulk
Other factors such as debilitation and 
constipating drugs may contribute
Irritable Bowel Syndrome20
Functional change in frequency or form 
of bowel movement without known 
pathology; possibly from change in 
intestinal bacteria.
Three patterns: diarrhea—predominant, 
constipation—predominant, or mixed. 
Symptoms present ≥6 mo and 
abdominal pain for ≥3 mo plus at least 
2 of 3 features (improvement with 
defecation; onset with change in stool 
frequency; onset with change in stool 
form and appearance)
Mechanical Obstruction
Cancer of the Rectum or  
Sigmoid Colon
Progressive narrowing of the bowel 
lumen from adenocarcinoma
Change in bowel habits; often diarrhea, 
abdominal pain, bleeding, occult blood 
in stool; in rectal cancer, tenesmus and 
pencil-shaped stools; weight loss
Fecal Impaction
A large, ﬁrm, immovable fecal mass, 
most often in the rectum
Rectal fullness, abdominal pain, and 
diarrhea around the impaction; 
common in debilitated, bedridden, and 
often elderly and institutionalized 
patients
Other Obstructing Lesions  
(such as Diverticulitis, Volvulus, 
Intussusception, or Hernia)
Narrowing or complete obstruction of 
the bowel
Colicky abdominal pain, abdominal 
distention, and in intussusception, often 
“currant jelly” stools (red blood and 
mucus)
Painful Anal Lesions
Pain may cause spasm of the external 
sphincter and voluntary inhibition of 
the defecation reﬂex.
Anal ﬁssures, painful hemorrhoids, 
perirectal abscesses
Drugs
A variety of mechanisms
Opiates, anticholinergics, antacids 
containing calcium or aluminum, and 
many others
Depression
A disorder of mood
Fatigue, anhedonia, sleep disturbance, 
weight loss
Neurologic Disorders
Interference with the autonomic 
innervation of the bowel
Spinal cord injuries, multiple sclerosis, 
Hirschsprung disease, and other 
conditions
Metabolic Conditions
Interference with bowel motility
Pregnancy, hypothyroidism, 
hypercalcemia
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
495
Table 11-5 Black and Bloody Stool
Problem
Selected Causes
Associated Symptoms and 
Setting
Melena
Refers to passage of black tarry stool 
Fecal blood tests are positive 
Involves loss ≥60 mL of blood into the 
gastrointestinal tract (less in children), 
usually from the esophagus, stomach, or 
duodenum with transit time of 7–14 hrs
Less commonly, if slow transit, blood loss 
originates in the jejunum, ileum, or 
ascending colon
In infants, melena may result from 
swallowing blood during the birth
Gastritis, GERD, peptic ulcer (gastric or 
duodenal)
Gastritis or stress ulcers
Esophageal or gastric varices
Reﬂux esophagitis, Mallory–Weiss tear 
in esophageal mucosa due to retching 
and vomiting
Usually epigastric discomfort from 
heartburn, dysmotility; if peptic ulcer, 
pain after meals (delay of 2–3 hrs if 
duodenal ulcer; may be asymptomatic 
Recent ingestion of alcohol, aspirin, or 
other anti-inﬂammatory drugs; recent 
bodily trauma, severe burns, surgery, or 
increased intracranial pressure
Cirrhosis of the liver or other causes of 
portal hypertension
Retching, vomiting, often recent 
ingestion of alcohol
Black Stool
Black stool from other causes with 
negative fecal blood tests; stool change 
has no pathologic signiﬁcance
Ingestion of iron, bismuth salts, licorice, 
or even chocolate cookies
Asymptomatic
Stool with Red Blood (Hematochezia)
Usually originates in the colon, rectum, 
or anus; much less frequently from the 
jejunum or ileum
Upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage may 
also cause red stool, usually with large 
blood loss ≥1 L 
Rapid transit leaves insufﬁcient time for 
the blood to turn black from oxidation  
of iron in hemoglobin
Colon cancer
Hyperplasia or adenomatous polyps
Diverticula of the colon
Inﬂammatory conditions of the colon 
and rectum
Ulcerative colitis, Crohn disease
Infectious diarrhea
Proctitis (various causes including 
anal intercourse)
Often a change in bowel habits, weight loss
Often no other symptoms
Often no symptoms unless 
inﬂammation causes diverticulitis
See Table 11-3, Diarrhea, p. 492
See Table 11-3, Diarrhea, p. 491
Rectal urgency, tenesmus
Ischemic colitis
Lower abdominal pain, sometimes fever 
or shock in older adults; abdomen 
typically soft to palpation
Hemorrhoids
Blood on the toilet paper, on the surface 
of the stool, or dripping into the toilet
Anal ﬁssure
Blood on the toilet paper or on the 
surface of the stool; anal pain
Reddish but Nonbloody Stool
Ingestion of beets
Pink urine, which usually precedes the 
reddish stool; from poor metabolism of 
betacyanin
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
496 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
496 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 11-6 Urinary Frequency, Nocturia, and Polyuria
Problem
Mechanisms
Selected Causes
Associated Symptoms
Frequency
Decreased bladder capacity
Increased bladder sensitivity to 
stretch because of inﬂammation
Infection, stones, tumor, or foreign 
body in the bladder
Burning on urination, urinary 
urgency, sometimes gross hematuria
Decreased elasticity of the 
bladder wall
Inﬁltration by scar tissue or tumor
Symptoms of associated inﬂamma-
tion (see above) are common
Decreased cortical inhibition of 
bladder contractions
Motor disorders of the central 
nervous system, such as a stroke
Urinary urgency; neurologic symp-
toms such as weakness and paralysis
Impaired bladder emptying with 
residual urine in the bladder
Partial mechanical obstruction 
of the bladder neck or proximal 
urethra
Most commonly, benign prostatic 
hyperplasia; also urethral stricture 
and other obstructive lesions of the 
bladder or prostate
Prior obstructive symptoms: hesitancy 
in starting the urinary stream, straining 
to void, reduced size and force of the 
stream, and dribbling during or at the 
end of urination
Loss of S2–S4 innervation to 
the bladder
Neurologic disease affecting the 
sacral nerves or nerve roots, e.g., 
diabetic neuropathy
Weakness or sensory defects
Nocturia
With High Volumes
Most types of polyuria (see p. 462)
Decreased concentrating ability of 
the kidney with loss of the normal 
drop in nocturnal urine output
Chronic renal insufﬁciency due to 
a number of diseases
Possibly other symptoms of renal 
insufﬁciency
Excessive ﬂuid intake before 
bedtime
Habit, especially involving alcohol 
and coffee
Fluid-retaining, edematous states. 
Daytime accumulation of 
dependent edema that is excreted 
at night when the patient is supine
Heart failure, nephrotic syndrome, 
hepatic cirrhosis with ascites, 
chronic venous insufﬁciency
Edema and other symptoms of the 
underlying disorder; urinary output 
during the day may be reduced as 
ﬂuid accumulates in the body tissues 
(see Table 12-1, Peripheral Causes of 
Edema, p. 534).
With Low Volumes
Urinary frequency
Voiding while up at night without 
a real urge, a “pseudofrequency”
Insomnia
Variable
Polyuria
Deﬁciency of antidiuretic hormone 
(diabetes insipidus)
A disorder of the posterior 
pituitary and hypothalamus
Thirst and polydipsia, often severe 
and persistent; nocturia
Renal unresponsiveness to 
antidiuretic hormone (nephrogenic 
diabetes insipidus)
A number of kidney diseases, 
including hypercalcemic and 
hypokalemic nephropathy; drug 
toxicity, e.g., from lithium
Thirst and polydipsia, often severe 
and persistent; nocturia
Solute diuresis
Electrolytes, such as sodium  
salts
Large saline infusions, potent 
diuretics, certain kidney diseases
Variable
Nonelectrolytes, such as glucose
Uncontrolled diabetes mellitus
Thirst, polydipsia, and nocturia
Excessive water intake
Primary polydipsia
Polydipsia tends to be episodic; 
thirst may not be present; nocturia is 
usually absent
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
497
Table 11-7 Urinary Incontinencea
Problem
Mechanisms
Symptoms
Physical Signs
Stress Incontinence
The urethral sphincter is 
weakened so that transient 
increases in intra-abdominal 
pressure raise the bladder 
pressure to levels that exceed 
urethral resistance.
In women, pelvic ﬂoor 
weakness and inadequate 
muscular and ligamentous 
support of the bladder neck 
and proximal urethra change 
the angle between the bladder 
and the urethra (see Chapter 14, 
pp. 592–593). Causes include 
childbirth and surgery. Local 
conditions affecting the 
internal urethral sphincter, 
such as postmenopausal 
atrophy of the mucosa and 
urethral infection, may also 
contribute.
Momentary leakage of small 
amounts of urine with 
coughing, laughing, and 
sneezing while the person is 
in an upright position. Urine 
loss is unrelated to a 
conscious urge to urinate.
Stress incontinence may be 
demonstrable, especially if 
the patient is examined 
before voiding and in a 
standing position.
Atrophic vaginitis may be 
evident. Bladder distention is 
absent.
In men, stress incontinence 
may follow prostate surgery.
Urge Incontinence
Detrusor contractions are 
stronger than normal and 
overcome the normal urethral 
resistance. The bladder is 
typically small.
Decreased cortical inhibition 
of detrusor contractions from 
stroke, brain tumor, dementia, 
and lesions of the spinal cord 
above the sacral level.
Involuntary urine loss 
preceded by an urge to void. 
The volume tends to be 
moderate.
The small bladder is not 
detectable on abdominal 
examination.
Hyperexcitability of sensory 
pathways, as in bladder 
infections, tumors, and fecal 
impaction.
Urgency, frequency, and 
nocturia with small to 
moderate volumes.
If acute inﬂammation is 
present, pain on urination.
When cortical inhibition is 
decreased, mental deﬁcits or 
motor signs of central 
nervous system disease are 
often present.
Deconditioning of voiding 
reﬂexes, as in frequent 
voluntary voiding at low 
bladder volumes.
Possibly “pseudo-stress 
incontinence”—voiding 
10–20 sec after stresses such 
as a change of position, going 
up- or downstairs, and 
possibly coughing, laughing, 
or sneezing.
When sensory pathways are 
hyperexcitable, signs of local 
pelvic problems or a fecal 
impaction may be present.
(continued)
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
498 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
498 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 11-7 Urinary Incontinencea (Continued )
Problem
Mechanisms
Symptoms
Physical Signs
Overﬂow Incontinence
Detrusor contractions are 
insufﬁcient to overcome 
urethral resistance, causing 
urinary retention. The bladder 
is typically ﬂaccid and large, 
even after an effort to void.
Obstruction of the bladder 
outlet, as in benign prostatic 
hyperplasia or tumor.
Weakness of the detrusor 
muscle associated with 
peripheral nerve disease at 
S2–4 level.
Impaired bladder sensation 
that interrupts the reﬂex arc, 
as in diabetic neuropathy.
When intravesicular pressure 
overcomes urethral resistance, 
continuous dripping or 
dribbling incontinence ensues.
Decreased force of the 
urinary stream.
Prior symptoms of partial 
urinary obstruction or other 
symptoms of peripheral 
nerve disease may be present.
Examination often reveals an 
enlarged, sometimes tender, 
bladder. Other signs include 
prostatic enlargement, motor 
signs of peripheral nerve 
disease, a decrease in 
sensation (including perineal 
sensation), and diminished 
to absent reﬂexes.
Functional Incontinence
The patient is functionally 
unable to reach the toilet in 
time because of impaired 
health or environmental 
conditions.
Problems in mobility 
resulting from weakness, 
arthritis, poor vision, or 
other conditions. 
Environmental factors such 
as an unfamiliar setting, 
distant bathroom facilities, 
bed rails, or physical 
restraints.
Incontinence on the way to 
the toilet or only in the early 
morning.
The bladder is not detectable 
on examination. Look for 
physical or environmental 
clues as the likely cause.
Incontinence Secondary 
to Medications
Drugs may contribute to any 
type of incontinence listed.
Sedatives, tranquilizers, 
anticholinergics, sympathetic 
blockers, and potent 
diuretics.
Variable. A careful history 
and chart review are 
important.
Variable.
aPatients may have more than one kind of incontinence.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
499
Table 11-8 Localized Bulges in the Abdominal Wall
Localized bulges in the abdominal wall include ventral hernias (defects in the wall through which tissue protrudes) and 
subcutaneous tumors such as lipomas. The more common ventral hernias are umbilical, incisional, and epigastric. Hernias and 
diastasis recti usually become more evident when the patient is supine and raises the head and shoulders.
Umbilical Hernia
A protrusion through a 
defective umbilical ring is 
most common in infants but 
also occurs in adults. In 
infants, it usually closes 
spontaneously within 1–2 yrs.
Diastasis Recti
Separation of the two rectus abdominis muscles, through 
which abdominal contents form a midline ridge typically 
extending from the xiphoid to the umbilicus and seen only 
when the patient raises the head and shoulders. Often present 
in patients with repeated pregnancies, obesity, and chronic 
lung disease. It is clinically benign.
Ridge
Incisional Hernia
This is a protrusion through 
an operative scar. Palpate to 
detect the length and width of 
the defect in the abdominal 
wall. A small defect, through 
which a large hernia has 
passed, has a greater risk for 
complications than a large 
defect.
Epigastric Hernia
A small midline protrusion 
through a defect in the linea 
alba occurs between the 
xiphoid process and the 
umbilicus. With the patient 
coughing or performing a 
Valsalva maneuver, palpate by 
running your ﬁngerpad down 
the linea alba.
Lipoma
Common, benign, fatty tumors 
usually in the subcutaneous tissues 
almost anywhere in the body, 
including the abdominal wall. 
Small or large, they are usually soft 
and often lobulated. Press your 
ﬁnger down on the edge of a 
lipoma. The tumor typically slips 
out from under your ﬁnger and is 
well demarcated, nonreducible, 
and usually nontender.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
500 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
500 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 11-9 Protuberant Abdomens
Fat
Fat is the most common 
cause of a protuberant 
abdomen. Fat thickens the 
abdominal wall, the 
mesentery, and omentum. 
The umbilicus may appear 
sunken. A pannus, or apron 
of fatty tissue, may extend 
below the inguinal 
ligaments. Lift it to look for 
inﬂammation in the skin 
folds or even for a hidden 
hernia.
Gas
Gaseous distention may 
be localized or 
generalized. It causes a 
tympanitic percussion 
note. Selected foods may 
cause mild distention 
from increased intestinal 
gas production. More 
serious causes are 
intestinal obstruction and 
adynamic (paralytic) ileus. 
Note the location of the 
distention. Distention is 
more marked in 
obstruction in the colon 
than in the small bowel.
Tympany
Dullness
Tumor
A large solid tumor, 
usually rising out of the 
pelvis, is dull to 
percussion. Air-ﬁlled 
bowel is displaced to the 
periphery. Causes include 
ovarian tumors and 
uterine ﬁbroids. 
Occasionally, a markedly 
distended bladder is 
mistaken for such a tumor.
Tympany
Dullness
Pregnancy
Pregnancy is a common 
pelvic “mass.” Listen  
for the fetal heart (see  
p. 945).
Bulging
flank
Umbilicus may be 
protuberant
Tympany
Dullness
Tympany
Dullness
Ascitic Fluid
Ascitic ﬂuid seeks the lowest point in the abdomen, producing bulging ﬂanks that are dull to 
percussion. The umbilicus may protrude. Turn the patient onto one side to detect the shift in 
position of the ﬂuid level (shifting dullness). (See pp. 484–485 for the assessment of ascites.)
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
501
Table 11-10 Sounds in the Abdomen
Renal artery
Aorta
Iliac artery
Bowel Sounds
Bowel sounds may be:
■ Increased, as in diarrhea or early intestinal obstruction
■ Decreased, then absent, as in adynamic ileus and peritonitis. 
Before deciding that bowel sounds are absent, sit down and 
listen where shown for 2 min or even longer.
High-pitched tinkling sounds suggest intestinal ﬂuid and air under 
tension in a dilated bowel. Rushes of high-pitched sounds coinciding 
with an abdominal cramp signal intestinal obstruction.
Bruits
A hepatic bruit suggests carcinoma of the liver or cirrhosis. 
Arterial bruits with both systolic and diastolic components 
suggest partial occlusion of the aorta or large arteries. Such 
bruits in the epigastrium are suspicious for renal artery stenosis 
or renovascular hypertension.
Epigastric
and
umbilical
Hepatic
Splenic
Venous Hum
A venous hum is a rare soft humming noise with both systolic 
and diastolic components. It points to increased collateral 
circulation between portal and systemic venous systems, as in 
hepatic cirrhosis.
Friction Rubs
Friction rubs are rare grating sounds with respiratory 
variation. They indicate inﬂammation of the peritoneal 
surface of an organ, as in liver cancer, chlamydial or 
gonococcal perihepatitis, recent liver biopsy, or splenic 
infarct. When a systolic bruit accompanies a hepatic friction 
rub, suspect carcinoma of the liver.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
502 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
502 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 11-11 Tender Abdomens
Abdominal Wall Tenderness
Superficial tender
area
Deep tender
area
Tenderness may originate in the abdominal wall. When the 
patient raises the head and shoulders, this tenderness persists, 
whereas tenderness from a deeper lesion (protected by the 
tightened muscles) decreases.
Visceral Tenderness
Enlarged liver
Normal cecum
Normal aorta
Normal or spastic
sigmoid colon
The structures shown may be tender to deep palpation. Usually 
the discomfort is dull with no muscular rigidity or rebound 
tenderness. A reassuring explanation to the patient may prove 
helpful.
Tenderness from Disease in the Chest and Pelvis
Unilateral or
bilateral, upper
or lower abdomen
Acute Pleurisy
Abdominal pain and tenderness may result from acute pleural 
inﬂammation. When unilateral, it can mimic acute cholecystitis 
or appendicitis. Rebound tenderness and rigidity are less 
common; chest signs are usually present.
Acute Salpingitis
Frequently bilateral, the tenderness of acute salpingitis 
(inﬂammation of the fallopian tubes) is usually maximal just 
above the inguinal ligaments. Rebound tenderness and rigidity 
may be present. On pelvic examination, motion of the cervix 
and uterus causes pain.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
503
Tenderness of Peritoneal Inﬂammation
Tenderness associated with peritoneal inﬂammation is more severe than visceral tenderness. Muscular rigidity and rebound 
tenderness are frequently but not necessarily present. Generalized peritonitis causes exquisite tenderness throughout the 
abdomen, together with board-like muscular rigidity. These signs on palpation, especially abdominal rigidity, double the 
likelihood of peritonitis.73 Local causes of peritoneal inﬂammation include:
Acute Cholecystitis10
Signs are maximal in the right upper quadrant. Check for 
Murphy sign (see pp. 486–487).
Acute Pancreatitis
In acute pancreatitis, epigastric tenderness and rebound tenderness 
are usually present, but the abdominal wall may be soft.
Just below the
middle of a line
joining the 
umbilicus and the 
anterior superior 
iliac spine
(McBurney point)
Right rectal
tenderness
Acute Appendicitis17,18
Right lower quadrant signs are typical of acute appendicitis 
but may be absent early in the course. The typical area of 
tenderness, McBurney point, is illustrated. Examine other 
areas of the right lower quadrant as well as the right ﬂank.
Acute Diverticulitis
Acute diverticulitis is a conﬁned inﬂammatory process, usually 
in the left lower quadrant, that involves the sigmoid colon. If 
the sigmoid colon is redundant there may be suprapubic or 
right-sided pain. Look for localized peritoneal signs and a 
tender underlying mass. Microperforation, abscess, and 
obstruction may ensue.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
504 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
504 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 11-12 Liver Enlargement: Apparent and Real
A palpable liver does not necessarily indicate hepatomegaly (an enlarged liver), but more often results from a change in 
consistency—from the normal softness to an abnormal ﬁrmness or hardness, as in cirrhosis. Clinical estimates of liver size 
should be based on both percussion and palpation, although even these techniques are imperfect compared to ultrasound.
Upper
border
low
Height by
percussion
normal
Elongated
right lobe
Downward Displacement of the Liver by a  
Low Diaphragm
This ﬁnding is common when the diaphragm is ﬂattened and 
low, as in COPD. The liver edge may be palpable well below 
the costal margin. Percussion, however, reveals a low upper 
edge, and the vertical span of the liver is normal.
Normal Variations in Liver Shape
In some individuals the right lobe of the liver may be 
elongated and easily palpable as it projects downward toward 
the iliac crest. Such an elongation, sometimes called Riedel 
lobe, represents a variation in shape, not an increase in liver 
volume or size.
Smooth Large Liver
Cirrhosis may produce an enlarged liver with a ﬁrm, nontender 
edge. The cirrhotic liver may also be scarred and contracted. 
Many other diseases may produce similar ﬁndings such as 
hemochromatosis, amyloidosis, and lymphoma. An enlarged 
liver with a smooth, tender edge suggests inﬂammation, as in 
hepatitis, or venous congestion, seen in right-sided heart failure.
Irregular Large Liver
An enlarged liver that is ﬁrm or hard with an irregular edge or 
surface suggests hepatocellular carcinoma. There may be one or 
more nodules. The liver may or may not be tender.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
505
REFERENCES
References
 1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Center for 
Health Statistics. National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Sur-
vey: 2011 Outpatient Department Summary Tables. Table 7. 
Twenty leading principal reasons for outpatient department visits: 
United States, 2011. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/ahcd.
htm. Accessed April 23, 2015.
 2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Center for 
Health Statistics. National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Sur-
vey: 2011 Emergency Department Summary Tables. Table 10. Ten 
leading principal reasons for emergency department visits, by 
patient age and sex: United States, 2011. Available at http://www.
cdc.gov/nchs/ahcd.htm. Accessed April 23, 2015.
 3. Talley NJ, Vakil NB, Moayyedi P, et al. American Gastroenterologi-
cal Association technical review on the evaluation of dyspepsia. 
Gastroenterology. 2005;129:1756.
 4. Drossman DA. The functional gastrointestinal disorders and the 
Rome III process. Gastroenterology. 2007;130:1377.
 5. Tack J, Talley NJ. Functional dyspepsia—symptoms, deﬁnitions 
and validity of the Rome III criteria. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 
2013;10:134.
 6. Ranji SR, Goldman LE, Simel DL, et al. Do opiates affect the clini-
cal evaluation of patients with acute abdominal pain? JAMA. 
2006;296:1764.
 7. Schneider L, Büchler MW, Werner J. Acute pancreatitis with an 
emphasis on infection. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2010;24:921.
 8. Fogel EL, Sherman S. ERCP for gallstone pancreatitis. N Engl J Med. 
2014;370:150.
 9. Guptak WB. In the clinic: acute pancreatitis. Ann Intern Med. 
2010;153:ITC5–1.
 10. Strasberg S. Acute calculus cholecystitis. N Engl J Med. 2008; 
358:2804.
 11. Wilson J. In the clinic: gastroesophageal reﬂux disease. Ann Intern 
Med. 2008;149:ITC2–1.
 12. DeVault KR, Castell DO. Updated guidelines for the diagnosis and 
treatment of gastroesophageal reﬂux disease. Am J Gastroenterol. 
2005;100:190.
 13. Fletcher KC, Goutte M, Slaughter JC, et al. Signiﬁcance and degree 
of reﬂux in patients with primary extraesophageal symptoms. 
Laryngoscope. 2011;121:2561.
 14. Shaheen NJ, Weinberg DS, Denberg TD. Upper endoscopy for gas-
troesophageal reﬂux disease: best practice advice from the clinical 
guidelines committee of the American College of Physicians. Ann 
Intern Med. 2012;157:808.
 15. Spechler SJ, Souza RF. Barrett’s esophagus. N Engl J Med. 2014; 
371:836.
 16. Bao J, Lopez JA, Huerta S. Acute abdominal pain and abnormal CT 
ﬁndings. JAMA. 2013;310:848.
 17. Howell JM, Eddy OL, Lukens TW, et al. Clinical policy: critical 
issues in the evaluation and management of emergency depart-
ment patients with suspected appendicitis. Ann Emerg Med. 2010; 
55:71.
 18. Andersson RE. The natural history and traditional management of 
appendicitis revisited: spontaneous resolution and predominance 
of prehospital perforations imply that a correct diagnosis is more 
important than an early diagnosis. World J Surg. 2007;31:86.
 19. Andresson RE. Meta-analysis of the clinical and laboratory diagno-
sis of appendicitis. Br J Sur. 2004;91:28.
 20. Camilleri M. Peripheral mechanisms in irritable bowel syndrome. 
N Engl J Med. 2012;367:1626.
 21. Roden DF, Altman KW. Causes of dysphagia among different age 
groups: a systematic review of the literature. Otolaryngol Clin North 
Am. 2013;46:965.
 22. Rome III Diagnostic Criteria for Functional Gastrointestinal Disor-
ders—Appendix A, pp. 885–898, 2006. Available at http://www.
romecriteria.org/criteria./ Accessed April 26, 2015.
 23. Longstreth GF, Thompson WG, Chey WD, et al. Functional bowel 
disorders. Gastroenterology. 2006;130:1480.
 24. Lefﬂer DA, Lamont JT. Clostridium difﬁcile infection. N Engl J Med. 
2015;372:1539.
 25. Shah BJ, Rughwani N, Rose S. Constipation. In the clinic: constipa-
tion. Ann Intern Med. 2015;162:ITC-1.
 26. Gallegos-Orozco JF, Foxx-Orenstein AE, Sterler SM, et al. Chronic 
constipation in the elderly. Am J Gastroenterol. 2012;107:18.
 27. Sarma AV, Wei JT. Benign prostatic hyperplasia and lower urinary 
tract symptoms. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:248.
 28. Hooton TM. Uncomplicated urinary tract infection. N Engl J Med. 
2012;366:1028.
 29. Gupta K, Trautner B. In the clinic: urinary tract infection. Ann 
Intern Med. 2012;156:ITC3–1.
 30. Bettez M, Tu le M, Carlson K, et al. 2012 update: guidelines for 
adult urinary incontinence collaborative consensus document for 
the Canadian Urological Association. Can Urol Assoc J. 2012;6:354.
 31. Markland AD, Vaughan CP, Johnson TM 2nd, et al. Incontinence. 
Med Clin North Am. 2011;95:539.
 32. Holroyd-Leduc JM, Tannenbaum C, Thorpe KE, et al. What type 
of urinary incontinence does this woman have? JAMA. 2008; 
299:1446.
 33. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. The 
NSDUH Report: Substance use and mental health estimates from the 
2013 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Overview of ﬁndings. 
Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration; 2014. Available at: http://store.samhsa.gov/shin/
content//NSDUH14–0904/NSDUH14–0904.pdf. Accessed March 7, 
2015.
 34. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Fact Sheets—Alcohol 
Use and Your Health. 2014. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/alco-
hol/pdfs/alcoholyourhealth.pdf. Accessed March 7, 2015.
 35. Wilson JF. In the clinic. Alcohol use. Ann Intern Med. 2009; 
150:ITC3–1.
 36. Moyer VA, U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening and 
behavioral counseling interventions in primary care to reduce 
alcohol misuse: U.S. preventive services task force recommenda-
tion statement. Ann Intern Med. 2013;159:210.
 37. National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. Alcohol Facts 
and Statistics. 2014. Available at http://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publi-
cations/AlcoholFacts&Stats/AlcoholFacts&Stats.pdf. Accessed 
March 7, 2015.
 38. National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. Helping 
patients who drink too much. A Clinician’s Guide. National Insti-
tutes of Health, 2005. Available at http://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/pub-
lications/Practitioner/CliniciansGuide2005/guide.pdf. Accessed 
March 7, 2015.
 39. National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. Prescribing 
medications for alcohol dependence. National Institutes of Health, 
2008. Available at http://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/Practi-
tioner/CliniciansGuide2005/PrescribingMeds.pdf. Accessed 
March 7, 2015.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
506 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
 40. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Hepatitis A. General 
information. U.S. Department of Health & Human Services; 2012. 
Available at http://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/A/PDFs/HepAGeneral-
FactSheet.pdf. Accessed March 7, 2015.
 41. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Viral Hepatitis Statis-
tics & Surveillance. 2014. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/hepati-
tis/Statistics/2012Surveillance/Table2.3.htm. Accessed March 7, 
2015.
 42. Fiore AE, Wasley A, Bell BP. Prevention of hepatitis A through 
active or passive immunization: recommendations of the Advisory 
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm 
Rep. 2006;55:1.
 43. Mast EE, Weinbaum CM, Fiore AE, et al. A comprehensive immu-
nization strategy to eliminate transmission of hepatitis B virus 
infection in the United States: recommendations of the Advisory 
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) Part II: immuniza-
tion of adults. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2006;55:1.
 44. LeFevre ML. Screening for hepatitis B virus infection in nonpreg-
nant adolescents and adults: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force 
recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161:58.
 45. Chou R, Cottrell EB, Wasson N, et al. Screening for Hepatitis C Virus 
Infection in Adults. Rockville, MD: 2012. Available at http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23304739. Accessed March 7, 2015.
 46. Rosen HR. Clinical practice. Chronic hepatitis C infection. N Engl 
J Med. 2011;364:2429.
 47. El-Serag HB. Hepatocellular carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 2011; 
365:1118.
 48. Moyer VA. Screening for hepatitis C virus infection in adults: U.S. 
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann 
Intern Med. 2013;159:349.
 49. Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2015. CA Cancer J 
Clin. 2015;65:5.
 50. Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al. SEER Cancer Statistics 
Review, 1975–2011. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute; 
2014. Available at http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2011. Accessed 
March 7, 2015.
 51. Edwards BK, Ward E, Kohler BA, et al. Annual report to the nation 
on the status of cancer, 1975–2006, featuring colorectal cancer 
trends and impact of interventions (risk factors, screening, and 
treatment) to reduce future rates. Cancer. 2010;116:544.
 52. American Cancer Society. Colorectal cancer facts & ﬁgures 2011–
2013, 2011. Available at http://www.cancer.org/acs/groups/con-
tent/@epidemiologysurveilance/documents/document/
acspc-028312.pdf. Accessed March 7, 2015.
 53. National Cancer Institute. Genetics of colorectal cancer (PDQ®). 
National Institutes of Health; 2015. Available at http://www.can-
cer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/genetics/colorectal/HealthProfessional. 
Accessed March 7, 2015.
 54. Holme O, Bretthauer M, Fretheim A, et al. Flexible sigmoidoscopy 
versus faecal occult blood testing for colorectal cancer screening in 
asymptomatic individuals. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;9: 
CD009259.
 55. Elmunzer BJ, Hayward RA, Schoenfeld PS, et al. Effect of ﬂexible 
sigmoidoscopy-based screening on incidence and mortality of 
colorectal cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis of ran-
domized controlled trials. PLoS Med. 2012;9:e1001352.
 56. Boyle T, Keegel T, Bull F, et al. Physical activity and risks of proximal 
and distal colon cancers: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
J Natl Cancer Inst. 2012;104:1548.
 57. Dube C, Rostom A, Lewin G, et al. The use of aspirin for primary 
prevention of colorectal cancer: a systematic review prepared for 
the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2007; 
146:365.
 58. Rostom A, Dube C, Lewin G, et al. Nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory 
drugs and cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors for primary prevention of 
colorectal cancer: a systematic review prepared for the U.S. Pre-
ventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2007;146:376.
 59. Chlebowski RT, Wactawski-Wende J, Ritenbaugh C, et al. Estrogen 
plus progestin and colorectal cancer in postmenopausal women. 
N Engl J Med. 2004;350:991.
 60. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Routine aspirin or nonsteroi-
dal anti-inﬂammatory drugs for the primary prevention of colorec-
tal cancer: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation 
statement. Ann Intern Med. 2007;146:361.
 61. Simon MS, Chlebowski RT, Wactawski-Wende J, et al. Estrogen 
plus progestin and colorectal cancer incidence and mortality. 
J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:3983.
 62. Chlebowski RT, Hendrix SL, Langer RD, et al. Inﬂuence of estrogen 
plus progestin on breast cancer and mammography in healthy 
postmenopausal women: the Women’s Health Initiative Random-
ized Trial. JAMA. 2003;289:3243.
 63. Manson JE, Hsia J, Johnson KC, et al. Estrogen plus progestin and 
the risk of coronary heart disease. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:523.
 64. Cushman M, Kuller LH, Prentice R, et al. Estrogen plus progestin 
and risk of venous thrombosis. JAMA. 2004;292:1573.
 65. Levin TR, Zhao W, Conell C, et al. Complications of colonoscopy 
in an integrated health care delivery system. Ann Intern Med. 2006; 
145:880.
 66. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for colorectal can-
cer: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation state-
ment. Ann Intern Med. 2008;149:627.
 67. Levin B, Lieberman DA, McFarland B, et al. Screening and surveil-
lance for the early detection of colorectal cancer and adenomatous 
polyps, 2008: a joint guideline from the American Cancer Society, 
the U.S. Multi-Society Task Force on Colorectal Cancer, and the 
American College of Radiology. CA Cancer J Clin. 2008;58:130.
 68. MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. Vital signs: 
colorectal cancer screening test use—United States, 2012. MMWR 
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2013;62:881.
 69. Inadomi JM, Vijan S, Janz NK, et al. Adherence to colorectal cancer 
screening: a randomized clinical trial of competing strategies. Arch 
Intern Med. 2012;172:575.
 70. Rex DK, Johnson DA, Anderson JC, et al. American College of 
Gastroenterology guidelines for colorectal cancer screening 2009 
[corrected]. Am J Gastroenterol. 2009;104:739.
 71. McGee S. Ch 51, Auscultation of the Abdomen, in Evidence-based 
Physical Diagnosis, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:453.
 72. Cope Z. The Early Diagnosis Of The Acute Abdomen. London: Oxford 
University Press; 1972.
 73. McGee S. Ch 50, Abdominal pain and tenderness, in Evidence-based 
Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:441–
452.
 74. McGee S. Ch 49, Palpation and percussion of the abdomen, in Evi-
dence-based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 
2012:428–440.
 75. de Bruyn G, Graviss EA. A systematic review of the diagnostic 
accuracy of physical examination for the detection of cirrhosis. 
BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2001;1:6.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  11 |
 
The Abdomen 
507
REFERENCES
 76. Naylor CD. Physical examination of the liver. JAMA. 1994;271:1859.
 77. Zoli M, Magalotti D, Grimaldi M, et al. Physical examination of the 
liver: is it still worth it? Am J Gastroenterol. 1995;90:1428.
 78. Grover SA, Barkun AN, Sackett DL. Does this patient have spleno-
megaly? JAMA. 1993;270:2218.
 79. Kent KC. Clinical practice. Abdominal aortic aneurysms. N Engl J 
Med. 2014;371:2101.
 80. Lederle F. In the clinic. Abdominal aortic aneurysm. Ann Intern 
Med. 2009;150:ITC5–1.
 81. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Final Recommendation State-
ment. Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm: Screening, June 2014. Avail-
able at http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/
Document/RecommendationStatementFinal/abdominal-aortic-
aneurysm-screening. Accessed April 28, 2015.
 82. Runyon BA, American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases. 
Introduction to the revised American Association for the Study of 
Liver Diseases Practice Guideline management of adult patients 
with ascites due to cirrhosis 2012. Hepatology. 2013:1651.
 83. Williams JW, Simel DL. Does this patient have ascites? How to 
divine ﬂuid in the abdomen. JAMA. 1992;267:2645.
 84. American College of Physicians. Gastroenterology and Hepatology - 
Medical Knowledge Self-Assessment Program. Philadelphia, PA: 
American College of Physicians; 2013.
 85. Ryan DP, Hong TS, Bardeesy N. Pancreatic adenocarcinoma. N Engl 
J Med. 2014;371:1039.
 86. Yadav D, Lowenfels AB. The epidemiology of pancreatitis and pan-
creatic cancer. Gastroenterology. 2013;144:1252.
 87. Katz LH, Guy DD, Lahat A, et al. Diverticulitis in the young is not 
more aggressive than in the elderly, but it tends to recur more 
often: systematic review and meta-analysis. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 
2013;28:1274.
 88. Acosta S. Mesenteric ischemia. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2015;21:171.
 89. Sise MJ. Acute mesenteric ischemia. Surg Clin North Am. 2014; 
94:165.
 90. DuPont HL. Acute infectious diarrhea in immunocompetent 
adults. N Engl J Med. 2014;370:1532.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  12 |
 
The Peripheral Vascular System 
509
Careful assessment is essential for detection of diseases of the peripheral arteries 
(Fig. 12-1) and veins. Peripheral artery disease (PAD) is generally deﬁned as ath-
erosclerotic disease distal to the aortic bifurcation, although some guidelines also 
include the abdominal aorta.1,2 PAD affects roughly 8 million Americans, with 
estimates ranging from 5.8% to 12% of the population older than age 40 years, 
but is “silent” in 20% to 50% of those affected.1–3 Prevalence increases with age, 
rising from 7% of adults aged 60 to 69 years to 23% of adults 80 years of age and 
older.4 Detection is doubly important because PAD is both a marker for cardio-
vascular morbidity and mortality, and a harbinger of functional decline. Risk of 
death from myocardial infarction and stroke triples in adults with PAD. In 2013, 
the American College of Cardiology Foundation and the American Heart Asso-
ciation updated their PAD guidelines from 2005 and 2011 to promote improved 
screening and prevention.2,5
C H A P T E R 
12
The Peripheral Vascular 
System
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate 
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 11: Peripheral Vascular System)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com
Smooth muscle
Media
Endothelium
Intima
Adventitia
F I G U R E  1 2 - 1 .  Anatomy of arteries.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
510 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Anatomy and Physiology
Arteries
Arteries contain three concentric layers of tissue: the intima, the media, and the 
adventitia (Figs. 12-1 and 12-2). The internal elastic membrane borders the 
intima and the media; the external elastic membrane separates the media from 
the adventitia.
Intima. Surrounding the lumen of all blood vessels is the intima, a single 
continuous lining of endothelial cells with remarkable metabolic properties.12
Intact endothelium synthesizes regulators of thrombosis such as prostacyclin, 
plasminogen activator, and heparin-like molecules. It produces prothrombotic 
molecules such as von Willebrand factor and plasminogen activator inhibitor. It 
modulates blood ﬂow and vascular reactivity through synthesis of vasoconstrictors 
like endothelin and angiotensin-converting enzyme, and vasodilators such as 
nitric oxide and prostacyclin. The intimal endothelium also regulates immune 
and inﬂammatory reactions through elaboration of interleukins, adhesion 
molecules, and histocompatibility antigens.
Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflamma-
tory disease initiated by injury to vas-
cular endothelial cells, provoking 
atheromatous plaque formation and 
the vascular lesions of hypertension. 
Longitudinal
section
Cross
section
Atheroma
(fatty layer)
F I G U R E  1 2 - 2 .  Arterial atheromas.
Atheroma formation begins in the 
intima, where circulating lipoproteins, 
especially low-density lipoproteins 
(LDLs), are exposed to proteoglycans 
from the extracellular matrix, undergo 
oxidative modification, and trigger a 
local inflammatory response that 
attracts mononuclear phagocytes. 
Once in the intima, phagocytes 
mature into macrophages, ingest  
lipids, and become foam cells that 
develop into fatty streaks.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Thromboembolic disorders of the peripheral venous system in the lower extremi-
ties are also common, seen in an estimated 1% of adults aged 60 years and 
above.6,7 Roughly two thirds of affected patients present with deep venous 
thrombosis (DVT), often in hospital settings, and one third with pulmonary 
thromboembolism (PE).8,9 Almost one quarter of PE cases present with sudden 
death.6 Superﬁcial venous thrombosis also poses risks—one third of those 
affected are diagnosed with DVT or PE.10 In addition, DVT in the upper extrem-
ity now represents about 10% of the cases of DVT, reﬂecting complications from 
increased placement of central venous catheters, cardiac pacemakers, and 
deﬁbrillators.11
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  12 |
 
The Peripheral Vascular System 
511
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Media. The media is composed of smooth muscle cells that dilate and 
constrict to accommodate blood pressure and ﬂow. Its inner and outer 
boundaries consist of elastic ﬁbers, or elastin, and are called internal and external 
elastic laminae, or membranes. Small arterioles called the vasa vasorum perfuse 
the media.
Adventitia. The outer layer of the artery is the adventitia, the connective 
tissue containing nerve ﬁbers and the vasa vasorum.
Arterial Branching. Arteries must respond to the variations in cardiac 
output during systole and diastole. Their anatomy and size vary according to 
their distance from the heart. The aorta and its immediate branches are large 
highly elastic arteries such as the common carotid and iliac arteries. These 
arteries course into medium-sized muscular arteries such as the coronary and 
renal arteries. The elastic recoil and smooth muscle contraction and relaxation 
in the media of large and medium-sized arteries produce arterial pulsatile 
ﬂow. Medium-sized arteries divide into small arteries less than 2 mm 
in diameter and even smaller arterioles with diameters from 20 to 100 μm 
(sometimes termed “microns”). Resistance to blood ﬂow occurs primarily in the 
arterioles. Recall that resistance is inversely proportional to the vessel radius, 
known as the law of Laplace. From the arterioles, blood ﬂows into the vast 
network of capillaries, each the diameter of a single red blood cell, only 7 to 8 μm 
across. Capillaries have an endothelial cell lining, but no media, facilitating rapid 
diffusion of oxygen and carbon dioxide.
Arterial Pulses. Arterial pulses are palpable in arteries lying close to the 
body surface.
Investigators place increasing empha-
sis on plaque activation, in addition to 
luminal stenosis, as a major precipi-
tant of ischemia and infarction.13–15 
If a major artery is obstructed, anasto-
moses between branching networks 
of smaller arteries can increase in size 
over time to form collateral circulation 
that perfuses structures distal to the 
occlusion. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Atheroma Formation
● In complex atheromas, there is a proliferation of smooth muscle cells and 
extracellular matrix that breaches the endothelial lining. 
● Complex atheromas contain a ﬁbrous cap of smooth muscle cells that overlies 
a necrotic lipid-rich core, vascular cells, and a wide range of immune cells and 
prothrombotic molecules. 
● Inﬂammatory mediators that alter collagen repair and cap ﬁbrosis are increas-
ingly implicated in plaque rupture and plaque erosion, which expose throm-
bogenic factors in the plaque core to coagulation factors in the blood. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
512 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Pulses in the Arms and Hands. 
In the arms, locate pulsations in the 
arteries shown in Figure 12-3:
■ The brachial artery at the bend of the 
elbow just medial to the biceps ten-
don
■ The radial artery on the lateral ﬂexor 
surface
■ The ulnar artery on the medial ﬂexor 
surface, although overlying tissues 
may obscure pulsations in the ulnar 
artery
Two vascular arches within the hand 
interconnect the radial and ulnar arteries, 
doubly protecting circulation to the hand 
and ﬁngers against possible arterial occlu-
sion.
Pulses in the Abdomen. In the abdomen, locate the pulsations of the 
aorta in the epigastrium (Fig. 12-4). Not palpable are its three important deeper 
branches, the celiac trunk and the superior and inferior mesenteric arteries, 
which perfuse the important organs of the abdominal cavity.
Anterior view
Superior mesenteric
artery (to midgut)
Celiac artery (to foregut)
Inferior mesenteric
artery (to hindgut)
Thoracic aorta
Abdominal aorta
F I G U R E  1 2 - 4 .  Abdominal aorta and its branches.
Brachial artery
Ulnar artery
Arterial arches
Radial artery
F I G U R E  1 2 - 3 .  Arteries of the arm.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  12 |
 
The Peripheral Vascular System 
513
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
■ Celiac trunk: esophagus, stomach, proximal duodenum, liver, gallbladder, 
pancreas, spleen (foregut)
■ Superior mesenteric artery: small intestine—jejunum, ileum, cecum; large 
intestine—ascending and transverse colon, right splenic ﬂexure (midgut)
■ Inferior mesenteric artery: large intestine—descending and sigmoid colon, 
proximal rectum (hindgut)
Pulses in the Legs. As shown in Figure 12-5, in the legs, palpate pulsa-
tions in:
■ The femoral artery just below the inguinal ligament, midway between the 
anterior superior iliac spine and the symphysis pubis
■ The popliteal artery, an extension of the femoral artery that passes medially 
behind the femur, palpable just behind the knee. The popliteal artery divides 
into the two arteries perfusing the lower leg and foot, listed below
■ The dorsalis pedis (DP) artery on the dorsum of the foot just lateral to the 
extensor tendon of the big toe
■ The posterior tibial (PT) artery lies behind the medial malleolus of the ankle. 
An interconnecting arch between its two chief arterial branches protects cir-
culation to the foot.
Veins
Unlike arteries, veins are thin-walled and highly distensible, with a capacity for 
containing up to two thirds of circulating blood ﬂow. The venous intima consists 
of nonthrombogenic endothelium. Protruding into the lumen are unidirectional 
valves that promote venous return to the heart. The media contains circumferen-
tial rings of elastic tissue and smooth muscle that change vein caliber in response 
to even minor changes in venous pressure. The smallest veins, or venules, drain 
capillary beds and form interconnecting venous plexuses such as the prostatic 
and the rectal venous plexuses.
Veins from the arms, upper trunk, and head and neck drain into the superior vena 
cava, which empties into the right atrium. Veins from the abdominal viscera, 
lower trunk, and legs drain into the inferior vena cava, except for circulation 
through the liver. The portal vein, at the conﬂuence of the nutrient-rich superior 
mesenteric and splenic veins, supplies ∼75% of the blood ﬂow to the liver, sup-
plemented by oxygenated blood from the hepatic artery. Blood from these vessels 
ﬂows into the hepatic sinusoids, then drains into three large hepatic veins that 
empty into the inferior vena cava. Because of their weaker wall structure, the 
leg veins are susceptible to irregular dilatation, compression, ulceration, and 
invasion by tumors, and warrant special attention.
Deep and Superﬁcial Venous System of the Legs. The deep veins 
of the legs carry approximately 90% of the venous return from the lower 
extremities. They are well supported by surrounding tissues.
Despite the rich collateral network 
that protects the three branches 
against hypoperfusion, occlusion of 
the mesenteric arteries can result in 
bowel ischemia and infarction. 
Femoral
artery
Inguinal 
ligament
Symphysis
pubis
Anterior
superior
iliac spine
Popliteal
artery
Posterior
tibial
artery
Dorsalis
pedis
artery
Arterial arch
F I G U R E  1 2 - 5 .  Arteries of the leg.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
514 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
In contrast, the superﬁcial veins are subcutaneous, 
with relatively poor tissue support (Fig. 12-6). They 
include:
■ The great saphenous vein, which originates on 
the dorsum of the foot, passes just anterior 
to the medial malleolus, continues up the 
medial aspect of the leg, and joins the femoral 
vein of the deep venous system below the ingui-
nal ligament
■ The small saphenous vein, which begins on the 
lateral side of the foot, passes upward along the 
posterior calf, and joins the deep venous system 
in the popliteal fossa
Anastomotic veins connect the two saphenous veins 
and are readily visible when dilated. Bridging or 
perforating veins connect the superﬁcial system with 
the deep system (Fig. 12-7).
When competent, the one-way valves of the deep, 
superﬁcial, and perforating veins propel blood 
toward the heart, preventing pooling, venous stasis, 
and backward ﬂow. Contraction of the calf muscles 
during walking serves as a venous pump, also pro-
pelling blood upward against gravity.
Small
saphenous
vein 
Femoral vein
Great
saphenous
vein
F I G U R E  1 2 - 6 .  Superﬁcial veins of the leg.
Perforating 
vein
Small 
saphenous
vein
Femoral 
vein
Great
saphenous
vein
F I G U R E  1 2 - 7 .  Deep, superﬁcial, and 
perforating veins of the leg.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  12 |
 
The Peripheral Vascular System 
515
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The Lymphatic System
The lymphatic system is an extensive vascular network that drains lymph ﬂuid 
from body tissues and returns it to the venous circulation. Networks of lymphatic 
capillaries, the lymphatic plexuses, originate in the extracellular spaces, where 
the capillaries collect tissue ﬂuid, plasma proteins, cells, and cellular debris via 
their porous endothelium, which lacks even a basement membrane. The 
lymphatic capillaries continue centrally as thin vascular channels, then as 
collecting ducts, and empty into the major veins at the neck. The right lymphatic 
duct drains ﬂuid from the right side of the head, neck, thorax, and right upper 
limb and empties into the junction of the right internal jugular and the right 
subclavian veins. The thoracic duct collects lymph ﬂuid from the rest of the body 
and empties into the junction of the left internal jugular and the left subclavian 
veins. Lymph ﬂuid transported through these channels is ﬁltered through lymph 
nodes interposed along the way.
Lymph Nodes. Lymph nodes are round, oval, or bean-shaped structures 
that vary in size according to their location. Some lymph nodes, such as the 
preauricular nodes, if palpable at all, are typically very small. The inguinal nodes, 
by contrast, are relatively larger—often 1 cm in diameter and occasionally even 
2 cm in an adult.
In addition to its vascular func-
tions, the lymphatic system plays 
an important role in the body’s 
immune system. Cells within the 
lymph nodes engulf cellular 
debris and bacteria and produce 
antibodies.
Only the superﬁcial lymph nodes 
are accessible to physical exami-
nation. These include the cervical 
nodes (p. 259), the axillary nodes 
(p. 421), and nodes in the arms 
and legs.
Recall that the axillary lymph 
nodes drain most of the arm 
(Fig. 12-8). Lymphatics from the 
ulnar surface of the forearm and 
hand, the little and ring ﬁngers, 
and the adjacent surface of the 
middle ﬁnger, however, drain ﬁrst 
into the epitrochlear nodes. These are located on the medial surface of the arm 
approximately 3 cm above the elbow. Lymphatics from the rest of the arm drain 
primarily into the axillary nodes. Some lymph ﬂuid may go directly to the infra-
clavicular nodes.
Infraclavicular
node
Central axillary
nodes
Lateral axillary
nodes
Epitrochlear
nodes
F I G U R E  1 2 - 8 .  Lymph nodes of the arm.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
516 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The lymphatics of the lower limb, following the 
venous supply, consist of both deep and superﬁcial 
systems (Fig. 12-9). Only the superﬁcial nodes are 
palpable. The superﬁcial inguinal nodes include two 
groups. The horizontal group lies in a chain high in the 
anterior thigh below the inguinal ligament. It drains 
the superﬁcial portions of the lower abdomen and 
buttock, the external genitalia (but not the testes), the 
anal canal and perianal area, and the lower vagina.
The vertical group clusters near the upper part of the 
saphenous vein and drains a corresponding region of 
the leg. By contrast, lymphatics from the portion of leg 
drained by the small saphenous vein (the heel and 
outer aspect of the foot) join the deep system at the 
level of the popliteal space. Lesions in this space are not 
usually associated with palpable inguinal lymph nodes.
Transcapillary Fluid  
Exchange
Blood circulates from arteries to veins through the 
capillary bed (Fig. 12-10). Traditionally, ﬂuid shifts 
between the plasma in the intravascular space and 
tissue interstitial space have been described by the 
Starling law. Starling proposed outward ﬁltration at 
the arteriolar end of the capillary (due to hydrostatic 
and interstitial colloid oncotic pressures) and inward 
resorption at the venous end of the capillary (due to 
colloid osmotic pressure from plasma proteins). 
Recent studies have demonstrated greater complex-
ity in capillary dynamics and the relationships 
between the endothelial capillary lining, the intersti-
tium, and lymphatic drainage.16–18 Net ﬁltration 
appears to continue throughout the capillary, regu-
lated in part by a capillary endothelial glycocalyx 
layer that affects intravascular volume and net ﬁltra-
tion. Interstitial oncotic pressure is notably lower 
than plasma oncotic pressure. Moreover, the inter-
stitium is more than a reservoir for plasma ultraﬁltrate. It is a complex system of 
ﬂuid containing albumin, a gel consisting of glycosaminoglycan molecules, and 
collagen. Capillary transendothelial ﬁltration has been found to be signiﬁcantly 
less than previously understood. Most ﬁltered ﬂuid returns to the circulation not 
as ﬂuid resorbed at the venous end of the capillaries, but as lymph. The kidneys 
also play a role in retention of sodium and water when plasma volume goes down. 
Much of this ﬂuid enters the interstitial space and appears clinically as edema. 
Readers are encouraged to review this recent literature, which has implications for 
use of crystalloid versus colloid ﬂuid resuscitation.
Femoral vein
Femoral artery
Great
saphenous vein
Vertical group
Horizontal group
F I G U R E  1 2 - 9 .  Superﬁcial inguinal lymph nodes.
Venule
Arteriole
Capillary bed
Lymph vessels
Interstitial space
interstitial colloid
oncotic pressure
Hydrostatic
pressure
Colloid osmotic 
pressure of 
plasma proteins
F I G U R E  1 2 - 1 0 .  Capillary ﬂuid exchange.
Mechanisms for the development of 
edema include increased plasma vol-
ume from sodium retention, altered 
capillary dynamics resulting in net fil-
tration, inadequate removal of filtered 
lymph fluid, lymphatic or venous 
obstruction, and increased capillary 
permeability.19,20 See Table 12-1, Types 
of Peripheral Edema, p. 533. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  12 |
 
The Peripheral Vascular System 
517
THE HEALTH HISTORY
The Health History
Peripheral Arterial Disease. As noted, PAD refers to stenotic, occlusive, 
and aneurysmal disease of the abdominal aorta, its mesenteric and renal 
branches, and the arteries of the lower extremities, exclusive of the coronary 
arteries.5 Pain in the extremities can also arise from the skin, musculoskeletal 
system, or nervous system. It may also be referred, like the pain of myocardial 
infarction that radiates to the left arm.
■ Ask about abdominal, ﬂank, or back pain, especially in older smokers. Is 
there unusual constipation or distention? Inquire about for urinary reten-
tion, difﬁculty voiding, or renal colic.
■ If there is persisting abdominal pain, ask about any related “food fear,” weight 
loss, or dark stool.
■ Ask about any pain or cramping in the legs during exertion that is relieved 
by rest within 10 minutes, called intermittent claudication.
See Table 12-2, Painful Peripheral  
Vascular Disorders and Their Mimics, 
pp. 534–535. 
An expanding hematoma from an 
abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) 
may cause symptoms by compressing 
the bowel, aortic branch arteries, or 
the ureters.21,22 
These symptoms suggest mesenteric 
ischemia from arterial embolism,  
arterial or venous thrombosis, bowel 
volvulus or strangulation, or hypoper-
fusion. Failure to detect acute symp-
toms can result in bowel necrosis and 
even death. 
Symptomatic limb ischemia with 
exertion is atherosclerotic PAD. Pain 
with walking or prolonged standing, 
radiating from the spinal area into 
the buttocks, thighs, lower legs, or 
feet, is neurogenic claudication. The 
positive likelihood ratio (LR) of spinal 
stenosis is >6 if the pain is relieved by 
sitting and bending forward, or if 
there is bilateral buttock or leg 
pain.23 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Common or Concerning Symptoms
● Abdominal, ﬂank, or back pain
● Pain or weakness in the arms or legs
● Intermittent claudication
● Cold, numbness, pallor in the legs; hair loss
● Swelling in calves, legs, or feet
● Color change in ﬁngertips or toes in cold weather
● Swelling with redness or tenderness
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
518 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
■ Ask also about coldness, numbness, or pallor in the legs or feet or loss of hair 
over the anterior tibial surfaces.
Because most patients with PAD report minimal symptoms, enquire about two 
common types of atypical leg pain from PAD that occur prior to critical limb 
ischemia: leg pain on exertion and rest (exertional pain that can begin at rest), and 
leg pain/carry on (exertional pain that does not stop the patient from walking). 
Ask speciﬁcally about the PAD warning signs that follow, particularly in patients 
aged ≥50 years and those with PAD risk factors, especially smoking, but also 
diabetes, hypertension, elevated cholesterol, African American ethnicity, or coro-
nary artery disease (see pp. 363–364). When the symptoms or risk factors 
described in the box below are present, pursue careful examination and testing 
with the ankle–brachial index (ABI) (see also p. 536).
Hair loss over the anterior tibiae 
points to decreased arterial perfusion. 
“Dry” or brown–black ulcers from  
gangrene may ensue. 
Only 10% of patients have the classic 
features of leg pain with exertion 
relieved by rest.24 Another 30% to 
50% have atypical leg pain, and up to 
60% are asymptomatic. Asymptom-
atic patients can have significant 
functional impairment that limits or 
slows walking to avoid symptoms as 
PAD is progressing. 
Symptom location suggests the site of 
arterial ischemia:
● buttock, hip: aortoiliac
● erectile dysfunction: iliac–pudendal
● thigh: common femoral or aortoiliac
● upper calf: superficial femoral
● lower calf: popliteal
● foot: tibial or peroneal 
These symptoms suggest intestinal 
ischemia of the celiac or superior or 
inferior mesenteric arteries. 
Prevalence of AAAs in first-degree  
relatives is 15% to 28%.25 
Peripheral Arterial Disease “Warning Signs”
● Fatigue, aching, numbness, or pain that limits walking or exertion in the legs; 
if present, identify the location. Ask also about erectile dysfunction.
● Any poorly healing or nonhealing wounds of the legs or feet
● Any pain present when at rest in the lower leg or foot and changes when 
standing or supine
● Abdominal pain after meals and associated “food fear” and weight loss (see 
Chapter 11)
● Any ﬁrst-degree relatives with an AAA
Peripheral Venous Disease (or Venous Thromboembolism). In 
patients with central venous catheters, ask about arm discomfort, pain, 
paresthesias, and weakness.
Ask about pain or swelling in the calf or leg.
These symptoms point to upper 
extremity DVT, most commonly from 
catheter-associated thrombosis.11 
Most patients are asymptomatic with 
thrombosis detected on routine 
screening. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Because individual clinical features 
have poor diagnostic value, experts 
recommend use of well-validated for-
mal clinical scoring systems like the 
Wells Clinical Score and the Primary 
Care Rule for all patients with sus-
pected DVT.8,26 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  12 |
 
The Peripheral Vascular System 
519
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Screening for Lower-Extremity Peripheral Artery Disease. 
Atherosclerotic lower-extremity PAD affects more than 200 million people 
globally.27 Prevalence increases with age, ranging from around 5% at ages 40 to 49 
years to 15% to 20% in persons aged 80 years and older. Cardiovascular risk 
factors, particularly smoking and diabetes, increase risk for PAD: an estimated 40% 
to 60% of PAD patients have coexisting coronary artery disease and/or cerebral 
artery disease, and the presence of PAD signiﬁcantly increases the risk for 
cardiovascular events.28 Only a minority of PAD patients have classic claudication 
(exertional calf pain relieved by rest), and many are asymptomatic.29
Health Promotion and 
Counseling: Evidence and 
Recommendations
Important Topics for Health Promotion  
and Counseling
● Screening for lower-extremity peripheral artery disease
● The ankle–brachial index
● Screening for renal artery disease
● Screening for abdominal aortic aneurysm
Risk Factors for Lower-Extremity Peripheral 
Arterial Disease
● Age ≥65 years
● Age ≥50 years with a history of diabetes or smoking
● Leg symptoms with exertion
● Nonhealing wounds
Source: Rooke TW, Hirsch AT, Misra S, et al. Management of patients with peripheral artery disease 
(compilation of 2005 and 2011 ACCF/AHA Guideline Recommendations): a report of the American 
College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. 
American College of Cardiology Foundation Task Force, American Heart Association Task Force.  
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:1555.
The Ankle–Brachial Index.
PAD can be diagnosed noninvasively using 
the ABI. The ABI is the ratio of blood pressure measurements in the foot and arm; 
values <0.9 are considered abnormal. However, the U.S. Preventive Services Task 
Force (USPSTF) does not advocate PAD screening due to insufﬁcient evidence 
for estimating the relative beneﬁts and harms of ABI testing (I statement).30
Nonetheless, the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart 
Association (ACCF/AHA) practice guidelines recommend measuring ABI in those 
at risk, as detailed in the box below, in order to offer therapeutic interventions to 
reduce the risk of cardiovascular events.5
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
520 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Learn to use the ABI, which is reliable, reproducible, and easy to perform in the 
ofﬁce. Although the sensitivity of an abnormal ABI is low (15% to 20%), the 
speciﬁcity is 99%, and the test has high positive and negative predictive values 
(both >80%).1 Clinicians or ofﬁce staff can easily measure systolic blood pressure 
in the arms using a sphygmomanometer and the pedal pulses using Doppler 
ultrasound. These values can be entered into calculators available at selected 
websites (see American College of Physicians, at http://www.sononet.us/abiscore/
abiscore.htm).
For patients with PAD and intermittent claudication, the ACCF/AHA guide-
lines strongly recommend supervised exercise programs as the initial treat-
ment.5 Randomized clinical trials have shown signiﬁcantly increased 
pain-free walking distances with supervised exercise programs compared to 
nonsupervised programs.31 Other recommendations for managing PAD 
include: tobacco cessation; treatment of hyperlipidemia; optimal control of 
diabetes and hypertension; use of antiplatelet agents; meticulous foot care 
and well-ﬁtting shoes, particularly for diabetic patients; and, in selected 
cases, revascularization.
Screening for Renal Artery Disease. Atherosclerotic renal artery 
stenosis (RAS) is present in substantial proportions of patients with end-stage 
renal disease, congestive heart failure, co-occurring diabetes and hypertension, 
and other atherosclerotic diseases.32 Atherosclerotic RAS is associated with 
markedly increased risks for cardiovascular events.33 RAS is less commonly 
caused by ﬁbromuscular dysplasia, usually in women younger than age 40 years. 
The ACCF/AHA guidelines recommend screening for RAS with either duplex 
ultrasonography, magnetic resonance angiography, or computed tomographic 
angiography in patients with the conditions listed in the box below.5
See Table 12-3, Using the Ankle– 
Brachial Index, p. 536. 
Conditions Suspicious for Renal Artery Disease
● Onset of hypertension at age ≤30 years
● Onset of severe hypertension at age ≥55 years
● Accelerated (sudden and persistent worsening of previously controlled hyper-
tension), resistant (not controlled with three drugs), or malignant hyperten-
sion (evidence of acute end-organ damage)
● New worsening of renal function or worsening function after use of an 
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or an angiotensin-receptor block-
ing agent
● An unexplained small kidney or size discrepancy of >1.5 cm between the two 
kidneys
● Sudden unexplained pulmonary edema, especially in the setting of worsening 
renal function
See Chapter 9, pp. 365–367, for 
guidelines for assessing blood pressure. 
The frequency of hypertension arising 
from RAS is unknown. 
Screening for Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm. AAA is deﬁned as an 
infrarenal aortic diameter ≥3 cm. The population prevalence of AAA in adults 
older than age 50 years ranges from 3.9% to 7.2% in men and from 1% to 1.3% 
in women.34,35 The dreaded consequence of AAA is rupture, which is often 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  12 |
 
The Peripheral Vascular System 
521
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
fatal—most patients die before reaching a hospital. The chances of rupture and 
mortality increase dramatically when the aortic diameter exceeds 5.5 cm. The 
strongest risk factors for AAA are older age, male sex, smoking, and family history; 
other potential risk factors include history of other vascular aneurysms, taller height, 
coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease, atherosclerosis, hypertension, and 
hyperlipidemia.34
Because symptoms are uncommon and screening can reduce AAA-related mor-
tality by about 50% over 13 to 15 years, the USPSTF makes a grade B recom-
mendation for one-time ultrasound screening of men aged 65 to 75 years who 
have smoked more than 100 cigarettes in a lifetime.36 Clinicians can selectively 
offer screening to men in this age range who have never smoked (grade C); evi-
dence is insufﬁcient regarding screening women in this age range who have ever 
smoked (I statement). However, the USPSTF recommends against screening 
women who have never smoked (grade D). Ultrasound is a noninvasive, inex-
pensive, and accurate (sensitivity 94% to 100%; speciﬁcity 98% to 100%) 
screening test for diagnosing AAA. Palpation is not sensitive enough to be recom-
mended for screening.
Techniques of Examination
As you intensify your focus on the peripheral vascular system, recall that periph-
eral arterial disease is often asymptomatic and underdiagnosed, leading to sig-
niﬁcant morbidity and mortality. Review the techniques for assessing blood 
pressure, the carotid artery, the aorta, and the renal and femoral arteries on the 
pages indicated below, which reﬂect current guidelines.
Important Areas of Examination
Arms
Abdomen
Legs
Size, symmetry,  
skin color
Radial pulse,  
brachial pulse
Epitrochlear lymph 
nodes
Aortic width and 
pulsation
Inguinal lymph nodes
Size, symmetry, skin color
Femoral, popliteal, 
dorsalis pedis, and 
posterior tibial pulses
Thighs, calves, and 
ankles for swelling and 
peripheral edema
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
522 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
There are several recommended systems for grading the amplitude of arterial 
pulses. One system uses a scale of 0 to 3, as shown in the box below.25 Use the 
scale adopted by your institution.
Summary: Key Components of the Peripheral 
Arterial Examination
● Measure the blood pressure in both arms (see Chapter 4, p. 130).
● Palpate the carotid upstroke, auscultate for bruits (see Chapter 9, pp. 381–
382).
● Auscultate for aortic, renal, and femoral bruits; palpate the aorta and assess 
its maximal diameter (see Chapter 11, pp. 472, 483).
● Palpate the pulses of the brachial, radial, ulnar, femoral, popliteal, DP, and PT 
arteries.
● Inspect the ankles and feet for color, temperature, and skin integrity; note any 
ulcerations; inspect for hair loss, trophic skin changes, hypertrophic nails.
Source: Hirsch AT, Haskal ZJ, Hertzer NR, et al. ACC/AHA 2005 Practice Guidelines for the manage-
ment of patients with peripheral arterial disease (lower extremity, renal, mesenteric, and abdominal 
aortic): a collaborative report from the American Association for Vascular Surgery/Society for Vas-
cular Surgery, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society for Vascular Medi-
cine and Biology, Society of Interventional Radiology, and the ACC/AHA Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines (Writing Committee to Develop Guidelines for the Management of Patients With Periph-
eral Arterial Disease): endorsed by the American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary 
Rehabilitation; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; Society for Vascular Nursing; TransAtlan-
tic Inter-Society Consensus; and Vascular Disease Foundation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;47:1239. 
If an artery is widely dilated, it is  
aneurysmal. 
Recommended Grading of Pulses
3+
2+
1+
0
Bounding
Brisk, expected (normal)
Diminished, weaker than expected
Absent, unable to palpate
Arms
Inspection. Inspect both arms from the ﬁngertips to the shoulders. Note:
■ Their size, symmetry, and any swelling
■ The venous pattern
■ The color of the skin and nail beds and the texture of the skin
Bounding carotid, radial, and femoral 
pulses are present in aortic regurgita-
tion; asymmetric diminished pulses 
point to arterial occlusion from ath-
erosclerosis or embolism. 
Swelling from lymphedema of the 
arm and hand may follow axillary 
node dissection and radiation 
therapy. 
Visible venous collaterals, swelling, 
edema, and discoloration signal 
upper extremity DVT.11 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Asymmetric blood pressures are 
found in coarctation of the aorta and 
dissecting aortic aneurysm. 
Atherosclerotic disease occurs prefer-
entially in selected arteries—the 
carotid bifurcation and the proximal 
renal arteries (and the proximal left 
anterior descending coronary 
artery).14 In the aorta, atherosclerotic 
disease results in ectasia and the for-
mation of aneurysms. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  12 |
 
The Peripheral Vascular System 
523
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Palpation. Palpate the radial pulse 
with the pads of your ﬁngers on the 
ﬂexor surface of the lateral wrist 
(Fig. 12-11). Partially flexing the 
patient’s wrist may help you feel this 
pulse. Compare the pulses in both arms.
If you suspect arterial insufﬁciency, 
palpate the brachial pulse. Flex the 
patient’s elbow slightly, and palpate 
the artery just medial to the biceps 
tendon at the antecubital crease (Fig. 
12-13). The brachial pulse can also be 
palpated higher in the arm in the 
groove between the biceps and triceps 
muscles.
Palpate one or more epitrochlear nodes. 
With the patient’s elbow ﬂexed to 
about 90º and the forearm supported 
by your hand, reach around behind 
the arm and feel in the groove between 
the biceps and triceps muscles, about 
3 cm above the medial epicondyle 
(Fig. 12-14). If a node is present, note 
its size, consistency, and tenderness.
Epitrochlear nodes are difﬁcult to 
identify in most healthy people.
F I G U R E  1 2 - 1 1 .  Palpate the radial 
pulse.
F I G U R E  1 2 - 1 2 .  Raynaud 
disease.
F I G U R E  1 2 - 1 3 .  Palpate the 
brachial pulse.
Capillary refill time in the digits of  
>5 seconds has low sensitivity and 
specificity and is not considered 
diagnostically helpful.26 
Right hand of examiner
Medial epicondyle of humerus
F I G U R E  1 2 - 1 4 .  Palpate the 
epitrochlear nodes.
An enlarged epitrochlear node sug-
gests local or distal infection or may 
be associated with lymphadenopathy 
from lymphoma or human immuno-
deficiency virus (HIV). 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
In Raynaud disease, wrist pulses are typ-
ically normal, but spasm of more distal 
arteries causes episodes of sharply 
demarcated pallor of the fingers, as 
shown in Figure 12-12 (see Table 12-2, 
Painful Peripheral Vascular Disorders 
and Their Mimics, pp. 534–535).
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
524 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Abdomen
For techniques of examination of the abdominal aorta, see Chapter 11, Abdomen, 
pp. 472, 483. In brief, listen for aortic, renal, and femoral bruits. Palpate and 
estimate the width of the abdominal aorta in the epigastric area by measuring the 
aortic width between two ﬁngers, especially in older adults and smokers due to 
higher risk of AAA. Assess for a pulsatile mass.
The Inguinal Lymph Nodes. Palpate the superﬁcial inguinal nodes, including 
both the horizontal and the vertical groups (Fig. 12-15). Note their size, consistency, 
and discreteness, and note any tenderness. Nontender, discrete inguinal nodes up 
to 1 cm or even 2 cm in diameter are frequently palpable in normal people.
The sensitivity of aortic palpation for 
AAA ≥4 cm is 60%. Sensitivity for a 
pulsatile mass, detected in only 50% 
of diagnosed ruptures, is 40% to 60%. 
Note that an inguinal mass suspicious 
for an incarcerated hernia is often 
diagnosed as an AAA at surgery.22 
Lymphadenopathy refers to enlarged 
lymph nodes, with or without tender-
ness. Distinguish between local and 
generalized lymphadenopathy by 
locating either a causative lesion in 
the drainage area, or enlarged nodes 
in at least two other noncontiguous 
lymph node regions. 
Femoral vein
Femoral artery
Great
saphenous vein
Vertical group
Horizontal group
F I G U R E  1 2 - 1 5 .  Superﬁcial inguinal lymph nodes.
Legs
The patient should be supine and draped so that the external genitalia are cov-
ered and the legs fully exposed. Stockings or socks should be removed.
Inspection. Inspect both legs from the groin and buttocks to the feet. Note:
■ Their size, symmetry, and any swelling or edema
■ The venous pattern and any venous enlargement
Individual findings of calf, leg, or 
ankle swelling or asymmetry; venous 
dilatation; erythema; or superficial 
thrombophlebitis have low diagnostic 
value for DVT compared to combined 
scoring systems and ultrasound.8,26 
See also Table 12-4, Chronic Insuffi-
ciency of Arteries and Veins, p. 537. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  12 |
 
The Peripheral Vascular System 
525
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Any pigmentation, rashes, scars, or ulcers
■ The color and texture of the skin, the color of the nail beds, and the distribu-
tion of hair on the lower legs, feet, and toes
Inspect the color of the skin.
■ Is there a local area of redness? If so, note its temperature.
■ Are there brownish areas near the ankles?
■ Note any ulcers in the skin. Where are they?
Inspect the saphenous system for varicosities. If present, ask the patient to stand, 
which allows any varicosities to ﬁll with blood and makes them visible; these 
changes are easily missed when the patient is supine. Palpate along any vari-
cosities to check for thrombophlebitis.
Inspect and compare the thighs, calves, 
and ankles for symmetry. Note their rela-
tive size and the prominence of veins, 
tendons, and bones. Are the veins unusu-
ally prominent (Fig. 12-16)?
Ulcers or sores on the feet raise the LR 
of peripheral vascular disease to 7.26 
See Table 12-5, Common Ulcers of the 
Ankles and Feet, p. 538. 
Warmth and redness over the calf  
signal cellulitis. Atrophic and hairless 
skin is commonly present but not 
diagnostic of PAD. 
Local swelling, redness, warmth, and a 
subcutaneous cord signal superficial 
thrombophlebitis, an emerging risk 
factor for DVT.10 
Brownish discoloration or ulcers just 
above the malleolus suggests chronic 
venous insufficiency. 
Thickened, brawny skin suggests 
lymphedema and advanced venous 
insufficiency. 
Varicose veins are dilated and tortu-
ous. Their walls may feel somewhat 
thickened. Note the many varicose 
veins along the leg on p. 531. 
F I G U R E  1 2 - 1 6 .  Note the 
prominent veins.
Edema may obscure the veins, tendons, 
and bony prominences. 
F I G U R E  1 2 - 1 7 .  Pretibial edema.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
526 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Is there swelling or edema (Fig. 12-17)? If so, is it unilateral or bilateral?
Note the extent of the swelling. How far up the leg does it go?
If you detect unilateral swelling or edema, measure the calves 10 cm below the 
tibial tuberosity. Normally, the difference in calf circumference is <3 cm. Mea-
sure and compare other areas of asymmetry, if needed, including the thighs and 
ankles.
Palpation: The Peripheral Pulses. Palpate the femoral, popliteal, and 
pedal pulses to assess the arterial circulation.
■ The femoral pulse. Press deeply, below 
the inguinal ligament and about mid-
way between the anterior superior 
iliac spine and the symphysis pubis 
(Fig. 12-18). As in deep abdominal 
palpation, the use of two hands, one 
on top of the other, may be helpful, 
especially in obese patients.
Unilateral calf and ankle swelling and 
edema suggest venous thromboem-
bolic disease (VTE) from DVT, chronic 
venous insufficiency from prior DVT, 
or incompetent venous valves; or it 
may be lymphedema. 
Bilateral edema is present in heart fail-
ure, cirrhosis, and nephrotic syndrome. 
Venous distention suggests a venous 
cause of edema. 
In DVT, the location of edema sug-
gests the point of occlusion—the 
popliteal vein if the lower leg or ankle 
is swollen, the iliofemoral veins if the 
entire leg is swollen. 
Calf asymmetry >3 cm increases the LR 
for DVT to >2.26 Also consider muscle 
tear or trauma, Baker cyst (posterior 
knee), and muscular atrophy. 
F I G U R E  1 2 - 1 8 .  Palpate the 
femoral pulse.
If the femoral pulse is absent, the LR 
of PAD is >6.26 If the occlusion is at the 
aortic or iliac level, all pulses distal to 
the occlusion are typically affected 
and may cause postural color changes 
(see pp. 530–531). 
An exaggerated, widened femoral 
pulse suggests the pathological dila-
tation of a femoral aneurysm. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  12 |
 
The Peripheral Vascular System 
527
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ The popliteal pulse. The patient’s knee should be somewhat ﬂexed, with the 
leg relaxed. Place the ﬁngertips of both hands so that they just meet in the 
midline behind the knee and press them deeply into the popliteal fossa 
(Fig. 12-19). The popliteal pulse is more difﬁcult to ﬁnd than other pulses. 
It is deeper and feels more diffuse.
F I G U R E  1 2 - 1 9 .  Palpate the popliteal pulse.
If you cannot palpate the popliteal pulse with this approach, try with the 
patient prone (Fig. 12-20). Flex the patient’s knee to about 90º, let the lower 
leg relax against your shoulder or upper arm, and press your two thumbs 
deeply into the popliteal fossa (Fig. 12-21).
An exaggerated, widened popliteal 
pulse suggests a popliteal artery aneu-
rysm. Popliteal and femoral aneurysms 
are uncommon. They are usually from 
atherosclerosis and occur primarily in 
men age ≥50 years. 
F I G U R E  1 2 - 2 0 .  Palpate the 
popliteal pulse, prone position.
F I G U R E  1 2 - 2 1 .  Deep palpation 
in the popliteal fossa.
Atherosclerosis most commonly 
obstructs arteries in the thigh: The 
femoral pulse is normal, the popliteal 
pulse decreased or absent. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
528 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ The DP pulse. Palpate the dorsum 
of the foot (not the ankle) just lat-
eral to the extensor tendon of the 
great toe (Fig. 12-22). The DP ar-
tery may be congenitally absent or 
branch higher in the ankle. If you 
cannot feel a pulse, explore the 
dorsum of the foot more laterally.
■ The PT pulse. Curve your ﬁngers 
behind and slightly below the me-
dial malleolus of the ankle (Fig. 
12-23). This pulse may be hard to 
feel in a fat or edematous ankle.
F I G U R E  1 2 - 2 2 .  Palpate the 
dorsalis pedis pulse.
Absent pedal pulses with normal fem-
oral and popliteal pulses raise the LR 
of PAD to >14.26 
F I G U R E  1 2 - 2 3 .  Palpate the 
posterior tibial pulse.
Acute arterial occlusion from embo-
lism or thrombosis causes pain and 
numbness or tingling. The limb distal 
to the occlusion becomes cold, pale, 
and pulseless. Pursue emergency 
treatment. 
Tips for Palpating Difﬁcult Pulses
● Position your body and examining hand comfortably; awkward positions 
decrease tactile sensitivity.
● Once your hand is positioned properly, linger and vary the pressure of your 
ﬁngers to pick up a weak pulsation. If unsuccessful, explore the area gently 
but more deliberately.
● Do not mistake the patient’s pulse with your own pulsating ﬁngertips. If 
needed, count your own heart rate and compare it to the patient’s. The rates 
are usually diﬀerent. Your carotid pulse is convenient for this comparison.
Assess the temperature of the feet and legs with the backs of your ﬁngers. Compare 
one side with the other. Bilateral coldness is usually caused by a cold environ-
ment or anxiety.
The Peripheral Veins: Swelling and Edema. If swelling or edema is 
present, palpate for pitting edema. Press ﬁrmly but gently with your thumb for at 
least 2 seconds (1) over the dorsum of each foot, (2) behind each medial 
malleolus, and (3) over the shins (Fig. 12-24). Look for pitting—a depression 
caused by pressure from your thumb. Normally there is none. The severity of 
edema is graded on a four-point scale, from slight to very marked.
Asymmetric coolness of the feet has a 
positive LR of >6 for PAD.26 
See Table 12-1, Types of Peripheral 
Edema, p. 533. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  12 |
 
The Peripheral Vascular System 
529
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Palpate for any venous tenderness or cords, which can accompany a DVT. DVTs 
often have no demonstrable signs, so diagnosis often depends on clinical suspi-
cion and testing.
■ Palpate the inguinal area just medial to the femoral pulse for tenderness of 
the femoral vein.
■ Next, with the patient’s leg ﬂexed at the knee and relaxed, palpate the calf. 
With your ﬁngerpads, gently compress the calf muscles against the tibia, and 
search for any tenderness or cords.
Special Techniques
Evaluating Arterial Perfusion of the 
Hand. If you suspect arterial insufﬁciency in the 
arm or hand, try to palpate the ulnar pulse as well as 
the radial and brachial pulses. Press deeply on the 
ﬂexor surface of the medial wrist (Fig. 12-26). 
Partially ﬂexing the patient’s wrist may help you. The 
pulse of a normal ulnar artery may not be palpable.
The Allen Test. The Allen test compares 
patency of the ulnar and radial arteries. It also 
ensures patency of the ulnar artery before punc-
turing the radial artery for blood samples. The 
patient should rest with hands in lap, palms up.
F I G U R E  1 2 - 2 4 .  Palpate for pitting edema.
Figure 12-25 shows 3+ pitting edema. 
F I G U R E  1 2 - 2 5 .  3+ pitting 
edema.
A painful, pale, swollen leg, together 
with tenderness in the groin over the 
femoral vein, suggests deep iliofemo-
ral thrombosis. Risk of PE in proximal 
vein thrombosis is 50%.7 
Only half of patients with DVT in the 
calf have tenderness or venous cords, 
and absence of calf tenderness does 
not rule out thrombosis. Note that 
Homan sign, discomfort behind the 
knee with forced dorsiflexion on the 
foot, is neither sensitive nor specific, 
and discredited by Homan himself.26 
F I G U R E  1 2 - 2 6 .  Palpate 
the ulnar pulse.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Arterial occlusive disease is much less 
common in the arms than in the legs. 
Absent or diminished pulses at the 
wrist occur in acute embolic occlusion 
and in Buerger disease, or thromboan-
giitis obliterans.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
530 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Ask the patient to make a tight ﬁst with one 
hand; then compress both radial and ulnar arter-
ies ﬁrmly between your thumbs and ﬁngers 
(Fig. 12-27).
Next, ask the patient to open the hand into a 
relaxed, slightly ﬂexed position (Fig. 12-28). The 
palm is pale.
Release your pressure over the ulnar artery. If the 
ulnar artery is patent, the palm ﬂushes within 
about 3 to 5 seconds (Fig. 12-29).
Test patency of the radial artery by releasing the radial artery while still com-
pressing the ulnar artery.
Postural Color Changes of Chronic Arterial Insufﬁciency. If 
pain or diminished pulses suggest arterial insufﬁciency, consider looking for 
postural color changes using the Buerger test (although it has not been 
studied well).26 Raise both legs to about 90º for up to 2 minutes until there 
is maximal pallor of the feet. In light-skinned persons, expect to see normal 
color, as in this right foot (Fig. 12-31), or slight pallor. In darker-skinned 
persons, if color changes are difﬁcult to see, inspect the soles of the feet 
instead, and use tangential lighting to see the veins.
F I G U R E  1 2 - 2 7 .  Compress 
the radial and ulnar arteries.
F I G U R E  1 2 - 2 8 .  Pallor 
when hand relaxed.
Extending the hand fully may cause 
pallor and a falsely positive test. 
F I G U R E  1 2 - 2 9 .  Palmar 
ﬂushing—Allen test negative.
Persisting pallor indicates occlusion of 
the ulnar artery or its distal branches, 
as shown in Figure 12-30. 
F I G U R E  1 2 - 3 0 .  Palmar pallor—
Allen test positive.
Marked pallor on elevation suggests 
arterial insufficiency, as shown in  
Figure 12-31, left foot (right side of 
photo). 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  12 |
 
The Peripheral Vascular System 
531
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Then ask the patient to sit up with legs dangling down. Compare both feet, not-
ing the time required for:
■ Return of pinkness to the skin, normally about 10 seconds or less
■ Filling of the veins of the feet and ankles, normally about 15 seconds
This right foot has normal color, and the veins on the foot have ﬁlled 
(Fig. 12-32). These normal responses suggest an adequate circulation.
Look for any unusual rubor (dusky redness) to replace the pallor of the depen-
dent foot. Rubor may take a minute or more to appear.
Normal responses accompanied by diminished arterial pulses point to good col-
lateral circulation around an arterial occlusion.
Mapping Varicose Veins. Mapping 
can demonstrate varicose veins and their 
origin. With the patient standing, place 
your palpating ﬁngers gently on a vein and, 
with your other hand below it, compress 
the vein sharply (Fig. 12-33). Feel for a 
pressure wave transmitted to the ﬁngers of 
your upper hand. A palpable pressure wave 
indicates that the two parts of the vein are 
connected.
A wave may also be transmitted downward, 
but not as easily.
F I G U R E  1 2 - 3 1 .  The 
Buerger test—legs elevated.
F I G U R E  1 2 - 3 2 .  The 
Buerger test—legs when sitting.
As shown in Figure 12-32, right side, 
the left foot is still pale, and the veins 
are just starting to fill, signs of arterial 
insufficiency. 
Source for Figs. 12-31 and 12-32: Kappert A, Winsor T. Diagnosis of Peripheral Vascular Disease. 
Philadelphia, PA: FA Davis, 1972. 
Persisting dependent rubor suggests 
arterial insufficiency (see p. 538). If  
the patient’s veins are incompetent, 
dependent rubor and the timing of 
color return and venous filling are not 
reliable tests of arterial insufficiency. 
Feel for a
pressure wave
Compress sharply
F I G U R E  1 2 - 3 3 .  Compress with 
both hands.
F I G U R E  1 2 - 3 4 .  Varicose veins.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
532 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
Evaluating the Competency of Venous Valves. Use the retrograde 
ﬁlling (Trendelenburg) test to assess the valves of the communicating veins and the 
saphenous system.
■ With the patient supine, elevate one leg to about 90º to empty it of venous 
blood.
■ Occlude the great saphenous vein in the upper thigh by manual compres-
sion, using enough pressure to occlude this vein but not the deeper vessels.
■ Ask the patient to stand. While you keep the vein occluded, watch for venous 
ﬁlling in the leg. Normally, the saphenous vein ﬁlls from below, taking about 
35 seconds as blood ﬂows through the capillary bed into the venous system.
■ After the patient stands for 20 seconds, release the compression and look for 
sudden additional venous ﬁlling. Normally, slow ﬁlling continues because 
competent valves in the saphenous vein block retrograde ﬂow.
When both steps of this test are normal, the response is termed “negative–
negative.”
Rapid filling of the superficial veins 
during occlusion of the saphenous 
vein indicates incompetent valves in 
the communicating veins that allow 
rapid retrograde flow from the deep 
to the saphenous system. 
Sudden additional filling of superfi-
cial veins after release of compression 
indicates incompetent valves in the 
saphenous vein. 
Results can be negative–positive;  
positive–negative; or, when both 
steps are abnormal, positive–positive. 
Recording Your Findings
Note that initially you may use sentences to describe your ﬁndings; later you will 
use phrases. Written descriptions of lymph nodes appear in Chapter 7, The Head 
and Neck (see p. 259). Likewise, assessment of the carotid pulse is recorded in 
Chapter 9, The Cardiovascular System (see pp. 380–382).
These findings suggest atherosclerotic 
peripheral arterial disease. 
Recording the Physical Examination—The 
Peripheral Vascular System
“Extremities are warm and without edema. No varicosities or stasis changes. 
Calves are supple and nontender. No femoral or abdominal bruits. Brachial, 
radial, femoral, popliteal, dorsalis pedis (DP), and posterior tibial (PT) pulses are 
2+ and symmetric.”
OR
“Extremities are pale below the midcalf, with notable hair loss. Rubor noted 
when legs dependent but no edema or ulceration. Bilateral femoral bruits; no 
abdominal bruits heard. Brachial and radial pulses 2+; femoral, popliteal, DP and 
PT pulses 1+.” (Alternatively, pulses can be recorded as below.)
Radial
Brachial
Femoral
Popliteal
Dorsalis 
Pedis
Posterior 
Tibial
RT
2+
2+
1+
1+
1+
1+
LT
2+
2+
1+
1+
1+
1+
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  12 |
 
The Peripheral Vascular System 
533
Table 12-1 Types of Peripheral Edema
Approximately one third of total body water is extracellular ﬂuid, which, in turn, is roughly 25% plasma; the remainder is 
interstitial ﬂuid. As discussed on p. 516, new evidence has changed the traditional understanding of Starling forces across the 
capillary bed. Net plasma ﬁltration appears to occur throughout the length of the capillary. Interstitial oncotic pressure is notably 
lower than plasma oncotic pressure, and lymphatic drainage plays a greater role in returning interstitial ﬂuid to the circulation 
than previously thought. Several clinical conditions disrupt these forces, resulting in edema, which is the clinically evident 
accumulation of interstitial ﬂuid. Pitting characteristics reﬂect the viscosity of the edema ﬂuid, based primarily on its protein 
concentration.20,26 When protein concentration is low, as in heart failure, pitting and recovery occur within a few seconds. In 
lymphedema, protein levels are higher and nonpitting is more typical. Not depicted below is capillary leak syndrome, in which 
protein leaks into the interstitial space, seen in burns, angioedema, snake bites, and allergic reactions.
Pitting
Swollen foot
Pitting Edema
Edema is a soft, bilateral palpable swelling from increased interstitial ﬂuid volume and 
retention of salt and water, demonstrated by pitting after 1 to 2 seconds of thumb 
pressure on the anterior tibiae and feet. Pitting edema occurs in several conditions: when 
legs are dependent from prolonged standing or sitting, which leads to increased 
hydrostatic pressure in the veins and capillaries; heart failure leading to decreased cardiac 
output; nephrotic syndrome, cirrhosis, or malnutrition leading to low albumin and 
decreased intravascular colloid oncotic pressure; and with selected medications.
Swollen foot
Ulcer
Chronic Venous Insufﬁciency
Edema is soft, with pitting on pressure, and occasionally bilateral. Look for brawny 
changes and skin thickening, especially near the ankle. Ulceration, brownish 
pigmentation, and edema in the feet are common. It arises from chronic obstruction and 
incompetent valves in the deep venous system. (See also Table 12-2, Painful Peripheral 
Vascular Disorders and Their Mimics, pp. 534–535.)
No pitting
Thick skin
Swollen foot
Lymphedema
Edema is initially soft and pitting, then becomes indurated, hard, and nonpitting. Skin is 
markedly thickened; ulceration is rare. There is no pigmentation. Edema often occurs 
bilaterally in the feet and toes. Lymphedema arises from interstitial accumulation of 
protein-rich ﬂuid when lymph channels are inﬁltrated or obstructed by tumor, ﬁbrosis, or 
inﬂammation, or disrupted by axillary node dissection and/or radiation.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
534 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
534 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 12-2  Painful Peripheral Vascular Disorders  
and Their Mimics
Problem
Process
Location of Pain
Arterial Disorders
Raynaud Phenomenon: 
Primary and Secondary37
Raynaud phenomenon, primary: Episodic reversible 
vasoconstriction in the ﬁngers and toes, usually 
triggered by cold temperatures (capillaries are normal); 
no deﬁnable cause
Raynaud phenomenon, secondary: symptoms/signs related 
to autoimmune diseases—scleroderma, systemic lupus 
erythematosus, mixed connective tissue disease; cryo-
globulinemia; also to occupational vascular injury; drugs
Distal portions of one or more ﬁngers
Pain is usually not prominent unless ﬁngertip ulcers 
develop; numbness and tingling are common
Peripheral Arterial 
Disease
Atherosclerotic disease leading to obstruction of 
peripheral arteries causing exertional claudication 
(muscle pain relieved by rest) and atypical leg pain; 
may progress to ischemic pain at rest
Usually calf muscles, but also occurs in the buttock, 
hip, thigh, or foot, depending on the level of 
obstruction; rest pain may be distal in the toes or 
forefoot
Acute Arterial 
Occlusion
Embolism or thrombosis
Distal pain, usually involving the foot and leg
Venous Disorders (Lower Extremity)
Superﬁcial Phlebitis 
and Superﬁcial Vein 
Thrombosis
Involves inﬂammation of a superﬁcial vein (best termed 
superﬁcial phlebitis), at times with venous thrombosis 
(now termed superﬁcial vein thrombosis when clot 
conﬁrmed by imaging)
Pain and tenderness along the course of a superﬁcial 
vein, most often in the saphenous system
Deep Venous 
Thrombosis (DVT)
DVT and PE are disorders of venous thromboembolic 
disease (VTE); DVTs are distal, limited to the deep calf 
veins, or proximal, in the popliteal, femoral, or iliac 
veins
Classically, painful calf swelling with erythema, but can 
be painless; signs correlate poorly with site of 
thrombosis
Chronic Venous 
Insufﬁciency (Deep)
More severe form of chronic venous disease, with 
chronic venous engorgement from venous occlusion  
or incompetent venous valves
Diffuse aching of the leg(s)
Thromboangiitis 
Obliterans (Buerger 
Disease)
Inﬂammatory nonatherosclerotic occlusive disease of 
small- to medium-sized arteries and veins, especially in 
smokers; occluding thrombus spares the blood vessel 
wall
Often digit or toe pain progressing to ischemic 
ulcerations
Compartment 
Syndrome
Pressure builds from trauma or bleeding into one of the 
four major muscle compartments between the knee and 
ankle; each compartment is enclosed by fascia that 
limits expansion to accommodate increasing pressure
Tight, bursting pain in calf muscles, usually in the 
anterior tibial compartment, sometimes with overlying 
dusky red skin
Acute Lymphangitis
Acute infection, usually from Streptococcus pyogenes or 
Staphylococcus aureus, spreading up the lymphatic 
channels from distal portal of entry such as skin 
abrasion, ulcer, or dog bite
An arm or a leg
Mimics (Primarily of Acute Superﬁcial Thrombophlebitis)
Acute Cellulitis
Acute bacterial infection of the skin and subcutaneous 
tissues, most commonly from beta-hemolytic streptococci 
(erysipelas) and S. aureus
In the arms, legs, or elsewhere
Erythema Nodosum
Painful raised, bilateral erythematous lesions from 
inﬂammation of subcutaneous fat tissue, seen in 
systemic conditions such as pregnancy, sarcoidosis, 
tuberculosis, streptococcal infections, inﬂammatory 
bowel disease, drugs (oral contraceptives)
Anterior pretibial surfaces of both lower legs; can also 
appear on extensor arms, buttocks, and thighs
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  12 |
 
The Peripheral Vascular System 
535
Timing
Factors That 
Aggravate
Factors That 
Relieve
Associated Manifestations
Relatively brief (minutes), 
but recurrent
Exposure to cold, emotional 
upset
Warm environment
Primary: Distinct digital color changes of pallor, 
cyanosis, and hyperemia (redness); no necrosis 
Secondary: More severe, with ischemia, necrosis, 
and loss of digits; capillary loops are distorted
May be brief if relieved by 
rest; if there is rest pain, may 
be persistent and worse at 
night
Exercise such as walking; if rest 
pain, leg elevation and bedrest
Rest usually stops the pain in 1–3 
min; rest pain may be relieved by 
walking (increases perfusion), 
sitting with legs dependent
Local fatigue, numbness, progressing to cool dry 
hairless skin, trophic nail changes, diminished 
to absent pulses, pallor with elevation, 
ulceration, gangrene (see p. 538)
Sudden onset; associated 
symptoms may occur 
without pain
Coldness, numbness, weakness, absent distal 
pulses
An acute episode lasting 
days or longer
Immobility, venous stasis and 
chronic venous disease, venous 
procedure, obesity
Supportive care, walking; 
measures prompted by further 
testing
Local induration, erythema; if palpable nodules 
or cords, consider superﬁcial or deep vein 
thrombosis, both associated with signiﬁcant risk 
of DVT and PE
Often hard to determine 
due to lack of symptoms; 
one third of untreated calf 
DVTs extend proximally
Immobilization or recent sur-
gery, lower extremity trauma, 
pregnancy or postpartum state, 
hypercoagulable state (e.g., ne-
phrotic syndrome, malignancy)
Antithrombotic and 
thrombolytic therapy
Asymmetric calf diameters more diagnostic than 
palpable cord or tenderness over femoral 
triangle; Homan sign unreliable; high risk of PE 
(50% with proximal DVT)
Chronic, increasing as the 
day wears on
Prolonged standing, sitting 
with legs dependent
Limb elevation, walking
Chronic edema, pigmentation, swelling, and 
possibly ulceration, especially if advanced age, 
pregnancy, increased weight, prior history, or 
trauma (see p. 538)
Ranges from brief recurrent 
to chronic persistent pain
Exercise
Rest; smoking cessation
May progress to gangrene at tips of digits; can 
move proximally, with migratory phlebitis and 
tender nodules along blood vessels; usually 
involves at least two limbs
Several hours if acute 
(pressure must be relieved 
to avert necrosis); during 
exercise if chronic
Acute: Anabolic steroids; 
surgical complication; crush 
injury
Chronic: Occurs with exercise
Acute: Surgical incision to 
relieve pressure 
Chronic: Avoiding exercise; ice, 
elevation
Tingling, burning sensations in calf; muscles 
may feel tight, full; numbness, paralysis if 
unrelieved
An acute episode lasting 
days or longer
Red streak(s) on the skin, with tenderness, 
enlarged, tender lymph nodes, and fever
An acute episode lasting 
days or longer
Erythema, edema, and warmth
Erysipelas: Lesion raised and demarcated from 
skin; involves upper dermis, lymphatics
Cellulitis: Involves deeper dermis, adipose tissue; 
may include enlarged, tender lymph nodes and fever
Pain associated with a 
series of lesions over 2 to 
8 wks
2–5-cm lesions, initially elevated, bright red 
then fade to violet or red-brown; do not 
ulcerate; often with polyarthralgia, fever, malaise
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
536 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
536 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 12-3 Using the Ankle–Brachial Index
Instructions for Measuring the Ankle–Brachial Index (ABI)
1. Patient should rest supine in a warm room for at least 10 min before testing.
2.  Place blood pressure cuffs on both arms and ankles as illustrated, then apply  
ultrasound gel over brachial, dorsalis pedis, and posterior tibial arteries.
3. Measure systolic pressures in the arms
■ Use vascular Doppler to locate brachial pulse
■ Inﬂate cuff 20 mm Hg above last audible pulse
■ Deﬂate cuff slowly and record pressure at which pulse becomes audible
■ Obtain 2 measures in each arm and record the average as the brachial  
pressure in that arm
4. Measure systolic pressures in ankles
■ Use vascular Doppler to locate dorsalis pedis pulse
■ Inﬂate cuff 20 mm Hg above last audible pulse
■ Deﬂate cuff slowly and record pressure at which pulse becomes audible
■ Obtain 2 measures in each ankle and record the average as the dorsalis pedis  
pressure in that leg
■ Repeat above steps for posterior tibial arteries
5. Calculate ABI
Right ABI =  
highest right average ankle pressure (DP or PT)
highest average arm pressure (right or left)
Left ABI = 
highest left average ankle pressure (DP or PT)
highest average arm pressure (right or left)
Site
1st reading 2nd reading Average
Site
1st reading
2nd reading
Average
Left brachial
Right brachial
Left dorsalis pedis
Right dorsalis pedis
Left posterior tibial
Right posterior tibial
 
 
 
 
 
Ankle–Brachial Index Calculator
A – BI = SA ÷ SB
Enter values for systolic pressure at:
 
The ankle: 
 mm/Hg
 The brachial artery: 
 mm/Hg
 Ankle–brachial index: 
Interpretation of Ankle–Brachial Index
>0.90 (with a range of 0.90 to 1.30) = Normal lower 
extremity blood ﬂow
<0.89 to >0.60 = Mid PAD
<0.59 to >0.40 = Moderate PAD
<0.39 = Severe PAD
Sources: Ankle–Brachial Calculator—American College of Physicians. Available at: http://www.sononet.us/abiscore/abiscore.htm. Accessed February 28, 2015; 
Wilson JF, Laine C, Goldman D. In the clinic: peripheral arterial disease. Ann Int Med. 2007;146:ITC 3.
Doppler
Doppler
Dorsalis pedis
(DP) artery
Posterior
tibial (PT)
artery
Doppler
Brachial artery
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  12 |
 
The Peripheral Vascular System 
537
Table 12-4 Chronic Insufﬁciency of Arteries and Veins
Chronic Arterial Insufﬁciency (Advanced)
Chronic Venous Insufﬁciency (Advanced)
Rubor
Ischemic ulcer
Pain
Intermittent claudication, progressing to pain 
at rest
Often painful
Mechanism
Tissue ischemia
Venous stasis and hypertension
Pulses
Decreased or absent
Normal, though may be difﬁcult to feel through edema
Color
Pale, especially on elevation; dusky red on 
dependency
Normal, or cyanotic on dependency Petechiae and then 
brown pigmentation appear with chronicity
Temperature
Cool
Normal
Edema
Absent or mild; may develop as the patient 
tries to relieve rest pain by lowering the leg
Present, often marked
Skin Changes
Trophic changes: thin, shiny, atrophic skin; 
loss of hair over the foot and toes; nails 
thickened and ridged
Often brown pigmentation around the ankle, stasis 
dermatitis, and possible thickening of the skin and 
narrowing of the leg as scarring develops
Ulceration
If present, involves toes or points of trauma 
on feet
If present, develops at sides of ankle, especially medially
Gangrene
May develop
Does not develop
Sources of photos: Arterial Insufﬁciency—Kappert A, Winsor T. Diagnosis of Peripheral Vascular Disease. Philadelphia, PA: FA Davis, 1972; Venous Insufﬁciency—
Marks R: Skin Disease in Old Age. London, UK: Martin Dunitz, 1987.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
538 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
538 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 12-5 Common Ulcers of the Ankles and Feet
Chronic Venous Insufﬁciency
This condition usually appears over the medial and sometimes the lateral 
malleolus. The ulcer contains small, painful granulation tissue and ﬁbrin; necrosis 
or exposed tendons are rare. Borders are irregular, ﬂat, or slightly steep. Pain 
affects quality of life in 75% of patients. Associated ﬁndings include edema, 
reddish pigmentation and purpura, venous varicosities, the eczematous changes 
of stasis dermatitis (redness, scaling, and pruritus), and at times cyanosis of the 
foot when dependent. Gangrene is rare.
Arterial Insufﬁciency
This condition occurs in the toes, feet, or possibly areas of trauma (e.g., the 
shins). Surrounding skin shows no callus or excess pigment, although it may be 
atrophic. Pain often is severe unless masked by neuropathy. May be accompanied 
by gangrene, along with decreased pulses, trophic changes, foot pallor on 
elevation, and dusky rubor on dependency.
Neuropathic Ulcer
This condition develops in pressure points of areas with diminished sensation; 
seen in diabetic neuropathy, neurologic disorders, and Hansen disease. The 
surrounding skin is calloused. There is no pain, so the ulcer may go unnoticed. In 
uncomplicated cases, there is no gangrene. Associated signs include decreased 
sensation and absent ankle jerks.
Source of photos: Marks R. Skin Disease in Old Age. London, UK: Martin Dunitz, 1987.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  12 |
 
The Peripheral Vascular System 
539
REFERENCES
References
 1. Lin JS, Olson CM, Johnson ES, et al. The ankle-brachial index for 
peripheral artery disease screening and cardiovascular disease pre-
diction among asymptomatic adults: a systematic evidence review 
for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2013; 
159:333.
 2. Olin JW, Allie DE, Belkin M, et al. ACCF/AHA/ACR/SCAI/SIR/
SVM/SVN/SVS 2010 performance measures for adults with periph-
eral artery disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology 
Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on perfor-
mance measures, the American College of Radiology, the Society 
for Cardiac Angiography and Interventions, the Society for Inter-
ventional Radiology, the Society for Vascular Medicine, the Society 
for Vascular Nursing, and the Society for Vascular Surgery (Writing 
Committee to Develop Clinical Performance Measures for Periph-
eral Artery Disease). Circulation. 2010;122:2583.
 3. Allison MA, Ho E, Denenberg JO, et al. Ethnic-speciﬁc prevalence 
of peripheral arterial disease in the United States. Am J Prev Med. 
2007;32:328.
 4. Ostchega Y, Paulose-Ram R, Dillon CF, et al. Prevalence of periph-
eral arterial disease and risk factors in persons aged 60 or older: 
data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
1999–2004. J am Geriatir Soc. 2007;55:583.
 5. Rooke TW, Hirsch AT, Misra S, et al. Management of patients with 
peripheral artery disease (compilation of 2005 and 2011 ACCF/
AHA Guideline Recommendations): a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Practice Guidelines. American College of Cardiology 
Foundation Task Force, American Heart Association Task Force. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:1555.
 6. Heit JA. The epidemiology of venous thromboembolism in the 
community. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2008;28:370.
 7. Bates SM, Ginsberg JS. Treatment of deep-vein thrombosis. N Engl 
J Med. 2004;351:268.
 8. Spandorfer J, Galanis T. In the clinic. Deep vein thrombosis. Ann 
Intern Med. 2015;162:ITC-1.
 9. Goodacre S, Sutton AJ, Sampson FC. Meta-analysis: The value of 
clinical assessment in the diagnosis of deep venous thrombosis. 
Ann Intern Med. 2005;143:129.
 10. Decousus H, Frappé P, Accassat S, et al. Epidemiology, diagnosis, 
treatment and management of superﬁcial-vein thrombosis of the 
legs. Best Pract Res Clin Haematol. 2012;25:275.
 11. Kucher N. Clinical practice. Deep-vein thrombosis of the upper 
extremities. N Engl J Med .2011;364:861.
 12. Mitchell RN. Ch. 11. Blood vessels. In: Kumar VK, Abbas AK, Aster 
JC, (eds). In Robbins and Cotran Pathologic Basis of Disease. 9th ed. 
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders/Elsevier; 2015.
 13. Libby P. Mechanisms of disease: Mechanisms of acute coronary 
syndromes and their implications for therapy. N Engl J Med. 
2013;368:2004.
 14. Libby P. Ch. 291e. The pathogenesis, prevention, and treatment of 
atherosclerosis. In: Kasper DL, Fauci AS, Hauser SL, et al (eds). 
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. 19th ed. New York: 
McGraw-Hill Education; 2015.
 15. Ketelhuth DF, Hansson GK. Modulation of autoimmunity and 
atherosclerosis-common targets and promising translational 
approaches against disease. Circ J. 2015;79:924.
 16. Levick JR, Michel CC. Microvascular ﬂuid exchange and the 
revised Starling principle. Cardiovasc Res. 2010;87(2):198.
 17. Woodcock TE, Woodcock TM. Revised Starling equation and the 
glycocalyx model of transvascular ﬂuid exchange: an improved 
paradigm for prescribing intravenous ﬂuid therapy. Br J Anaesth. 
2012;108(3):384.
 18. Reed RK, Rubin K. Transcapillary exchange: role and importance 
of the interstitial ﬂuid pressure and the extracellular matrix. Car-
diovasc Res. 2010;87(2):211.
 19. Braunwald E, Loscalzo J. Ch. 50 Edema. In: Kasper DL, Fauci AS, 
Hauser SL, et al (eds). Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. 19th 
ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Education; 2015.
 20. Lawenda BD, Mondry TE, Johnstone PA. Lymphedema: a primer 
on the identiﬁcation and management of a chronic condition in 
oncologic treatment. CA Cancer J Clin. 2009;59:8.
 21. Kent KC. Clinical practice. Abdominal aortic aneurysms. N Engl J 
Med. 2014;371:2101.
 22. Lederle FA. In the clinic. Abdominal aortic aneurysm. Ann Intern 
Med. 2009;150:ITC5–1.
 23. Suri P, Rainville J, Kalichman L, et al. Does this older adult with 
lower extremity pain have the clinical syndrome of lumbar spinal 
stenosis? JAMA. 2010;304:2628.
 24. McDermott MM. Lower extremity manifestations of peripheral 
artery disease: the pathophysiologic and functional implications of 
leg ischemia. Circ Res. 2015;116:1540.
 25. Hirsch AT, Haskal ZJ, Hertzer NR, et al. ACC/AHA 2005 Practice 
Guidelines for the management of patients with peripheral arterial 
disease (lower extremity, renal, mesenteric, and abdominal aortic): a 
collaborative report from the American Association for Vascular Sur-
gery/Society for Vascular Surgery, Society for Cardiovascular Angiog-
raphy and Interventions, Society for Vascular Medicine and Biology, 
Society of Interventional Radiology, and the ACC/AHA Task Force 
on Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Develop Guidelines 
for the Management of Patients With Peripheral Arterial Disease): 
endorsed by the American Association of Cardiovascular and Pul-
monary Rehabilitation; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; 
Society for Vascular Nursing; TransAtlantic Inter-Society Consensus; 
and Vascular Disease Foundation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;47:1239.
 26. McGee S. Ch. 52 Peripheral Vascular Disease; Ch. 54, Edema and 
Deep Vein Thrombosis. Evidence-based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. 
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2012, pp. 459–465; pp. 470–476.
 27. Fowkes FG, Rudan D, Rudan I, et al. Comparison of global estimates 
of prevalence and risk factors for peripheral artery disease in 2000 
and 2010: a systematic review and analysis. Lancet. 2013;382:1329.
 28. Norgren L, Hiatt WR, Dormandy JA, et al. Inter-Society Consensus 
for the Management of Peripheral Arterial Disease (TASC II). J Vasc 
Surg. 2007;45(Suppl S):S5.
 29. McDermott MM. Ankle-brachial index screening to improve health 
outcomes: where is the evidence? Ann Intern Med. 2013;159:362.
 30. Moyer VA. Screening for peripheral artery disease and cardiovas-
cular disease risk assessment with the ankle-brachial index in 
adults: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation state-
ment. Ann Intern Med. 2013;159:342.
 31. Fokkenrood HJ, Bendermacher BL, Lauret GJ, et al. Supervised 
exercise therapy versus non-supervised exercise therapy for inter-
mittent claudication. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;8:CD005263.
 32. de Mast Q, Beutler JJ. The prevalence of atherosclerotic renal artery 
stenosis in risk groups: a systematic literature review. J Hypertens. 
2009;27:1333.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
540 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
 33. Dworkin LD, Cooper CJ. Clinical practice. Renal-artery stenosis. 
N Engl J Med. 2009;361:1972.
 34. Guirguis-Blake JM, Beil TL, Sun X, et al. Primary care screening for 
abdominal aortic aneurysm: A systematic evidence review for the 
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Rockville, MD; 2014.
 35. LeFevre ML. Screening for abdominal aortic aneurysm: U.S. Pre-
ventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern 
Med. 2014;161:281.
 36. Guirguis-Blake JM, Beil TL, Senger CA, et al. Ultrasonography 
screening for abdominal aortic aneurysms: a systematic evidence 
review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 
2014;160:321.
 37. Varga J. Ch. 382. Systemic sclerosis (scleroderma) and related disor-
ders. In: Kasper DL, Fauci AS, Hauser SL, et al (eds). Harrison’s Prin-
ciples of Internal Medicine. 19th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill 
Education; 2015.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  13 |
 
Male Genitalia and Hernias 
541
Review the anatomy of the male genitalia (Fig. 13-1). The shaft of the penis is 
formed by three columns of vascular erectile tissue: the corpus spongiosum, con-
taining the urethra, and two corpora cavernosa. The corpus spongiosum extends 
from the bulb of the penis to the cone-shaped glans with its expanded base, or 
C H A P T E R 
13
Male Genitalia and Hernias
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate 
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 14: Male Genitalia, Rectum, Anus, and Prostate)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com
Anatomy and Physiology
Tunica vaginalis
Scrotum
Testis
Epididymis
Spermatic cord
Ejaculatory duct
Seminal vesicle
Prepuce
Urethral meatus
Glans
Corona
Corpus
spongiosum
Corpus
cavernosum
Blood vessels
Vas deferens
Urethra
Bulb of the penis 
F I G U R E  1 3 - 1 .  Anatomy of male genitalia.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
542 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
corona. In uncircumcised men, the glans is covered by a loose, hoodlike fold of 
skin called the prepuce or foreskin where smegma, or secretions of the glans, may 
collect. The urethra is located in the ventral midline of the shaft of the penis; 
urethral abnormalities may sometimes be felt there. The urethra opens into the 
vertical slit-like urethral meatus, located somewhat ventrally at the tip of the glans.
The testes are paired ovoid glands consisting primarily of seminiferous tubules 
and interstitial tissue, covered by a ﬁbrous outer coating, the tunica albuginea. 
The testes are normally 1.5 to 2 cm in length for prepubertal boys and 4 to 5 cm 
post puberty. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GRH) from the hypothalamus 
stimulates pituitary secretion of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle- stimulating 
hormone (FSH). LH acts on the interstitial Leydig cells to promote synthesis of 
testosterone, which is converted in target tissues to 5α-dihydrotestosterone. It is 
5α-dihydrotestosterone that triggers pubertal growth of the male genitalia, pros-
tate, seminal vesicles, and secondary sex characteristics such as facial and body 
hair, musculoskeletal growth, and enlargement of the larynx with its associated 
low-pitched voice. FSH regulates sperm production by the germ cells and Sertoli 
cells of the seminiferous tubules.
Surrounding or appended to the testes are several structures. The scrotum is a 
loose, wrinkled pouch of skin and underlying dartos muscle. The scrotum is 
divided into two compartments, each containing a testis or testicle. Covering the 
testis, except posteriorly, is the serous membrane of the tunica vaginalis, derived 
from the peritoneum of the abdomen and brought down into the scrotum during 
testicular descent through the deep internal inguinal ring. The parietal layer of 
the tunica vaginalis cloaks the anterior two thirds of the testis, and the visceral 
layer lines the adjacent scrotum. On the posterolateral surface of each testis is the 
softer, comma-shaped epididymis, consisting of tightly coiled tubules emanating 
from the testis that become the vas deferens. The epididymis is normally sepa-
rated from the testis by a palpable sulcus, and provides a reservoir for storage, 
maturation, and transport of sperm.
During ejaculation, the vas deferens, a ﬁrm muscular cord-like structure, 
 transports sperm from the tail of the epididymis along a somewhat circular 
route to the urethra. The vas ascends from the scrotal sac into the pelvic cavity 
through the inguinal canal, then loops anteriorly over the ureter to the prostate 
behind the bladder. There, it merges with the seminal vesicle to form the ejacula-
tory duct, which traverses the prostate and empties into the urethra. Secretions 
from the vasa deferentia, the seminal vesicles, and the prostate all contribute to 
the seminal ﬂuid. Within the scrotum, each vas is closely associated with blood 
vessels, nerves, and muscle ﬁbers. These structures make up the spermatic cord.
Male sexual function depends on normal levels of testosterone, arterial blood 
ﬂow from the internal iliac artery to the internal pudendal artery and its penile 
artery and branches, and intact neural innervation from α-adrenergic and cho-
linergic pathways. Erection from venous engorgement of the corpora cavernosa 
results from two types of stimuli. Visual, auditory, or erotic cues trigger sympa-
thetic outﬂow from higher brain centers to the T11 through L2 levels of the 
spinal cord. Tactile stimulation initiates sensory impulses from the genitalia to 
the S2 to S4 reﬂex arcs and the parasympathetic pathways through the pudendal 
If the peritoneal lining remains an 
open channel to the scrotum it can 
give rise to an indirect inguinal hernia.
The parietal and visceral layers form a 
potential space for the abnormal fluid 
accumulation of a hydrocele. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  13 |
 
Male Genitalia and Hernias 
543
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
nerve. Both sets of stimuli appear to increase levels of nitric oxide and cyclic 
guanosine monophosphate, resulting in local vasodilation.
Lymphatics
Lymph drainage from the penis passes primarily to the deep inguinal and external 
inguinal nodes. Lymph vessels from the scrotum drain into the superﬁcial ingui-
nal lymph nodes. When you ﬁnd an inﬂammatory or possibly malignant lesion 
on these surfaces, assess the inguinal nodes especially carefully for enlarge-
ment or tenderness. Lymphatic drainage from the testes parallels their venous 
drainage: the left testicular vein empties into the left renal vein, and the right 
testicular vein empties into the inferior vena cava. The connecting lumbar and 
preaortic lymph nodes in the abdomen are clinically undetectable.
Anatomy of the Groin
Because hernias are relatively common, it is important to understand the anat-
omy of the groin (Fig. 13-2). The basic landmarks are the anterior superior iliac 
spine, the pubic tubercle, and the inguinal ligament that runs between them, 
which are readily identiﬁed.
See pp. 515–516 for further discussion 
of the inguinal nodes. 
Anterior superior
iliac spine
Inguinal
ligament
Site of femoral
canal
Femoral artery
Femoral vein
Spermatic cord
Pubic tubercle
Internal inguinal
ring
External inguinal
ring
Inguinal canal
X
F I G U R E  1 3 - 2 .  Anatomy of the groin.
Indirect inguinal hernias develop at 
the internal inguinal ring, where the 
spermatic cord exits the abdomen. 
Direct inguinal hernias arise more 
medially due to weakness in the floor 
of the inguinal canal and are associ-
ated with straining and heavy lifting. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
The inguinal canal, which lies medial to and roughly parallel to the inguinal 
 ligament, forms a tunnel for the vas deferens as it passes through the abdominal 
muscles. The internal opening of the canal, the internal inguinal ring, is approxi-
mately 1 cm above the midpoint of the inguinal ligament. Neither the canal nor 
the internal ring is palpable through the abdominal wall. The exterior opening 
of the tunnel, the external inguinal ring, is a triangular slit-like structure palpable 
just above and lateral to the pubic tubercle. When loops of bowel force their way 
through the inguinal canal, they produce inguinal hernias, as illustrated on p. 561.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
544 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
See also Chapter 3, The Sexual History, 
pp. 94–95. 
Sexual Health. Clinicians and educators recognize the importance of a 
robust education in sexual health, yet training and clinical expertise remain 
limited.1–5 Learn to obtain the sexual history in a respectful and nonjudgmental 
manner. Your skill and comfort will grow with repetition and practice. To put 
your patients at ease as you explore the sexual history, adopt the tips in the box 
below.
The Health History
Common or Concerning Symptoms
● Sexual health
● Penile discharge or lesions
● Scrotal pain, swelling, or lesions
● Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) 
Tips for Taking the Sexual History
● Explain why you are taking the sexual history.
● Convey that you understand that this information is highly personal, and 
encourage the patient to be open and direct.
● Relate that you gather this history from all your patients.
● Aﬃrm that your conversation is conﬁdential.
For example, you can begin with a general statement such as:
“To provide good care, I need to review your sexual health and see if you are at risk for 
any sexually transmitted infections. I know this is a sensitive area. Any information you 
share is conﬁdential and only between us.”
Do not overlook patient groups that are often underevaluated, such as those with 
disabilities, mental illness, traumatic brain injury, and the elderly, and modify 
your approach as indicated.6–9 Avoid assumptions about your patients’ sexual 
health or concerns unless they are based on inquiry ﬁrst.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Another route for a herniating mass is the femoral canal, below the inguinal liga-
ment. Although this canal is not visible, you can estimate its location by placing 
your right index ﬁnger, from below, on the right femoral artery. Your middle 
ﬁnger will then overlie the femoral vein; your ring ﬁnger, the femoral canal. 
Femoral hernias protrude at this location.
Femoral hernias are more likely to 
present as emergencies with bowel 
incarceration or strangulation. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  13 |
 
Male Genitalia and Hernias 
545
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity. Discussing sexual orienta-
tion and gender identity touches a vital and multifaceted core of your patients’ 
lives. Reﬂect on any biases you may have so that they do not interfere with 
professional responses to your patients’ disclosures and concerns. A neutral 
supportive approach is essential for exploring your patients’ health and well-
being.10
Pose neutral questions about sexual orientation and gender identity such as:
■ “Are you currently dating, sexually active, or in a relationship?” “How would 
you identify your sexual orientation?” The range of responses includes 
 heterosexual or straight, lesbian, gay, women who have sex with women, 
men who have sex with men, bisexual, transsexual, and questioning, among 
others.
■ Continue with “How would you describe your gender identity?” Responses 
include male, female, transsexual, transgendered, intersex, female-to-male, 
male-to-female, unsure or questioning, or even “prefer not to answer.”
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Health Care. Several recent 
surveys provide some of the ﬁrst national data sets on the lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
and transgender (LGBT) population. For the ﬁrst time, in 2013, the National 
Health Interview Survey included a measure of sexual orientation: in a sample 
of more than 34,000 adults, 1.6% identiﬁed as gay or lesbian, 0.7% identiﬁed 
as bisexual, and 1.1% responded either other or did not know. Most gay and 
lesbian respondents were between the ages of 18 and 64 years, with a higher 
percentage of bisexual respondents between 18 and 44 years.11 In 2012, the 
Gallup Daily Tracking Survey initiated the largest single study of the distribu-
tion of the LGBT population in the United States.12,13 The Survey added an 
LGBT identity question that generated 120,000 responses: 3.4% answered “yes” 
when asked if they identify as LGBT. Of those identifying as LGBT, 53% were 
women and 6.4% were ages 18 to 29 years. Nearly 13% were in a domestic 
partnership or living with a partner. Non-whites were more likely to identify as 
LGBT: African American 4.6%; Asians 4.3%; Hispanics 4.9%; and non-Hispanic 
white 3.2%. The 2013 American Community Survey of the U.S. Census Bureau 
reported more than 726,000 households with same-sex couples; 34% had 
same-sex spouses.14 In its 2011 report on LGBT health disparities, the Institute 
of Medicine called for better measures of health care disparities among the 
diverse LGBT subpopulations to elucidate their differing health behaviors and 
health care needs.15
LGBT patients have higher rates of depression, suicide, anxiety, drug use, sexual 
victimization, and risk of infection with HIV and STIs.16–19 The Institute of Medi-
cine has stated that barriers to accessing quality health care for LGBT adults are “a 
lack of providers who are knowledgeable about LGBT health needs as well as a fear 
of discrimination in health care settings.”15 The American College of Physicians has 
called for “enhancing physician understanding of how to provide culturally and 
clinically competent care for LGBT individuals, addressing environmental and 
social factors that can affect their mental and physical well-being,” in addition to 
supporting further research into understanding their health needs.20
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
546 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
During clinical encounters, LGBT and sexual minority patients often experience 
signiﬁcant anxiety related to fears of being accepted; they may be uncomfortable 
disclosing their sexual behaviors and still ﬂuctuating in their sexual identity. 
When they experience bias or discrimination, they are unlikely to reveal their 
sexual identity or concerns.21–23 Furthermore, reports indicate that clinicians are 
often unprepared to respond to questions about fertility and transgender issues 
like hormonal therapy and surgery. Expand your knowledge and clinical skills 
about gay, lesbian, and transgender health as you talk with your patients and 
pursue the many resources available.24–26
Sexual Response. Explore the patient’s sexual response. “How is your 
current relationship?” “Are you satisﬁed with your relationship and your sex-
ual activity?” “What about your ability to perform sexually?” If the patient 
expresses relational or sexual concerns, explore both their psychological and 
physiologic dimensions. Ask about the meaning of the relationship in the 
patient’s life. Are there any changes in desire or frequency of sexual activity? 
What is the patient’s view of the cause, what responses has the patient tried, 
and what are the patient’s hopes?
Direct questions help you assess each phase of the sexual response. To assess 
libido, or desire, ask “How is your desire for sex?” For the arousal phase, ask 
“Can you achieve and maintain an erection?” Explore the timing, severity, 
setting, and any other factors that may contribute to the patient’s concerns. 
What about related changes in the relationship with his partner or in his life 
circumstances? Are there circumstances when erection is normal? On awak-
ening in the early morning or during the night? With other partners? With 
masturbation?
To learn about the phase of orgasm and ejaculation of semen, if ejaculation is 
premature, or early and out of control, ask “About how long does intercourse 
last?” “Do you climax too soon?” “Do you feel you have control over climaxing?” 
“Do you think your partner would like intercourse to last longer?” For reduced 
or absent ejaculation, “Do you ﬁnd you cannot reach orgasm even though you 
can have an erection?” Try to determine whether the problem involves the plea-
surable sensation of orgasm, the ejaculation of seminal ﬂuid, or both. Review the 
frequency and setting of the symptoms, medications, surgery, and neurologic 
causes.
Penile Discharge or Lesions, Scrotal Swelling or Pain, and 
STIs. Ask about any discharge from the penis, dripping, or staining of 
underwear. If penile discharge is present, clarify the amount, color, and any 
fever, chills, rash, or associated symptoms. Note that for men born between 1940 
and 1989, the median age of sexual initiation is 16.1 years and the median 
number of lifetime partners is 8.8, underscoring the importance of screening for 
STIs.28
Low libido may arise from depression, 
endocrine dysfunction, or side effects 
of medications.
Erectile dysfunction may be from psy-
chogenic causes, especially if early 
morning erection is preserved; it may 
also reflect decreased testosterone, 
decreased blood flow in the hypogas-
tric arterial system, impaired neural 
innervation, and diabetes.27 
Premature ejaculation is common, 
especially in young men. Less com-
mon is reduced or absent ejaculation 
affecting middle-aged or older men. 
Possible causes are medications, 
 surgery, neurologic deficits, or lack  
of androgen. Lack of orgasm with 
 ejaculation is usually psychogenic. 
Look for yellow penile discharge in 
gonorrhea; white discharge in non-
gonococcal urethritis from Chlamydia. 
See Table 13-1, Sexually Transmitted 
Infections of the Male Genitalia (p. 557).
Rash, tenosynovitis, monoarticular 
arthritis, even meningitis, not always 
with urogenital symptoms, occur in 
disseminated gonorrhea. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  13 |
 
Male Genitalia and Hernias 
547
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Inquire about sores or growths on the penis. Ask about swelling or pain in the 
scrotum.
Review any previous genital symptoms or past history of infection from herpes, 
gonorrhea, or syphilis. Men with multiple or same sex partners, illicit drug use, 
or prior history of STIs are at increased risk of HIV infection and other new 
STIs.
Because STIs may involve other areas of the body, explain that “Sexually trans-
mitted infections can involve any body opening where you have sex. It’s impor-
tant for you to tell me if you have oral or anal sex.” Ask about symptoms such as 
sore throat, diarrhea, rectal bleeding, and anal itching or pain.
Because many infected individuals do not have symptoms or risk factors, ask all 
patients, “Do you have any concerns about HIV infection?” and discuss the need 
for universal testing for HIV.29–33
Look for an ulcer in syphilitic chancre 
and herpes; warts from human 
papillomavirus (HPV); swelling in 
mumps orchitis, scrotal edema, and 
testicular cancer; pain in testicular 
torsion, epididymitis, and orchitis.
See Table 13-2, Abnormalities of the Penis 
and Scrotum, p. 558, and Table 13-3, 
Abnormalities of the Testis, p. 559. 
Infections from oral–penile transmis-
sion include gonorrhea, chlamydia, 
syphilis, and herpes. Symptomatic or 
asymptomatic proctitis may follow 
anal intercourse. 
Health Promotion and 
Counseling: Evidence and 
Recommendations
Prevention of Sexually Transmitted Infections and Human 
Papillomavirus. The Institute of Medicine has called STIs a “hidden 
epidemic of enormous health and economic consequence in the United States.”34
Clinicians play a vital role in educating patients about prevention, as well as in 
detecting and treating STIs. The growing burden of STIs affects the health of 
all segments of the population, but especially adolescents and young adults.
Important Topics for Health Promotion  
and Counseling
● Screening for STIs and HPV
● Screening for HIV infection and AIDS
● Counseling about sexual practices
● Screening for testicular cancer and testicular self-examination
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
548 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force  (USPSTF) has given a grade B recom-
mendation for chlamydia and gonorrhea screening in sexually active women age 
24 years and younger; the evidence is insufﬁcient to make a recommendation for 
sexually active men.37 However,  substantial proportions of those with high-risk 
sexual behaviors are not being tested for STIs (or HIV).
HPV Vaccination. The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices 
(ACIP) recommends routine quadrivalent HPV vaccination in males age 11 or 
12 years and through age 21 years if not vaccinated previously (age 26 years if immu-
nocompromised or having sex with other men).38 The vaccine can prevent HPV-
related diseases in males (genital warts, anal cancer, and penile cancer) and 
possibly reduce HPV transmission to female sex partners and lower the risk of 
oropharyngeal cancers. (See also Chapter 14, pp. 577–578.)
Screening for HIV Infection and AIDS. Despite advances in detection and 
treatment, HIV and AIDS remain signiﬁcant threats to health, particularly for 
younger Americans, men who have sex with men, and injection drug users.
Facts about STIs
● The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recently estimated 
that nearly 20 million new STIs occur each year, with almost half in between 
the ages of 15 and 24 years; the associated health care costs are nearly 
$16  billion.35,36
● Of the nearly 1.8 million new STI cases reported in 2013, nearly 80% were 
infections from chlamydia, 18% from gonorrhea, and 3% from syphilis (all 
stages). In recent years, rates of gonorrhea and syphilis infections have been 
increasing, and chlamydia infections have been declining.
● The CDC notes that these ﬁgures underestimate the “true national burden” of 
STIs; many cases of gonorrhea, chlamydia, and syphilis are unreported, and 
mandatory reporting is not required for infections such as HPV, trichomoniasis, 
and genital herpes.
Facts about HIV and AIDS
● The CDC estimates that more than 1.2 million Americans ≥age 13 years are 
currently infected with HIV, with approximately 50,000 new infections 
 annually.35,39,40
● More than 600,000 Americans have died with an AIDS diagnosis. At highest 
risk are men who have sex with men (78% of new infections among males), 
African Americans (44% of new infections), and Hispanics/Latinos (21% of 
new infections); injection drug users represent 8% of new HIV infections.
● In 2011, an estimated 14% of infected individuals were unaware of their 
infected status and only 37% were prescribed antiretroviral therapy (ART).41
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  13 |
 
Male Genitalia and Hernias 
549
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Identifying early HIV infection and initiating combined ART decreases the risk 
of progressing to AIDS. Treatment also reduces the risk of transmitting HIV to 
uninfected heterosexual partners and from a pregnant mother to her child.42 
Current screening recommendations are summarized below.
Summary: Screening Recommendations for HIV
● The USPSTF gives a grade A recommendation for HIV screening of adoles-
cents and adults from age 15 to 65 years and for screening all pregnant 
women.42
● The CDC recommends universal HIV testing for adolescents and adults ages 
13 to 64 years in health care settings and prenatal testing of all pregnant 
women.43
● The CDC recommends an opt-out approach to HIV testing—verbally notifying 
the patient that testing will be performed unless the patient declines. 
 Separate written consent is not required.
● The American College of Physicians recommends extending the upper age for 
screening to 75 years.44 The proportion of adults who have ever been tested 
for HIV increased from 37% in 2000 to 45% in 2010.45
● One-time testing for low-risk patients is reasonable, but at least annual test-
ing is recommended for high-risk groups (including adolescents younger than 
15 years and older adults), deﬁned as men with male sex partners, individuals 
with multiple sexual partners, past or present injection drug users, persons 
who exchange sex for money or drugs, and sex partners of persons who are 
HIV-infected, bisexual, or injection-drug users.43 The presence of any STI, or 
requests for STI testing, warrants testing for coinfection with HIV.
See discussions of the sexual history 
on pp. 94–95 and pp. 544–547. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Counseling about Sexual Practices. Clinicians must master the skills 
of eliciting the sexual history and asking frank but tactful questions about sex-
ual practices. Key information includes the patient’s sexual orientation, the 
number of partners in the past month, and any history of past STIs (see also 
pp. 94–95). Carefully screen for alcohol and drug use, especially injection 
drugs. Patient counseling should be interactive and combine information 
about general risk reduction with personalized messages based on the patient’s 
personal risk behaviors. Implementing this approach, termed client-centered 
counseling, can reduce the frequency of high-risk behaviors and lower the acqui-
sition rates for STIs.46
As you counsel patients, encourage them to seek prompt attention for any genital 
lesions or penile discharge. Address preventive behaviors such as using condoms, 
limiting the number of sexual partners, and establishing regular health care for treat-
ment of STIs and HIV. Correct use of male condoms is highly effective in preventing 
the transmission of HIV, HPV, and other STIs.47 Key instructions should include:
■ Using a new condom with each sex act
■ Applying the condom before any sexual contact occurs
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
550 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Adding only water-based lubricants
■ Immediately withdraw if the condom breaks during sexual activity, and 
holding the condom during withdrawal to keep it from slipping off.
Screening for Testicular Cancer and  Testicular  
Self-Examination
Epidemiology. In 2015, an estimated 8,430 cases of testicular cancer 
will be diagnosed in the United States though fewer than 400 males are 
expected to die from this cancer.48 While testicular cancer is rare, it is highly 
treatable when detected early. It is the most commonly diagnosed cancer in 
white men from ages 20 to 34 years; the risk of diagnosis is ﬁve times more 
common in white men compared to black men.49 Risk factors are family his-
tory, HIV infection, and a history of cryptorchidism (undescended testicle). 
Cryptorchidism, present in 7% to 10% of men with testicular cancer, con-
fers a 3- to 17-fold increased risk for testicular cancer.50 About 70% of 
testicular cancers are localized; most are curable even when diagnosed at 
advanced stage.
Screening Recommendations. In 2011, the USPSTF concluded that 
there is inadequate evidence for the beneﬁt of screening, either by clinical 
examination or self-examination, and advised against screening for testicular 
cancer in asymptomatic adolescent or adult males (grade D recommenda-
tion).51 In contrast, the American Cancer Society recommends that a testicular 
examination should be part of a general physical examination.52 The Ameri-
can Cancer Society does not have a recommendation for regular testicular 
self-examinations (TSEs), but does advise men to seek clinical attention for any 
of the following: a painless lump, swelling, or enlargement in either testicle; 
pain or discomfort in a testicle or the scrotum; a feeling of heaviness or a sud-
den ﬂuid collection in the scrotum; or a dull ache in the lower abdomen or 
the groin.
See pp. 555–556 for patient instruc-
tions for TSE. 
Techniques of Examination
Many students feel uneasy about examining the male genitalia. “How will the 
patient react?” “Will he let me examine him?” “Will he have an erection?” 
Explain what is involved and review each step of the examination so that the 
patient feels reassured and knows what to expect. When needed, request an 
assistant to accompany you. Occasionally, if the patient has an erection, explain 
that this is a normal response, ﬁnish your examination, and proceed with a 
calm demeanor. If the patient refuses the examination, respect the patient’s 
wishes.
For a good genital examination the gowned patient can be either standing or 
supine. To check for varicoceles, however, the patient should stand, and you 
should sit comfortably on a chair or stool. The gown should cover the patient’s 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  13 |
 
Male Genitalia and Hernias 
551
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
chest and abdomen. Place a drawsheet at the midthigh. Wear gloves throughout 
the examination. Expose the genitalia and inguinal areas. For younger patients, 
review the sexual maturity ratings on p. 899.
The Penis
Inspection. Inspect the penis, including:
■ The skin. Inspect the skin on the ventral and dorsal surfaces and the base 
of the penis for excoriations or inflammation, lifting the penis when 
necessary.
■ The prepuce (foreskin). If present, retract the prepuce or ask the patient to 
retract it. This step is essential for the detection of chancres and carcino-
mas. Smegma, a cheesy, whitish material, may accumulate normally under 
the foreskin.
■ The glans. Look for any ulcers, scars, nodules, or signs of inﬂammation.
■ The urethral meatus. Inspect the location of the urethral meatus.
Compress the glans gently between 
your index ﬁnger above and your 
thumb below (Fig. 13-3). This maneu-
ver should open the urethral meatus 
and allow you to inspect it for dis-
charge. Normally, there is none.
If the patient has reported a discharge 
that you are unable to see, ask him to 
strip, or milk, the shaft of the penis 
from its base to the glans. Alternatively, 
do this yourself. This maneuver may 
expel some discharge from the urethral 
meatus for appropriate examination. 
Have a glass slide and culture materials 
ready.
Palpation. Palpate the shaft of the penis between your thumb and ﬁrst two 
ﬁngers, noting any induration. (This may be omitted in a young asymptomatic 
male patient.) Palpate any abnormality of the penis, noting any induration or 
tenderness.
If you retract the foreskin, replace it before proceeding on to examine the scro-
tum.
See Table 13-2, Abnormalities of the 
Penis and Scrotum, p. 558. 
Pubic or genital excoriations suggest 
lice (crabs) or sometimes scabies in 
the pubic hair. 
Phimosis is a tight prepuce that cannot 
be retracted over the glans. Paraphimo-
sis is a tight prepuce that, once retracted, 
cannot be returned. Edema ensues. 
Balanitis is inflammation of the glans; 
balanoposthitis is inflammation of the 
glans and prepuce. 
Hypospadias is a congenital ventral 
displacement of the meatus on the 
penis (see p. 558). 
F I G U R E  1 3 - 3 .  Gently compress the 
glans to inspect the urethral meatus.
Profuse yellow discharge signals 
gonococcal urethritis; scanty white or 
clear discharge signals nongonococcal 
urethritis. Definitive diagnosis 
requires Gram stain and culture. 
Induration along the ventral surface 
of the penis suggests a urethral stric-
ture or possibly a carcinoma. Tender-
ness in the indurated area suggests 
periurethral inflammation from a 
 urethral stricture. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
552 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The Scrotum and its Contents
Inspection. Inspect the scrotum, including:
■ The skin. Lift up the scrotum so that you can inspect its posterior surface. 
Note any lesions or scars. Inspect the pubic hair distribution.
■ The scrotal contours. Inspect for swelling, lumps, veins, bulging masses, or 
asymmetry of the left and right hemiscrotum.
■ The inguinal areas. Note any erythema, excoriation, or visible adenopathy.
There may be dome-shaped white or yellow 
papules or nodules formed by occluded folli-
cles ﬁlled with keratin debris of desquamated 
follicular epithelium. Such epidermoid cysts are 
common, frequently multiple, and benign 
(Fig. 13-4).
Palpation. If using a one-handed 
technique, palpate each testis and epididymis 
between your thumb and ﬁrst two ﬁngers 
(Fig. 13-5). If using two hands, cradle the 
testis at both poles in the thumb and 
ﬁngertips of both hands. Palpate the scrotal 
contents as you gently slide them back and 
forth from the ﬁngertips of one hand to the 
other, without changing the position of your 
hands as they cup the scrotum. This 
technique is comfortable for the patient and 
allows a subtle controlled and accurate 
examination. The testes should be ﬁrm but 
not hard, descended, symmetric, nontender, 
and without masses.53
See Table 13-2, Abnormalities of the 
Penis and Scrotum, p. 558. 
Inspection may reveal scrotal nevi, 
hemangiomas, or telangiectasias as 
well as STIs including condyloma or 
ulcers from herpes and chancroid (pain-
ful) and syphilis and lymphogranuloma 
venereum (painless), with associated 
inguinal lymphadenopathy.53 
A poorly developed scrotum on one or 
both sides suggests cryptorchidism (an 
undescended testicle). Common scro-
tal swellings include indirect inguinal 
hernias, hydroceles, scrotal edema, and, 
rarely, testicular carcinoma. 
Erythema and mild excoriation point 
to fungal infection, not uncommon in 
this moist area. 
F I G U R E  1 3 - 4 .  Epidermoid cysts.
F I G U R E  1 3 - 5 .  Palpate the 
testis and epididymis.
See Table 13-3, Abnormalities of  
the Testis, p. 559, and Table 13-4, 
Abnormalities of the Epididymis  
and Spermatic Cord, p. 560. 
Tender painful scrotal swelling is 
present in acute epididymitis, acute 
orchitis, torsion of the spermatic cord, 
or a  strangulated inguinal hernia. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  13 |
 
Male Genitalia and Hernias 
553
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ For each testis, assess size, shape, consistency, and tenderness; feel for any 
nodules. Pressure on the testis normally produces a deep visceral pain.
■ Palpate the epididymis on the posterior surface of each testicle without 
applying excess pressure, which can cause discomfort. The epididymis feels 
nodular and cord-like and should not be confused with an abnormal lump. 
Normally, it should not be tender.
■ Palpate each spermatic cord, includ-
ing the vas deferens, between your 
thumb and ﬁngers, from the epi-
didymis to the external inguinal 
ring (Fig. 13-6). The vas feels 
slightly stiff and tubular and is dis-
tinct from the accompanying vessels 
of the spermatic cord.
■ Palpate any nodules or swellings.
Swelling in the scrotum apart from the testicles can be evaluated by transillumi-
nation. After darkening the room, shine the beam of a strong ﬂashlight from 
behind the scrotum through the mass. Look for transmission of the light as a red 
glow.
Hernias
During the examination for hernias, the patient can be either supine or stand-
ing. The techniques for examination and examiner hand placement are the 
same for both positions. The techniques which follow apply to the standing 
position, but can be replicated for the supine position depending on examiner 
preference.
Any painless nodule on the testis 
raises the possibility of testicular 
cancer, a potentially curable cancer 
with a peak incidence between the 
ages 15 to 34 years. Recall that 
lymph drainage from the testes par-
allels retroperitoneal venous flow 
from the renal vein and inferior vena 
cava, the primary site of lymph node 
involvement in  testicular cancer  
(see p. 516). 
F I G U R E  1 3 - 6 .  Palpate the 
spermatic cord.
To check for a varicocele, with the 
patient standing, palpate the sper-
matic cord about 2 cm above the tes-
tis. Have the patient hold his breath 
and “bear down” against a closed 
glottis for about 4 seconds (the  
Valsalva maneuver). 
During this maneuver, a temporary 
increase in the diameter of the sper-
matic cord indicates filling of abnor-
mally dilated spermatic veins draining 
the testis.
The vas deferens, if chronically 
infected, may feel thickened or 
beaded. A cystic structure in the 
 spermatic cord suggests a hydrocele  
of the cord. 
Swellings containing serous fluid, 
such as hydroceles, light up with a red 
glow, or transilluminate. Those con-
taining blood or tissue, such as a nor-
mal testis, a tumor, or most hernias, 
do not. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
554 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Inspection. Sitting comfortably in front of the patient, with the patient 
standing and an assistant present, if indicated, inspect the inguinal regions and 
genitalia for bulging areas and asymmetry.
Palpation. Palpate for an inguinal hernia, using the techniques below. 
Continue to face the patient, who should still be standing.
■ To examine for an inguinal hernia on either side (the right is illustrated in 
Fig. 13-7), place the tip of your dominant index ﬁnger at the anterior inferior 
margin of the scrotum, staying superﬁcial to the testicle, then move your 
ﬁnger and hand upward toward the external inguinal ring, invaginating the 
scrotal skin beneath the peripubic fat pad next to the base of the penis.
A bulge suggests a hernia. 
See Table 13-5, Course, Presentation, 
and Differentiation of Hernias in the 
Groin, p. 561. 
Inguinal
ligament
External
inguinal
ring
F I G U R E  1 3 - 7 .  Invaginate the scrotum.
A bulge near the external inguinal 
ring suggests a direct inguinal hernia. 
A bulge near the internal inguinal ring 
suggests an indirect inguinal hernia. 
Experts note that distinguishing the 
type of hernia is difficult, with sensi-
tivity and specificity of 74% to 92%, 
and 93%. Hernias warrant surgical 
evaluation, especially when symp-
tomatic or incarcerated. Chance of 
incarceration is low, estimated at 0.3% 
to 3% per year, and is 10 times more 
common with indirect hernias.54–57 
■ Follow the spermatic cord upward to the inguinal ligament. Find the trian-
gular slit-like opening of the external inguinal ring just above and lateral to 
the pubic tubercle. Palpate the external inguinal ring and its ﬂoor. Ask the 
patient to cough. Palpate for a distinct bulge or mass that moves against your 
stationary ﬁnger during the cough.
■ The external ring may be large enough for you to gently palpate obliquely 
along the inguinal canal toward the internal inguinal ring. Again ask the pa-
tient to cough. Check for a bulge that slides down the inguinal canal and taps 
against the ﬁngertip.
■ Use the same techniques with the same dominant ﬁnger to examine both 
sides.
Palpate for a femoral hernia by placing your ﬁngers on the anterior thigh in the 
region of the femoral canal. Ask the patient to strain down again or cough. Note 
any swelling or tenderness.
Evaluating a Possible Scrotal Hernia. To assess a scrotal mass and pos-
sible hernia, ask the patient to lie down. The mass may return to the abdomen 
by itself. If so, it is a hernia. If not:
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  13 |
 
Male Genitalia and Hernias 
555
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Can you get your ﬁngers above the mass in the scrotum?
■ Listen to the mass with a stethoscope for bowel sounds, but note that bowel 
sounds may be transmitted from the abdomen through a hydrocele in the 
scrotum.
If your ﬁndings suggest a hernia, gently try to reduce it (return it to the abdom-
inal cavity) by sustained pressure with your ﬁngers. Do not attempt this maneu-
ver if the mass is tender or the patient reports nausea and vomiting.
The history may be helpful. The patient can usually tell you what happens to his 
swelling when lying down and may be able to demonstrate how he reduces it 
himself.
Special Techniques
The Testicular Self-Examination. The incidence of testicular cancer is 
low, about 5 per 100,000 men, but it is the most common solid cancer of young 
men between ages 15 and 34 years, with an estimated lifetime risk of 1:260.58
Although the USPSTF and the American Cancer Society have not recommended 
routine TSE for screening, the clinician and patient may wish to teach the TSE to 
enhance health awareness and self-care. For high-risk patients, review the risk 
factors for testicular carcinoma, which has an excellent prognosis when detected 
early: cryptorchidism, which confers a high risk for testicular carcinoma in the 
undescended testicle; a history of carcinoma in the contralateral testicle; mumps 
orchitis; an inguinal hernia; a hydrocele in childhood; and a positive family history.
If you can place your fingers above 
the mass, suspect a hydrocele. 
Transillumination of the scrotal mass 
may help identify a hydrocele from an 
intestine-containing hernia. 
A hernia is incarcerated when its 
contents cannot be returned to the 
abdominal cavity. A hernia is 
strangulated when the blood supply 
to the entrapped contents is 
compromised. Suspect strangulation 
in the presence of tenderness, nausea, 
and vomiting, and consider surgical 
intervention. See Table 13-5, Course, 
Presentation, and Differentiation of 
Hernias in the Groin, p. 561. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Patient Instructions for the Testicular  
Self-Examination
This examination is best performed after a warm bath or shower.59,60 This way, 
the scrotal skin is warm and relaxed. It is best to do the test while standing.
● Standing in front of a mirror, check  
for any swelling on the skin of the 
scrotum.
● With the penis out of the way, gently 
feel your scrotal sac to locate a testi-
cle. Examine each testicle separately.
● Use one hand to stabilize the testicle. 
Using the ﬁngers and thumb of your 
other hand, ﬁrmly but gently feel or 
roll the testicle between your ﬁngers. 
Feel the entire surface. Find the  
epididymis. This is a soft, tube-like 
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
556 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
Note that initially you may use sentences to describe your ﬁndings; later you will 
use phrases. The style below contains phrases appropriate for most write-ups.
Patient Instructions for the Testicular  
Self-Examination (continued )
structure at the back of the testicle that collects and carries sperm, and is not 
an abnormal lump. Check the other testicle and epididymis the same way.
● If you ﬁnd a hard lump, an absent or enlarged testicle, a painful swollen scro-
tum, or any other diﬀerences that do not seem normal, do not wait. See your 
health care provider right away.
As noted by the American Cancer Society, “It’s normal for one testicle to be 
slightly larger than the other, and for one to hang lower than the other. You 
should also know that each normal testicle has a small, coiled tube (epididymis) 
that can feel like a small bump on the upper or middle outer side of the testicle. 
Normal testicles also have blood vessels, supporting tissues, and tubes that 
carry sperm. Some men may confuse these with abnormal lumps at ﬁrst. If you 
have any concerns, ask your doctor or clinician.”
Recording Your Findings
Recording the Male Genitalia Examination
“Circumcised male. No penile discharge or lesions. No scrotal swelling or discol-
oration. Testes descended bilaterally, smooth, without masses. Epididymis is 
nontender. No inguinal or femoral hernias.”
OR
“Uncircumcised male; prepuce easily retractible. No penile discharge or lesions. 
No scrotal swelling or discoloration. Testes descended bilaterally; right testicle 
smooth; 1 × 1 cm ﬁrm nodule on left lateral testicle. It is ﬁxed and nontender. 
Epididymis nontender. No inguinal or femoral hernias.”
These findings are suspicious for tes-
ticular carcinoma, the most common 
form of cancer in men between the 
ages of 15 and 34 years. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  13 |
 
Male Genitalia and Hernias 
557
Table 13-1 Sexually Transmitted Infections of Male Genitalia
Genital Warts (Condylomata Acuminata)
■  Appearance: Single or multiple papules or plaques of variable 
shapes; may be round, acuminate (pointed), or thin and 
slender. May be raised, ﬂat, or cauliﬂower-like (verrucous).
■  Causative organism: HPV, usually subtypes 6, 11; carcinogenic 
subtypes rare, approximately 5–10% of all anogenital warts. 
Incubation: weeks to months; infected contact may have no 
visible warts.
■  Can arise on penis, scrotum, groin, thighs, anus; usually 
asymptomatic, occasionally cause itching and pain.
■  May disappear without treatment.
Genital Herpes Simplex
■  Appearance: Small scattered or grouped vesicles, 1 to 3 mm 
in size, on glans or shaft of penis. Appear as erosions if 
vesicular membrane breaks.
■  Causative organism: Usually Herpes simplex virus 2 (90%), a 
double-stranded DNA virus. Incubation: 2 to 7 days after 
exposure.
■  Primary episode may be asymptomatic; recurrence usually 
less painful, of shorter duration.
■  Associated with fever, malaise, headache, arthralgias; local 
pain and edema, lymphadenopathy.
■  Need to distinguish from genital herpes zoster (usually in 
older patients with dermatomal distribution) and candidiasis.
Primary Syphilis
■  Appearance: Small red papule that becomes a chancre, a 
painless erosion up to 2 cm in diameter. Base of chancre is 
clean, red, smooth, and glistening; borders are raised and 
indurated. Chancre heals within 3 to 8 wks.
■  Causative organism: Treponema pallidum, a spirochete. 
Incubation: 9–90 d after exposure.
■  May develop inguinal lymphadenopathy within 7 d; lymph 
nodes are rubbery, nontender, mobile.
■  20%–30% of patients develop secondary syphilis while 
chancre still present (suggests coinfection with HIV).
■  Distinguish from: genital herpes simplex; chancroid; 
granuloma inguinale from Klebsiella granulomatis (rare in the 
United States; four variants, so difﬁcult to identify).
Chancroid
■  Appearance: Red papule or pustule initially, then forms a 
painful deep ulcer with ragged nonindurated margins; 
contains necrotic exudate, has a friable base.
■  Causative organism: Haemophilus ducreyi, an anaerobic 
bacillus. Incubation: 3–7 d after exposure.
■  Painful inguinal adenopathy; suppurative buboes in 25% of 
patients.
■  Need to distinguish from: primary syphilis; genital herpes 
simplex; lymphogranuloma venereum, granuloma inguinale 
from Klebsiella granulomatis (both rare in the United States).
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
558 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
558 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 13-2 Abnormalities of the Penis and Scrotum
Hypospadias
A congenital displacement of the urethral meatus to the inferior 
surface of the penis. The meatus may be subcoronal, midshaft, 
or at the junction of the penis and scrotum (penoscrotal).
Scrotal Edema
Pitting edema may make the scrotal skin taut; seen in heart 
failure or nephrotic syndrome.
Fingers can
palpate above
mass
Peyronie Disease
Palpable, nontender, hard plaques are found just beneath the 
skin, usually along the dorsum of the penis. The patient 
complains of crooked, painful erections.
Hydrocele
A nontender, ﬂuid-ﬁlled mass within the tunica vaginalis. It 
transilluminates, and the examining ﬁngers can palpate above 
the mass within the scrotum.
Fingers cannot
get above
mass
Carcinoma of the Penis
An indurated nodule or ulcer that is usually nontender. 
Limited almost completely to men who are not circumcised, it 
may be masked by the prepuce. Any persistent penile sore is 
suspicious.
Scrotal Hernia
Usually an indirect inguinal hernia that comes through the 
external inguinal ring, so the examining ﬁngers cannot get 
above it within the scrotum.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  13 |
 
Male Genitalia and Hernias 
559
Table 13-3 Abnormalities of the Testis
Cryptorchidism
The testis is atrophied and lies outside 
the scrotum in the inguinal canal, 
abdomen, or near the pubic tubercle; it 
may also be congenitally absent. There is 
no palpable left testis or epididymis in 
the unﬁlled scrotum. Cryptorchidism, 
even with surgical correction, markedly 
raises the risk of testicular cancer.61
Small Testis
In adults, testicular length is usually 
≤3.5 cm. Small ﬁrm testes usually 
≤2 cm suggest Klinefelter syndrome. 
Small soft testes suggesting atrophy are 
seen in cirrhosis, myotonic dystrophy, 
use of estrogens, and hypopituitarism; 
may also follow orchitis.
Acute Orchitis
The testis is acutely inﬂamed, painful, 
tender, and swollen. It may be difﬁcult 
to distinguish from the epididymis. The 
scrotum may be reddened. Seen in 
mumps and other viral infections; 
usually unilateral.
Early
 
Late
Tumor of the Testis 
Usually appears as a painless nodule.  
As a testicular neoplasm grows and 
Any nodule within the testis warrants  
spreads, it may seem to replace the 
investigation for malignancy. 
entire organ. The testicle characteristically
 
feels heavier than normal.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
560 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
560 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 13-4  Abnormalities of the Epididymis and 
Spermatic Cord 
Spermatocele and Cyst of the Epididymis
A painless, movable cystic mass just above the testis suggests 
a spermatocele or an epididymal cyst. Both transilluminate. 
The former contains sperm, and the latter does not, but they 
are clinically indistinguishable.
Acute Epididymitis
An acutely inﬂamed epididymis is indurated, swollen, and 
notably tender, making it difﬁcult to distinguish from the 
testis. The scrotum may be reddened and the vas deferens 
inﬂamed. Causes include infection from Neisseria gonorrheae, 
Chlamydia trachomatis (younger adults), Escherichia coli, and 
Pseudomonas (older adults); trauma; and autoimmune 
disease. Barring urinary symptoms, urinalysis is often 
negative.
Tuberculous Epididymitis
The chronic inﬂammation of tuberculosis produces a ﬁrm 
enlargement of the epididymis, which is sometimes tender, 
with thickening or beading of the vas deferens.
Varicocele of the Spermatic Cord
Varicocele refers to gravity-mediated varicose veins of the 
spermatic cord, usually found on the left. It feels like a soft 
“bag of worms” in the spermatic cord above the testis, and if 
prominent, appears to distort the contours of the scrotal skin. 
A varicocele collapses in the supine position, so examination 
should be both supine and standing. If the varicocele does 
not collapse when the patient is supine, suspect a left 
spermatic vein obstruction within the abdomen.
Torsion of the Spermatic Cord
Torsion, or twisting, of the testicle on its spermatic cord 
produces an acutely painful, tender, and swollen organ that is 
often retracted upward in the scrotum. The cremasteric reﬂex 
is nearly always absent on the affected side in boys or men 
with testicular torsion. If the presentation is delayed, the 
scrotum becomes red and edematous. There is no associated 
urinary infection. Torsion is most common in neonates and 
adolescents, but can occur at any age. It is a surgical 
emergency because of obstructed circulation.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  13 |
 
Male Genitalia and Hernias 
561
Table 13-5  Course, Presentation, and Differentiation 
of Hernias in the Groin
Internal inguinal ring
External inguinal ring
Femoral artery
Femoral vein
Inguinal canal
COURSE AND
PRESENTATION OF
FEMORAL HERNIA
COURSE AND
PRESENTATION 
OF INDIRECT
INGUINAL HERNIA
COURSE AND
PRESENTATION 
OF DIRECT
INGUINAL HERNIA
Inguinal Hernias
Indirect
Direct
Femoral Hernias
Frequency, Age, and  
Sex
Most common, all ages, both 
sexes. Often in children; may 
occur in adults.
Less common. Usually in 
men older than 40 yrs; rare 
in women.
Least common. More common 
in women than in men.
Point of Origin
Above inguinal ligament, near 
its midpoint (the internal 
inguinal ring).
Above inguinal ligament, 
close to the pubic tubercle 
(near the external inguinal 
ring).
Below the inguinal ligament; 
appears more lateral than an 
inguinal hernia. Can be hard 
to differentiate from lymph 
nodes.
Course
Often into the scrotum. 
Rarely into the scrotum.
Never into the scrotum.
(Examining ﬁnger in inguinal 
canal during coughing or 
 straining)
The hernia comes down the 
inguinal canal and touches the 
ﬁngertip.
The hernia bulges anteriorly 
and pushes the side of the 
ﬁnger forward.
The inguinal canal is empty.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
562 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
References
 1. Turner D, Driemeyer W, Nieder T, et al. How much sex do medical 
students need? A survey of the knowledge and interest in sexual 
medicine of medical students. Psychother Psychosom Med Psychol. 
2014;64:452.
 2. Lapinski J, Sexton P. Still in the closet: the invisible minority in 
medical education. BMC Med Educ. 2014;14:171.
 3. Moll J, Krieger P, Moreno-Walton L, et al. The prevalence of les-
bian, gay, bisexual, and transgender health education and training 
in emergency medicine residency programs: what do we know? 
Acad Merg Med. 2014;21:608.
 4. Sack S, Drabant B, Perrin E. Communicating about sexuality: an 
initiative across the core clerkships. Acad Med. 2002;77:1159.
 5. Rutherford K, McIntyre J, Daley A, et al. Development of expertise 
in mental health service provision for lesbian, gay, bisexual and 
transgender communities. Med Educ. 2012;46:903.
 6. Kellaher D. Sexual behavior and autism spectrum disorders: an 
update and discussion. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2015;17:562.
 7. Bonﬁls K, Firmin R, Salyers M, et al. Sexuality and intimacy among 
people living with serious mental illnesses: factors contributing to 
sexual activity. Psychiatr Rehabil J. 2015;38:249.
 8. Turner D, Schottle D, Krueger R, et al. Sexual behavior and its cor-
relates after traumatic brain injury. Curr Opin Psychiatry. 2015; 
28:180.
 9. Lee D, Nazroo J, O’Connor D, et al. Sexual health and well-being 
among older men and women in England: ﬁnding from the Eng-
lish longitudinal study of ageing. Arch Sex Behav. 2016;45:133. 
2015 January 27. Epub ahead of print.
 10. Barbara AM, Doctor F, Chaim G. Asking the right questions 2. Talk-
ing with clients about sexual orientation and gender identity in 
mental health, counselling and addiction settings. Toronto Canada: 
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health; 2007. Available at http://
knowledgex.camh.net/amhspecialists/Screening_Assessment/
assessment/ARQ2/Pages/default.aspx. Accessed May 20, 2015.
 11. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexual orientation and 
health among U.S. adults. National Health Interview Survey, 2013. 
Available at http://www.cdc.gov/lgbthealth/. Accessed May 10, 
2015.
 12. Gates GJ, Newport F. Gallup Special Report: The US LGBT adult 
population. Washington, DC: Gallup, Inc; 2013. See also Gates GJ, 
Newport F. Special Report: 3.4% of U.S. Adults Identify as LGBT. 
October 18, 2012. Available at http://www.gallup.com/poll/158066/
special-report-adults-identify-lgbt.aspx. Accessed May 11, 2015.
 13. Gates GJ. Demographics and LGBT health. J Health Soc Behav. 
2013;54:72.
 14. U.S. Census Bureau. Same sex couples. 2013. Available at http://
www.census.gov/hhes/samesex./ Accessed May 10, 2015.
 15. Institute of Medicine. The Health of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and 
Transgender People: Building a Foundation for Better Understanding. 
Washington, DC: National Institutes of Health; 2011. See also 
Report at https://www.iom.edu/Reports/2011/The-Health-of-Les-
bian-Gay-Bisexual-and-Transgender-People.aspx March 31 2011. 
Accessed May 11, 2015.
 16. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Lesbian and bisexual 
women. Updated March 25, 2014. Available at http://www.cdc.
gov/lgbthealth/women.htm. Gay and bisexual men. Updated 
March 25, 2014. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/lgbthealth/msm.
htm. Accessed May 10, 2015.
 17. Centers for Disease Prevention and Control. CDC fact sheet. HIV 
among gay and bisexual men. March 2015. Available at http://
www.cdc.gov/msmhealth/. Accessed May 10, 2015.
 18. Matarazzo BB, Barnes SM, Pease JL, et al. Suicide risk among les-
bian, gay, bisexual, and transgender military personnel and veter-
ans: what does the literature tell us? Suicide Life Threat Behav. 
2014;44:200.
 19. Haas AP, Eliason M, Mays VM, et al. Suicide and suicide risk in 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender populations: review and 
recommendations. J Homosex. 2011;58:10.
 20. Daniel H, Butkus R, for the Health and Public Policy Committee of 
the American College of Physicians. Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and 
transgender health disparities: Executive summary of a policy 
position paper from the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern 
Med. 2015;163:135.
 21. Durso LE, Meyer IH. Patterns and predictors of disclosure of sex-
ual orientation to healthcare providers among lesbians, gay men, 
and bisexuals. Sex Res Social Policy. 2013;10:35.
 22. Polek CA, Hardie TL, Crowley EM. Lesbians’ disclosure of sexual 
orientation and satisfaction with care. J Transcult Nurs. 2008;19:243.
 23. Friedman MR, Dodge B, Schick V, et al. From bias to bisexual 
health disparities: attitudes toward bisexual men and women in 
the United States. LGBT Health. 2014;1:309.
 24. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
and transgender health. Updates July 22 2014. Available at http://
www.cdc.gov/lgbthealth./ Accessed May 11, 2015.
 25. National LGBT Health Education Center. Suggested resources and 
readings, 2015. Available at http://www.lgbthealtheducation.org/
publications/lgbt-health-resources./ Accessed May 11, 2015.
 26. Strutz KL, Herring AH, Halpern CT. Health disparities among 
young adult sexual minorities in the U.S. Am J Prev Med. 2015; 
48:76.
 27. Gareri P, Castagna A, Francomano D. Erectile dysfunction in the 
elderly: an old widespread issue with novel treatment perspectives. 
Int J Endocrin. 2014;2014:878670.
 28. Liu G, Hariri S, Bradley H, et al. Trends and patterns of sexual 
behaviors among adolescents and adults aged 14 to 59 years, 
United States. Sex Transm Dis. 2015;42:20.
 29. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted 
diseases. Draft for Public Comment Version: Sexually Transmitted 
Diseases Treatment Guidelines, 2014. Updated November 12, 
2014. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment/update.htm. 
Accessed May 11, 2015.
 30. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. USPSTF recommendations for 
STI screening. February 2014. Available at http://www.uspreventi-
veservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name/uspstf-recommendations-for-
sti-screening. Accessed May 11, 2015.
 31. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Human immunodeﬁciency 
virus (HIV) infection: Screening. April 2013. Available at http://
www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Topic/recommenda-
tion-summary/human-immunodeficiency-virus-hiv-infection-
screening?ds=1&s=HIV. Accessed May 11, 2015.
 32. Skarbinski J, Rosenberg E, Paz-Bailey G, et al. Human Immunode-
ﬁciency virus transmission at each step of the care continuum in 
the United States. JAMA Intern Med. 2015;175:588.
 33. Meanley S, Gale A, Harmell C, et al. The role of provider interac-
tions on comprehensive sexual healthcare among young men who 
have sex with men. AIDS Educ Prev. 2015;27:15.
 34. Institute of Medicine, Eng TR, Butler WT, eds. The Hidden Epi-
demic: Confronting Sexually Transmitted Diseases: Summary. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  13 |
 
Male Genitalia and Hernias 
563
REFERENCES
 Washington, DC: National Academies Press (US); 1997. Available 
at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25165803. Accessed 
May 12, 2015.
 35. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually Transmitted 
Disease Surveillance 2013. Atlanta: U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services; 2014. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/std/
stats13/default.htm. Accessed May 11, 2015.
 36. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC Fact Sheet. 
Reported STDs in the United States. 2013 National Data for Chla-
mydia, Gonorrhea, and Syphilis, 2014. Available at: http://www.
cdc.gov/nchhstp/newsroom/docs/std-trends-508.pdf. Accessed 
May 11, 2015.
 37. LeFevre ML. Screening for Chlamydia and gonorrhea: U.S. Preven-
tive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern 
Med. 2014;161:902.
 38. Markowitz LE, Dunne EF, Saraiya M, et al. Human papillomavirus 
vaccination: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immu-
nization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep. 2014;63(RR-05):1.
 39. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC Fact Sheet. 
Reported STDs in the United States. 2013 National Data for Chla-
mydia, Gonorrhea, and Syphilis, 2014. Available at: http://www.
cdc.gov/nchhstp/newsroom/docs/std-trends-508.pdf. Accessed 
May 11, 2015.
 40. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. HIV in the United 
States: At a Glance, March 2015. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/
hiv/pdf/statistics_basics_ataglance_factsheet.pdf. Accessed May 12, 
2015.
 41. Bradley H, Hall HI, Wolitski RJ, et al. Vital Signs: HIV diagnosis, 
care, and treatment among persons living with HIV—United 
States, 2011. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2014;63:1113.
 42. Moyer VA. Screening for HIV: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force 
Recommendation Statement. Ann Intern Med. 2013;159:51.
 43. Branson BM, Handsﬁeld HH, Lampe MA, et al. Revised recom-
mendations for HIV testing of adults, adolescents, and pregnant 
women in health-care settings. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2006;55(RR-
14):1.
 44. Qaseem A, Snow V, Shekelle P, et al. Screening for HIV in health 
care settings: a guidance statement from the American College of 
Physicians and HIV Medicine Association. Ann Intern Med. 2009; 
150:125.
 45. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC Fact Sheet. HIV 
Testing in the United States, 2014. Available at http://www.cdc.
gov/nchhstp/newsroom/docs/HIV-Testing-US-508.pdf. Accessed 
May 12, 2015.
 46. Workowski KA, Berman S. Sexually transmitted diseases treatment 
guidelines, 2010. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2010;59(RR-12):1.
 47. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Condom Effective-
ness. Condom Fact Sheet in Brief, 2013. Available at: http://www.
cdc.gov/condomeffectiveness/brief.html. Accessed May 12, 
2015.
 48. Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2015. CA Cancer J 
Clin. 2015;65:5.
 49. Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al. SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 
1975–2011. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute; 2014. Available at 
http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2011./ Accessed May 12, 2015.
 50. National Cancer Institute. Testicular Cancer Screening (PDQ®). 
Description of the evidence; 2014. Available at http://www.cancer.
gov/cancertopics/pdq/screening/testicular/HealthProfessional/
page2. Accessed May 12, 2015.
 51. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for testicular can-
cer: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force reafﬁrmation recommen-
dation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2011;154:483.
 52. American Cancer Society. Testicular Cancer Overview, 2014. Avail-
able at http://www.cancer.org/cancer/testicularcancer/overview-
guide./ Accessed May 2, 2015.
 53. Montgomery JS, Bloom DA. The diagnosis and management of 
scrotal masses. Med Clin North Am. 2011;95:235.
 54. Simons MP, Aufenacker T, Bay-Nielsen M, et al. European Hernia 
Society guidelines on the treatment of inguinal hernia in adult 
patients. Hernia. 2009;13:343.
 55. Miserez M, Peeters E, Aufenacker T, et al. Update with level 1 stud-
ies of the European Hernia Society guidelines on the treatment of 
inguinal hernia in adult patients. Hernia. 2014;18:151.
 56. Kraft BM, Kolb H, Kuckuk B, et al. Diagnosis and classiﬁcation of 
inguinal hernias. Surg Endosc. 2003;17:2021.
 57. Van den Berg JC, de Valois JC, Go PM, et al. Detection of groin 
hernia with physical examination, ultrasound, and MRI compared 
with laparoscopic ﬁndings. Invest Radiol. 1999;34:739.
 58. Aberger M, Wilson B, Holzbeierlein JM, et al. Testicular self-exam-
ination and testicular cancer: a cost-utility analysis. Cancer Med. 
2014;3:1629.
 59. American Cancer Society. Testicular self-exam. Updated January 21, 
2015. Available at http://www.cancer.org/cancer/testicularcancer/
moreinformation/doihavetesticularcancer/do-i-have-testicular-
cancer-self-exam. Accessed May 13, 2015.
 60. U.S. National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health. 
MedlinePlus—Testicular self-exam. Updated December 27 2013. 
Available at http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/ 
003909.htm. Accessed May 13, 2015.
 61. Kolon TF, Herndon CD, Baker LA, et al; American Urological Asso-
ciation. Evaluation and treatment of cryptorchidism: AUA guide-
line. J Urol. 2014;192:337.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  14 |
 
Female Genitalia 
565
Knowing the basics of pelvic anatomy will enhance your examination skills and 
improve your detection of abnormal ﬁndings. Begin by reviewing the anatomy of the 
external female genitalia, or vulva (Fig. 14-1). Note the mons pubis, a hair-covered fat 
pad overlying the symphysis pubis; the labia majora, rounded folds of adipose tissue 
forming the outer lips of the vagina; the labia minora, the thinner pinkish-red folds 
or inner lips that extend anteriorly to form the prepuce; and the clitoris. The vestibule 
C H A P T E R 
14
Female Genitalia
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate 
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 15: Female Genitalia, Anus, and Rectum)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com
Anatomy and Physiology
Mons pubis
Prepuce
Clitoris
Urethral meatus
Opening of
paraurethral
(Skene) gland
Vestibule
Introitus
Perineum
Labia majora
Labia minora
Hymen
Vagina
Opening of
Bartholin gland
Anus
F I G U R E  1 4 - 1 .  External female genitalia.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
566 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
is the boat-shaped fossa between the labia 
minora. In its posterior portion lies the vag-
inal opening, the introitus, which in virgins 
may be hidden by the hymen. The term 
perineum refers to the tissue between the 
introitus and the anus.
The urethral meatus opens into the vesti-
bule between the clitoris and the vagina. 
Just posterior and adjacent to the meatus 
on either side lie the openings of the para-
urethral (Skene) glands.
The openings of Bartholin glands are 
located posteriorly on both sides of the 
vaginal opening but are not usually visi-
ble (Fig. 14-2). The glands themselves are 
situated more deeply.
The vagina is a musculomembranous tube extending upward and posteriorly 
between the urinary bladder and urethra and the rectum. Its upper third lies at 
a horizontal plane and terminates in the cup-shaped fornix. The vaginal mucosa 
lies in transverse folds, or rugae.
The vagina lies at almost a right angle to the uterus, a thick-walled ﬁbromuscular 
structure shaped like an inverted pear (Fig. 14-3). Its convex upper surface is the 
uterine fundus. The body of the uterus, or corpus, and the cylindrical cervix are 
joined inferiorly at the isthmus. The uterine walls contain three layers: the peri-
metrium, with its serosal coating from the perineum; the myometrium of disten-
sible smooth muscle; and the endometrium, the adherent inner coating. The 
Location of
Bartholin glands
F I G U R E  1 4 - 2 .  Bartholin glands.
See Table 14-1, Lesions of the Vulva,  
p. 596, and Table 14-2, Bulges and 
Swelling of the Vulva, Vagina, and 
Urethra, p. 597. 
Rectouterine
pouch
Isthmus
 of uterus
Rectum
Posterior
 fornix
Cervix
Vagina
Perineum
Sacrum
Ovary
Fallopian 
tube
Uterus
Bladder
Anterior
fornix
Urethra
Introitus
F I G U R E  1 4 - 3 .  Pelvic anatomy—sagittal view.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  14 |
 
Female Genitalia 
567
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
cervix protrudes into the vagina, dividing the upper vagina into three recesses, 
the anterior, posterior, and lateral fornices.
The vaginal surface of the cervix, the ectocervix, is seen easily with the help of a 
speculum (Fig. 14-4). At its center is a round, oval, or slit-like depression, the 
external os of the cervix, which marks the opening into the endocervical canal. 
The ectocervix is covered by plushy red columnar epithelium that surrounds the 
os and lines the endocervical canal, and by shiny pink squamous epithelium con-
tinuous with the vaginal lining. The squamocolumnar junction forms the boundary 
between these two types of epithelium. During puberty, the broad band of 
columnar epithelium encircling the os, called ectropion, is gradually replaced by 
squamous epithelium. The squamocolumnar junction migrates toward the os, 
creating the transformation zone. This is the area at risk for later dysplasia which 
is sampled by the Papanicolaou, or Pap, smear.
External os of
the cervix
Transformation
zone
Columnar epithelium
Squamocolumnar junction
Squamous epithelium
F I G U R E  1 4 - 4 .  Cervical epithelia and transformation zone.
A fallopian tube with a fanlike tip, the ﬁmbria, extends from the ovary to each side 
of the uterus, and conducts the oocyte from the periovarian peritoneal cavity to 
the uterine cavity (Fig. 14-5). The two ovaries are almond-shaped glands that 
vary considerably in size but average approximately 3.5 × 2 × 1.5 cm from adult-
hood through menopause. The ovaries are palpable on pelvic examination in 
roughly half of women during the reproductive years. Normally, the fallopian 
tubes are not palpable. The term adnexa, a plural Latin word meaning “append-
ages,” refers to the ovaries, tubes, and supporting tissues.
Fundus
of uterus
Body of 
uterus
Isthmus
Cervix
Cervical canal
Uterine
cavity
Round
ligament
Fallopian tube
Ovary
(sectioned)
Myometrium
Endometrium
Fimbriae
Ligament
of ovary
Cervical os
F I G U R E  1 4 - 5 .  Pelvic anatomy—cross-sectional view.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
568 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The ovaries have two primary functions: the production of oocytes and the secre-
tion of hormones, including estrogen, progesterone, and testosterone. Increased 
hormonal secretion during puberty stimulates the growth of the uterus and its 
endometrial lining, enlargement of the vagina, thickening of the vaginal epithe-
lium, and the development of secondary sex characteristics, including the breasts 
and pubic hair.
The parietal peritoneum extends downward behind the uterus into a cul-de-sac 
called the rectouterine pouch (pouch of Douglas). You can just reach this area on 
rectovaginal examination.
The greater pelvis, protected by the bony wings of the ilia, contains the lower 
abdominal viscera, then narrows inferiorly at the lesser pelvis, which surrounds 
the pelvic cavity and the perineum. The anatomy and innervation of the pelvis 
and pelvic organs are complex, but involve several common symptoms and dis-
orders, so review the following text and ﬁgures carefully.1,2
The pelvic organs are supported by a sling of tissues composed of muscle, liga-
ments, and endopelvic fascia called the pelvic ﬂoor, which helps support the 
pelvic organs above the outlet of the lesser pelvis (Fig. 14-6). Pelvic ﬂoor muscles 
also aid in sexual function (orgasm), urinary and fecal continence, and stabiliza-
tion of connecting joints. The pelvic ﬂoor consists of the pelvic diaphragm and 
the perineal membrane.
Vagina
Pelvic 
diaphragm
Levator ani
Coccygeus
Piriformis
Coccyx
Anus
Urethra
Urogenital diaphragm
Symphysis pubis
F I G U R E  1 4 - 6 .  Pelvic ﬂoor.
■ Brieﬂy, the pelvic diaphragm separates the pelvic cavity from the perineum 
and consists of the levator ani and the coccygeal muscles, which attach to the 
inner surface of the lesser pelvis.
■ The perineal membrane is a triangular sheet of ﬁbromuscular tissue that con-
tains the bulbocavernosus and ischiocavernosus muscles, the superﬁcial 
transverse perineal body, and the external anal sphincter. This membrane 
spans the anterior triangle that anchors the urethra, the vagina, and perineal 
body to the ischiopubic rami.
Weakness of the pelvic floor muscles 
may cause pain; urinary incontinence; 
fecal incontinence; and prolapse of 
the pelvic organs that can produce a 
cystocele, rectocele, or enterocele. Risk 
factors are advancing age; prior pelvic 
surgery or trauma; parity and child-
birth; clinical conditions (obesity, dia-
betes, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson 
disease); medications (anticholiner-
gics, a-adrenergic blockers); and 
chronically increased intra-abdominal 
pressure from chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD), chronic 
constipation, or obesity.1 
See Table 14-2, Bulges and Swelling of 
the Vulva, Vagina, and Urethra, p. 597. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  14 |
 
Female Genitalia 
569
THE HEALTH HISTORY
■ The urethra, vagina, and anorectum pass through the key-like opening in the 
center of the pelvic diaphragm, the urogenital (levator) hiatus.
■ Inferior to the pelvic diaphragm is the third supporting structure, the deep 
urogenital diaphragm. This diaphragm includes the external urethral sphinc-
ter; the urethra; and the supporting deep transverse perineal muscle, which 
runs from the inferior ischium to the midline. Note the structures of the 
posterior triangle, principally the external anal sphincter muscle that encircles 
the rectum and the internal anal sphincter.
■ The pelvic diaphragm is innervated by the sacral nerve roots S3 to S5. The 
perineal membrane and the urogenital diaphragm are innervated by the pu-
dendal nerve.
In most women, pubic hair spreads downward in a triangular pattern, pointing 
toward the vagina. In 10% of women, it may form an inverted triangle, pointing 
toward the umbilicus. This growth is usually not completed until the middle 20s 
or later. The growth of pubic hair along with breast development are the main 
components of sexual maturity assessment in girls.
Just before menarche, there is a physiologic increase in vaginal secretions—a 
normal change that sometimes worries a girl or her mother. As menses 
become more regular, these increased secretions, or leukorrhea, coincide with 
ovulation. They also accompany sexual arousal. These normal discharges 
must be differentiated from the discharges of cervical and vaginal infections.
Lymphatics. Lymph from the vulva and lower vagina drains into the 
inguinal nodes. Lymph from the internal genitalia, including the upper vagina, 
ﬂows into the pelvic and abdominal lymph nodes, which are not palpable.
Loss of urethral support contributes 
to stress incontinence. Weakness of the 
perineal body from childbirth predis-
poses to rectoceles and enteroceles. 
See the Tanner stages of sexual matu-
rity in Chapter 18, Assessing Children: 
Infancy Through Adolescence,  
pp. 897–901. 
See Table 14-3, Vaginal Discharge,  
p. 598, and Table 14-6, Abnormalities 
of the Cervix, p. 600. 
The Health History
Common and Concerning Symptoms
● Menarche, menstruation, menopause, postmenopausal bleeding
● Pregnancy
● Vulvovaginal symptoms
● Sexual health
● Pelvic pain—acute and chronic
● Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Menarche, Menstruation, Menopause. Questions about menarche, 
menstruation, and menopause provide an opportunity to explore the patient’s 
concerns and her attitude about her body. Learn to describe menstrual patterns, 
using the terms on the next page.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
570 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
The Menstrual History—Helpful Deﬁnitions
● Menarche—age at onset of menses
● Dysmenorrhea—pain with menses, often with bearing down, aching, or cramp-
ing sensation in the lower abdomen or pelvis
● Premenstrual syndrome (PMS)—a cluster of emotional, behavioral, and 
 physical symptoms occurring 5 days before menses for three consecutive 
cycles
● Amenorrhea—absence of menses
● Abnormal uterine bleeding—bleeding between menses; includes infrequent, 
excessive, prolonged, or postmenopausal bleeding
● Menopause—absence of menses for 12 consecutive months, usually occurring 
between ages 48 and 55 years
● Postmenopausal bleeding—bleeding occurring 6 months or more after cessa-
tion of menses
Menarche and Menses. When talking with an adolescent girl about 
menarche, opening questions might include: “How did you ﬁrst learn about 
monthly periods? How did you feel when they started? Many girls worry when 
their periods aren’t regular or come late. Has anything like that bothered you?” 
Explain that girls in the United States usually begin menstruation between ages 
9 and 16 years, and that often it takes ≥1 year for menstrual cycles to settle into 
a regular pattern. Age at menarche is variable, depending on genetic endowment, 
socioeconomic status, and nutrition. The interval between periods ranges 
roughly from 24 to 32 days; ﬂow lasts from 3 to 7 days.
For the menstrual history, ask the patient her age when menses began, or age at 
menarche. When did her last menstrual period (LMP) start, and, if possible, the 
one before that, called the prior menstrual period (PMP). How often does she have 
periods, as measured by the interval between the ﬁrst day of two successive 
periods? How regular or irregular are they? How long do they last? How heavy 
is the ﬂow? What color is it? Flow can be assessed roughly by the number of pads 
or tampons used daily. Because women differ in their deﬁnitions of heavy, mod-
erate, or light ﬂow, ask the patient whether she usually soaks a pad or tampon, 
or spots it lightly. Further, does she use a pad and tampon at the same time? Does 
she have any bleeding between periods? Or after intercourse?
Dysmenorrhea. Dysmenorrhea or pain with menses, is reported by 
almost half of women patients. Ask if the patient has any discomfort or pain 
before or during her periods. If so, what is it like, how long does it last, and does 
it interfere with usual activities? Are there other associated symptoms? Dysmen-
orrhea may be primary, without an organic cause, or secondary, with an organic 
cause.
The dates of previous periods provide 
clues to possible pregnancy or men-
strual irregularities. 
Unlike the normal dark red menstrual 
discharge, excessive flow tends to be 
bright red and may include “clots” (not 
true fibrin clots). 
Primary dysmenorrhea results from 
increased prostaglandin production 
during the luteal phase of the men-
strual cycle, when estrogen and  
progesterone levels decline. 
Causes of secondary dysmenorrhea 
include endometriosis, adenomyosis 
(endometriosis in the muscular layers 
of the uterus), pelvic inflammatory 
disease (PID), and endometrial polyps. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  14 |
 
Female Genitalia 
571
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Premenstrual Syndrome. PMS includes emotional and behavioral 
symptoms such as depression, angry outbursts, irritability, anxiety, confusion, 
crying spells, sleep disturbance, poor concentration, and social withdrawal.3 
Ask about signs such as bloating and weight gain, swelling of the hands and 
feet, and generalized aches and pains. Criteria for diagnosis are symptoms and 
signs in the 5 days prior to menses for at least three consecutive cycles; cessa-
tion of symptoms and signs within 4 days after onset of menses; and interfer-
ence with daily activities.
Amenorrhea. Amenorrhea refers to the absence of periods. Absence of 
ever initiating periods is primary amenorrhea; cessation of periods after they have 
been established is secondary amenorrhea. Pregnancy, lactation, and menopause 
are physiologic causes of secondary amenorrhea.
Abnormal Bleeding. Ask about any abnormal bleeding. The term abnormal 
uterine bleeding encompasses several patterns.
Other causes of secondary amenor-
rhea include low body weight from 
any condition, including malnutrition 
and anorexia nervosa, stress, chronic 
illness, and hypothalamic–pituitary–
ovarian dysfunction. 
Causes vary by age group and include 
pregnancy, cervical or vaginal infec-
tion or cancer, cervical or endometrial 
polyps or hyperplasia, fibroids, bleed-
ing disorders, and hormonal contra-
ception or replacement therapy. 
Postcoital bleeding suggests cervical 
polyps or cancer or, in an older 
woman, atrophic vaginitis. 
Patterns of Abnormal Bleeding
● Polymenorrhea, or less than 21-day intervals between menses
● Oligomenorrhea, or infrequent bleeding
● Menorrhagia, or excessive ﬂow
● Metrorrhagia, or intermenstrual bleeding
● Postcoital bleeding
Menopause. Menopause typically occurs between ages 48 and 55 years, 
peaking at a median age of 51 years. It is deﬁned retrospectively as cessation of 
menses for 12 months, progressing through several stages of erratic cyclical 
bleeding. These stages of variable cycle length, often with vasomotor symptoms 
like hot ﬂashes, ﬂushing, and sweating, represent perimenopause. The ovaries 
stop producing estradiol or progesterone and estrogen levels drop signiﬁcantly, 
although some testosterone synthesis persists.4 Pituitary secretion of luteinizing 
hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone gradually becomes markedly ele-
vated. Low levels of estradiol remain detectable due to conversion of adrenal 
steroids in peripheral adipose tissue. During the menopausal transition, women 
may experience mood shifts; changes in self-image; hot ﬂashes from vasomotor 
changes; accelerated bone loss; increases in total and low-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol; and vulvovaginal atrophy with vaginal drying, dysuria, or dyspa-
reunia. Studies suggest that only vasomotor symptoms, vaginal symptoms, and 
trouble sleeping are consistently linked to menopause. Urinary symptoms may 
occur in the absence of infection, due to atrophy of the urethra and urinary 
trigone.
Women may ask about alternative 
compounds and botanicals for relief of 
menopause-related symptoms. Most 
are poorly studied and not proven to 
be beneficial. Estrogen replacement 
relieves symptoms, but poses other 
health hazards.5 Relatively few medi-
cations have been shown to affect 
symptoms (see p. 582). 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
572 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Ask a middle-aged or older woman if she has stopped menstruating. When? 
Continue with “How do (did) you feel about not having your periods anymore?” 
“Has this affected your life in either a positive or negative way?” Did any symp-
toms accompany her transition to menopause? Always be sure to ask about any 
bleeding or spotting after menopause as this may be an early sign of cancer.
Pregnancy. The health history includes such questions as, “Have you ever 
been pregnant? How many times?…How many living children do you have?…
Have you ever had a miscarriage or an abortion? How many times?” Ask about 
any difﬁculties during pregnancy and the timing and circumstances of any 
abortion, whether spontaneous or induced. How did the woman experience 
these losses? Obstetricians commonly record the pregnancy history using the 
“gravida para” system.
Causes of postmenopausal bleeding 
include endometrial cancer, hormone 
replacement therapy (HRT), and uterine 
and cervical polyps. 
The Gravida Para Notation
● G = gravida, or total number of pregnancies
● P = para, or outcomes of pregnancies. After P, you will often see the notations 
F (full-term), P (premature), A (abortion), and L (living child).
See Chapter 19, The Pregnant Woman, 
pp. 927–954 for further discussion. 
Inquire about methods of contraception used by the patient and her partner. Is 
the patient satisﬁed with the method chosen? Are there any questions about the 
options available?
If amenorrhea suggests a current pregnancy, inquire about the date of last inter-
course and common early symptoms: tenderness, tingling, or increased size of the 
breasts; urinary frequency; nausea and vomiting; easy fatigability; and sensations 
that the baby is moving, usually present at about 20 weeks. Be sensitive to the 
patient’s feelings about these topics; explore them when the patient has special 
concerns. (See also Chapter 19, The Pregnant Woman, p. 927.)
Vulvovaginal Symptoms. The most common vulvovaginal symptoms 
are vaginal discharge and itching. If the patient reports a discharge, inquire about 
its amount, color, consistency, and odor. Ask about any local sores or lumps in the 
vulvar area. Are they painful? Because patients vary in their understanding of 
anatomical terms, be prepared to try alternative phrasing such as “Any itching 
(or other symptoms) near your vagina?. . . between your legs?. . . where you 
urinate?”
Sexual Health. Sexual health plays an important and natural role in overall 
well-being, yet many clinicians feel ill-equipped to address sexual health issues.6,7 
Patients immediately sense your receptiveness to their concerns in this sensitive 
and vital area. Maintaining a neutral, nonjudgmental tone helps your patients 
feel safe and trust you with their concerns. Many patients have strong beliefs 
about sexual behavior related to their upbringing, faith, ethnicity, educational 
level, and past experiences. Reassure them that sex in a mature consensual 
relationship is healthy, and that you explore sexual health with all your patients. 
Be aware of your own body language, facial expressions, and tone of voice, so 
that you create an open environment for discussion. In younger patients and 
Amenorrhea followed by heavy 
bleeding suggests a threatened abor-
tion or dysfunctional uterine bleeding 
related to lack of ovulation. 
See Table 14-1, Lesions of the Vulva,  
p. 596; and Table 14-3, Vaginal  
Discharge, p. 598. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  14 |
 
Female Genitalia 
573
THE HEALTH HISTORY
adolescents, consider asking the parents to leave the room so that the patients 
feel free to answer questions without fear of parental disapproval or repercussions, 
especially when discussing possible sexual abuse.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity. Recent surveys indicate 1.6% 
to 3.4% of Americans’ self-identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender 
(LGBT).8–10 Many are apprehensive about health care encounters, and clinicians 
are generally underprepared for providing LGBT care. Both the Institute of Med-
icine (2011) and the American College of Physicians (2015) have called for 
policies to reduce signiﬁcant disparities in LGBT health care, including increased 
risk of suicide, depression, and STIs.11,12 Listen closely to your patients and 
probe existing resources to learn about LGBT health issues.13–15 As you talk with 
patients, begin with neutral questions about sexual orientation and gender identity, 
listed below.16
■ “Are you currently dating, sexually active, or in a relationship?” “How would 
you identify your sexual orientation?” The range of responses includes het-
erosexual or straight, lesbian, gay, women who have sex with women, men 
who have sex with men (MSM), bisexual, transsexual, and questioning, 
among others.
■ “How would you describe your gender identity?” Responses include male, 
female, transsexual, transgendered, intersex, female-to-male, male-to- 
female, unsure or questioning, and even “prefer not to answer.”
■ Continue with, “Do you use protection such as birth control or condoms?…
Has anyone ever tried to touch or have sex with you without your consent?”
Sexual Response. Start with general questions such as “How is sex for 
you?” or “Are you having any problems with sex? This includes sexual inter-
course and anal and oral sex.” Alternatively, you can ask, “Are you satisﬁed with 
your sex life as it is now? Has there been any signiﬁcant change in the last few 
years? Are you satisﬁed with your ability to perform sexually? How does your 
partner feel?” Studies show that patients are often uncomfortable bringing up 
these topics. Many prefer to have them initiated by their providers, and most 
welcome information about sexual health.17–19 
If the patient has concerns about her response to sex, consider direct questions 
to help you assess each phase of the sexual response: desire, arousal, and orgasm. 
“Do you have an interest in (appetite for) sex?” inquires about desire, or libido. If 
indicated, follow up with, “Has your interest in sex increased or decreased? . . . Can 
you describe why you think it has changed? Are you and your partners having 
any difﬁculties or problems, or any new stress?” Often, stressors like relationship 
changes, job changes, or even moving affect sexual drive and enjoyment. For 
arousal, ask, “Do you get sexually aroused? Do you lubricate easily (get wet or 
slippery)? Do you stay too dry?” Continue with, “Do you use lubricants to help 
with dryness?” For orgasm, ask, “Are you able to reach climax (have an orgasm, 
or ‘come’)?” “Is it important for you to reach climax?” “Do you enjoy sex if you 
do not reach orgasm?”
See also The Sexual History, Chapter 3, 
pp. 94–95; and Tips for Taking a Sexual 
History and the discussion of gay, les-
bian, bisexual and transgender health 
care in Chapter 13, Male Genitalia and 
Hernias, pp. 545–546. 
Sexual dysfunction is classified by the 
phase of sexual response. A woman 
may lack desire; she may fail to 
become aroused and attain adequate 
vaginal lubrication; or, despite ade-
quate arousal, she may be unable to 
reach orgasm. Causes include lack of 
estrogen, clinical illness, trauma or 
abuse, surgery, pelvic anatomy,  
and psychological and psychiatric 
 conditions. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
574 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Ask also about dyspareunia, or pain with intercourse. If present, try to localize 
where the pain occurs. Is it near the outside, at the start of intercourse, or does 
she feel it farther in, when her partner is pushing deeper? Vaginismus refers to an 
involuntary spasm of the muscles surrounding the vaginal oriﬁce that makes 
penetration during intercourse painful or impossible.
In addition to identifying and understanding sexual problems, ask about onset, 
severity (persistent or sporadic), setting, and factors, if any, that make them bet-
ter or worse. What does the patient think is the source of the problem, what has 
she tried to do about it, and what does she hope for? The causes of sexual dys-
function are complex and include the patient’s general health; medications and 
drugs, including use of alcohol; knowledge of sexual practices and techniques; 
her attitudes, values, and fears; the relationship and communication between 
partners; and the setting in which sexual activity takes place.
Pelvic Pain—Acute and Chronic. Many women volunteer a history of 
pelvic pain. Acute pelvic pain in menstruating girls and women warrants 
immediate attention. The differential diagnosis is broad but includes life-
threatening conditions such as ectopic pregnancy, ovarian torsion, and appendicitis. 
As you identify onset, timing, features of the pain, and associated symptoms, you 
will need to consider infectious, gastrointestinal (GI), and urinary causes. Be sure to 
ask about STIs, recent insertion of an intrauterine device (IUD), and any symptoms 
in the sexual partner. A careful pelvic examination, with attention to vital signs, and 
testing for pregnancy will help narrow your diagnosis and guide further testing.
Chronic pelvic pain refers to pain that lasts for more than 6 months and does not 
respond to treatment.23 It accounts for approximately 10% of ambulatory referrals 
to gynecologists and 20% of hysterectomies.24,25 Risk factors are advancing age, 
prior pelvic surgery or trauma, parity and childbirth, clinical conditions (obesity, 
diabetes, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson disease), medications (anticholinergics, 
α-adrenergic blockers), and chronically increased intra-abdominal pressure 
(COPD, chronic constipation, obesity).1 Explore gynecologic, urologic, GI, mus-
culoskeletal, and neurological causes.24 The Pelvic Pain Assessment Form of the 
International Pelvic Pain Society, which includes screening questions for depres-
sion and physical and sexual abuse, as well as a pain map that women complete, 
is a helpful resource.26 Asking the woman to keep a daily pain journal, noting any 
changes in situational, dietary, or seasonal conditions, may also be useful.
Sexually Transmitted Infections. Local symptoms or ﬁndings on 
physical examination may raise the possibility of STIs (also referred to as sexually 
transmitted diseases [STDs]). After establishing the seven attributes of any 
symptoms, elicit the patient’s sexual history. Inquire about sexual contacts and 
establish the number of sexual partners in the past 3 to 6 months. Ask if the 
patient has concerns about human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) infection, 
Superficial pain suggests local inflam-
mation, atrophic vaginitis, or inade-
quate lubrication; deeper pain may 
arise from pelvic disorders or pressure 
on a normal ovary. Causes of vaginis-
mus may be physical or psychological. 
Commonly, sexual problems are 
related to situational and psychosocial 
factors. 
The most common cause of acute pel-
vic pain is PID, followed by ruptured 
ovarian cyst, and appendicitis.20 STIs 
and recent IUD insertion are red flags 
for PID. Always rule out ectopic preg-
nancy first with serum or urine testing 
and possible ultrasound.21,22 
Also consider mittelschmerz, which is 
typically a mild unilateral pain lasting 
for a few hours to a few days arising at 
midcycle from ovulation, ruptured 
ovarian cyst, and tubo-ovarian abscess. 
Endometriosis, from retrograde men-
strual flow and extension of the uterine 
lining outside the uterus, affects 50% to 
60% of women and girls with pelvic 
pain.27 Other causes include PID and 
adenosis and fibroids, which are tumors 
in the uterine wall or submucosal or sub-
serosal surfaces arising from the smooth 
muscle cells of the myometrium. 
Chronic pelvic pain is a red flag for a 
history of sexual abuse. Also consider 
pelvic floor spasm from myofascial pain 
with trigger points on examination 
(see pp. 592–593). 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  14 |
 
Female Genitalia 
575
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
desires HIV testing, or has current or past partners at risk. Also ask about oral 
and anal sex and, if indicated, about symptoms involving the mouth, throat, 
anus, and rectum. Review the past history of STIs. “Have you ever had herpes?…
any other problems such as gonorrhea?…syphilis?…pelvic infections?” Continue 
with the more general questions suggested on pp. 94–95.
Health Promotion and 
Counseling: Evidence and 
Recommendations
Important Topics for Health Promotion  
and Counseling
● Cervical cancer screening
● Ovarian cancer: risk factors and screening
● Sexually transmitted infections
● Options for family planning
● Menopause and hormone replacement therapy
Cervical Cancer Screening: The Pap Smear and Human Papilloma-
virus Infection. Widespread screening with the Papanicolaou (Pap) smear
has contributed to a signiﬁcant decline in cervical cancer incidence and mortality. 
In 2014, an estimated 12,900 women were diagnosed with cervical cancer, with 
4,100 deaths.28 The current estimated incidence rate is 7.8 cases per 100,000 
women per year. Most cases of cervical cancer occur in women who have not had 
appropriate screening.
HPV infection with high-risk oncogenic subtypes is found in virtually all cervical 
cancers.29 Roughly 90% of HPV infections are asymptomatic and resolve within 
2 years. The most important risk factor for cervical cancer is persistent infection with 
high-risk HPV subtypes, especially HPV 16 or HPV 18. These two subtypes cause 
roughly 70% of cervical cancers worldwide. Even the 10% of women with persistent 
infection rarely progress to cervical cancer if they undergo regular screening, insofar 
as the average estimated time for a high-grade HPV lesion to progress to cervical can-
cer is 10 years, allowing a long interval for detection and treatment.28 Genital infection 
with low-risk subtypes, such as HPV 6 and HPV 11, is associated with genital warts.
Two notable risk factors for cervical cancer include failure to undergo screen-
ing, which accounts for roughly half of women diagnosed with cervical cancer, 
and multiple sexual partners. Other risk factors include smoking, immunosup-
pression from any cause including HIV infection, long-term use of oral contra-
ception, coinfection with Chlamydia trachomatis, parity, prior cervical cancer, and 
genetic polymorphisms affecting the entry of HPV DNA into cervical cells.30
Cervical Cancer Screening Guidelines, 2015.
For the ﬁrst time, in 
2012, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), the American College of 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
576 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), and the American Cancer Society (ACS), 
in collaboration with the American Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology 
(ASCCP) and the American Society for Clinical Pathology (ASCP), released guide-
lines that agree on cervical cancer screening for average-risk women, summarized 
below, which contain the important deﬁnition of average risk.28,30–32 Note that in 
2014, the American College of Physicians found no evidence supporting screening 
with routine pelvic examinations alone in average-risk, asymptomatic adult women 
(as distinct from cervical cancer screening or symptom-based examination).33,34
Rationale for Screening Recommendations. All three sets of guide-
lines concur that screening should begin at age 21 years, and that there is no 
need for annual screening for average-risk women at any age.
■ Women age <21 years: Although cytologic abnormalities on Pap smear are 
common, most HPV infections clear spontaneously within 1 to 2 years. Pap 
smears in this age group have often led to unnecessary procedures that could 
affect cervical competency, pregnancy, and childbirth.
■ Women ages 21 to 65 years: All three guidelines, including a grade A recom-
mendation from the USPSTF, recommend Pap smear cytology every 3 years 
or, alternatively, cotesting with cytology plus HPV testing for high-risk sub-
types every 5 years. Women with normal cytology but negative high-risk 
Current Cervical Cancer Screening Guidelines 
for Average-Risk Women: USPSTF, ACS/ASCCP/
ASCP, and ACOG
Variablea
Recommendation
Age at which to begin screening
21 yrs
Screening method and interval
Ages 21–65 yrs: cytology every 3 yrs OR
Ages 21–29 yrs: cytology every 3 yrs
Ages 30–65 yrs: cytology plus HPV testing 
(for high-risk or oncogenic HPV types) 
every 5 yrs
Age at which to end screening
Age >65 yrs, assuming three consecutive 
negative results on cytology or two con-
secutive negative results on cytology 
plus HPV testing within 10 yrs before 
cessation of screening, with the most 
recent test performed within 5 yrs
Screening after hysterectomy 
with removal of the cervix
Not recommended
HPV, human papillomavirus.
aDeﬁnition of Average Risk: No history of high-grade, precancerous cervical lesion (cervical intraep-
ithelial neoplasia grade 2 or a more severe lesion) or cervical cancer; not immunocompromised 
(including being HIV-infected); and no in utero exposure to diethylstilbestrol.
Source: Sawaya GF, Kulasingam S, Denberg T, et al. Cervical cancer screening in average-risk women: 
Best practice advice from the Clinical Guidelines Committee of the American College of Physicians. 
Ann Intern Med 2015;162:851.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  14 |
 
Female Genitalia 
577
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
HPV testing have an estimated risk of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) 
grade 2 or higher at 5 years of only 0.34%.28 The guidelines agree that testing 
for HPV alone or cotesting should only begin after age 30 years, because the 
prevalence of self-limited HPV in women age <30 years is still high.
■ Women age ≥65 years: All concur that screening can stop if women have had 
three consecutive negative results on cytology or two consecutive negative 
results with cotesting within 10 years of cessation of screening (with the 
most recent test performed within 5 years), as the risk of cervical cancer is 
low, and risk factors decrease with age.
■ Women with hysterectomy: Average-risk women with a hysterectomy and re-
moval of the cervix and no history of high-grade precancer or cervical cancer 
do not need screening. Screening guidelines for women with a subtotal 
(supracervical) hysterectomy are the same as for average risk women.35
Note that to follow these guidelines, women and clinicians need to have an accu-
rate history of past Pap smear testing and results.
Take the time to understand how Pap smear results are reported. Current clas-
siﬁcation and management guidelines are based on the Bethesda System of the 
National Cancer Institute (NCI), revised in 2001.36,37 The principal categories 
are provided below. Management depends on the cervical cancer risk and often 
involves repeat cytology, colposcopy, and DNA testing for HPV.
Conventional Pap smears have a sensi-
tivity and specificity for detecting cer-
vical cancer of 30% to 87% and 86% to 
100%, respectively. For liquid-based 
cytology, these figures are 61% to 95% 
and 78% to 82%. The sensitivity of Pap 
smear and HPV DNA testing is 74.6% 
to 100%.38–40 
Classiﬁcation of Pap Smear Cytology:  
The Bethesda System (2001)
● Negative for intraepithelial lesion or malignancy: No cellular evidence of neoplasia 
is present, although other organisms like Trichomonas, Candida, or Actinomyces 
may be reported in this category. Shifts in ﬂora consistent with bacterial vagino-
sis or cellular changes from herpes simplex may also be reported.
● Epithelial cell abnormalities: These include precancerous and cancerous lesions 
such as:
● Squamous cells, including atypical squamous cells (ASC ), which may be of 
undetermined signiﬁcance (ASC-US); low-grade squamous intraepithelial 
lesions (LSIL), including mild dysplasia; high-grade squamous intraepithelial 
lesions (HSIL), including moderate and severe dysplasia with features suspi-
cious for invasion; and invasive squamous cell carcinoma.
● Glandular cells, including atypical endocervical cells or atypical endometrial 
cells, speciﬁed or not otherwise speciﬁed (NOS); atypical endocervical cells 
or atypical glandular cells, favor neoplasia; endocervical adenocarcinoma in 
situ; and adenocarcinoma.
● Other malignant neoplasms, such as sarcomas or lymphomas, are rare.
The HPV Vaccine
■ Routine vaccination for girls ages 11 and 12: The Advisory Committee on Immu-
nization Practices of the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and the Ameri-
can Academy of Pediatrics recommend a three-dose vaccination series over 6 
months with either the quadrivalent or bivalent vaccine for girls and boys at 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
578 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
ages 11 or 12, before their ﬁrst sexual encounter; the series can begin as early 
as age 9 years.41,42 The quadrivalent vaccine prevents infection from HPV sub-
types 16 and 18, as well as 6 and 11, which cause 90% of genital warts. The 
bivalent vaccine prevents infection from subtypes 16 and 18. Vaccination with 
the quadrivalent HPV vaccine is also recommended for the prevention of cervi-
cal, vulvar, and vaginal cancers and precancers in females, as well as anal can-
cers and precancers and genital warts in both females and males.
Starting HPV vaccination early is important. In American adolescents, the 
prevalence of sexual intercourse in 2013 was 5.6% before age 13 years; 30% 
by ninth grade, and 64% by the end of high school.43 Vaccinated women 
should still get cervical cancer screening because the vaccines do not prevent 
all HPV subtypes. Also, consistent use of condoms does not eliminate the 
risk of cervical HPV infection.44,45
■ Catch-up vaccination: is recommended for females ages 13 through 26 years 
who have not had prior vaccination or completed the three-dose series. If 
females reach age 27 years before completing the series, the second and/or 
third vaccine doses can be administered after age 26 years to complete the 
series. Prevaccination assessments to establish the need for Pap or high-risk 
HPV DNA testing are not recommended.
■ The HPV vaccine is recommended for persons with compromised immune 
systems, including infection with HIV, through age 26 years if they have not 
been fully vaccinated when younger.
Ovarian Cancer: Risk Factors and Screening. Many women are fearful 
of ovarian cancer. Although ovarian cancer is relatively rare, it is the ﬁfth leading 
cause of cancer-related death for women.46 Two thirds of women affected are older 
than age 55 years; most are diagnosed when the disease is already metastatic to the 
peritoneal cavity or other organs. Overall 5-year survival is only 40%,47 compared to 
94% for the 15% of women who present with local early-stage disease. Currently, 
there are no effective screening tests, so clinicians face the challenge of improving 
identiﬁcation of symptoms. In women older than age 50 years, three symptoms 
merit special attention: abdominal distention, abdominal bloating, and urinary 
frequency; however, these are usually reported within 3 months of diagnosis 
and frequently occur in other conditions. The USPSTF reviewed current evidence 
in 2012 and continued to recommend against screening for ovarian cancer, a grade 
D recommendation based on ﬁndings that there is moderate or high certainty that 
screening has no net beneﬁt, or that the harms outweigh the beneﬁts.46
Risk factors for ovarian cancer include family history and presence of the 
BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutation. Risk is tripled if there is a ﬁrst-degree relative 
with breast or ovarian cancer. Carriers of BRCA1 and BRCA2 have a lifetime risk 
of 40% to 50% and 20% to 30%, respectively.48 Other risk factors include obesity 
and nulliparity, with growing evidence of increased risk from use of postmenopausal 
HRT, especially long-time users and users of sequential estrogen–progesterone 
schedules.49,50 More than 90% of ovarian cancers appear to be random. Risk is 
decreased by use of oral contraceptives, multiple pregnancies, breastfeeding, and 
tubal ligation. Recent investigations show that in high-risk women (BRCA positive; 
positive family history), some ovarian cancer cells may arise in the fallopian tubes, 
creating the option of risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy.51 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  14 |
 
Female Genitalia 
579
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Women frequently ask about CA-125 testing. The CA-125 level is neither sensitive 
nor speciﬁc. Recent studies are investigating additional biomarkers and stratiﬁcation 
of CA-125 cutoff points for demographic and clinical subgroups to reduce the high 
false-positive rate.47,52 Although CA-125 is elevated in more than 80% of women 
with ovarian cancer and helps predict relapse after treatment, it is also elevated in 
many other conditions and cancers, including pregnancy; endometriosis; uterine 
ﬁbroids; PID; benign cysts; and pancreatic, breast, lung, gastric, and colon cancer. 
Current investigations of combined screening with CA-125, transvaginal ultrasound, 
and selected tumor markers have not demonstrated beneﬁts that improve survival.
Sexually Transmitted Infections. U.S. rates of STIs are the highest in 
the industrialized world. Chlamydia trachomatis is the most commonly reported 
STI in the United States and the most common STI in women, with an estimated 
2.8 million cases annually (although HPV is more prevalent and the most common 
STI).53 Often, symptoms are subtle and the infection remains undiagnosed. If 
untreated, 10% to 15% of women will develop PID, a polymicrobial infection 
with an 8% to 40% risk of tubal infertility depending on the number of episodes; 
a third to a half of cases are attributed to coinfection of C. trachomatis with Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae.54,55 Chlamydia infection rates are highest in women ages 20 to 
24 years, closely followed by women ages 15 to 19 years. African American 
women and American Indian/Alaskan natives are at highest risk for infection. As 
with other STIs, risk factors are age younger than 24 years and sexually active; 
prior infection with chlamydia or other STIs, new or multiple partners, inconsistent 
condom use, and occupational sex work. Detection, groups most affected, and 
consequences of underdiagnosis and treatment are similar for gonorrhea. Infection 
with syphilis is less common, but increasing in men.56
To improve detection and treatment, the CDC and the USPSTF57 strongly recom-
mend screening for STIs, summarized below.
CDC STI and HIV Screening  
Recommendations 2014
● Chlamydia and gonorrhea screening annually for all sexually active women 
ages <25 years and older women with risk factors such as new or multiple sex 
partners, or a sex partner infected with an STI.
● Chlamydia, syphilis, hepatitis B, and HIV screening for all pregnant women and 
gonorrhea screening for at-risk pregnant women starting early in pregnancy, 
with repeat testing as needed to protect the health of mothers and their infants.
● Chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis screening at least once a year for all sexually 
active gay, bisexual, and other MSM. MSM who have multiple or anonymous part-
ners should be screened more frequently for STIs (i.e., at 3- to 6-month intervals).
● HIV testing at least once for all adults and adolescents from ages 13 to 64 years.
● HIV testing at least once a year for anyone having unsafe sex or using injec-
tion drug equipment. Sexually active gay and bisexual men may beneﬁt from 
testing every 3 to 6 months.
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted diseases. STD and HIV 
screening recommendations. Updated December 16, 2014. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/std/ 
prevention/screeningreccs.htm. Accessed May 20, 2015.
Chlamydial infection is a cause of ure-
thritis, cervicitis, PID, ectopic preg-
nancy, infertility, and chronic pelvic 
pain. Risk factors include age younger 
than 26 years, multiple partners, and 
prior history of STIs. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
580 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
HIV Infection. More than 1.2 million Americans are infected with HIV, 
and one in seven (14%) is unaware of their infection.58 The number of infected 
individuals continues to increase, although the number of new infections has 
remained stable. In 2013, an estimated 47,352 people were diagnosed with HIV 
infection and an estimated 26,688 people were diagnosed with acquired immune 
deﬁciency syndrome (AIDS), bringing the estimated total number of Americans 
diagnosed with AIDS to 1,194,039. At highest risk, are gay, bisexual, and other 
MSM of all ethnicities, but especially, young black/African American MSM ages 
13 to 24 years. In 2010, MSM represented 4% of the United States male popula-
tion and 63% of all new infections. White MSM had the largest total number of 
new infections. Blacks/African Americans and Hispanics/Latinos remain dispro-
portionately affected.
In the United States, 20% of new infections occur in women, primarily 
through heterosexual contact (84% in 2010) and injection drug use (14%). 
Women represent 23% of those living with HIV infection. Among infected 
women, 64% are African American, 18% are white, and 15% are Hispanic/
Latinos. The CDC reports that women are not accessing health care and are 
undertreated: “in 2011, only 45% were engaged in care, and only 32% had 
achieved viral suppression.”59 Heterosexual transmission is more likely in the 
following settings: vaginal or anal intercourse without a condom, sex 
exchanged for drugs, sex with multiple partners, infection with other STIs, 
women who have been sexually abused, sex with an infected partner with a 
high viral load of HIV-1, cervical ectopy, sex during menstruation, and sex 
with a male partner without circumcision. Recurrent vulvocandidiasis, con-
current STIs, abnormal Pap smears (occurring in 40% of HIV-positive women), 
and HPV infection are warning indications for HIV testing. As shown above, 
the CDC recommends universal HIV testing for everyone in the age range of 
13 to 64 years due to the prevalence of infections in people without known 
risk factors and underreporting.
Clinician Counseling for Prevention of STIs and HIV. The USPSTF 
recommends intensive behavioral counseling for all sexually active adolescents 
and for adults who are at increased risk for STIs, a grade B recommendation.60 
High-intensity counseling with more than 2 hours of intervention contact is the 
most successful, although this may be challenging for primary care ofﬁces com-
pared to integrated practice settings.61 The USPSTF evidence review notes that 
successful counseling includes: “prevalence, transmission, and details on how to 
reduce the risk for transmission; help in identifying personal risk for STIs; train-
ing in common behavior change processes, such as problem solving, decision 
making, and goal-setting; training in communication surrounding condom use 
and safe sex; and hands-on practice with condoms. Many successful interven-
tions were also speciﬁcally tailored to the gender and race/ethnicity of the 
participants.”
Key to effective clinician counseling are respect, compassion, a nonjudgmental 
attitude, and use of open-ended and understandable questions, such as, “Tell me 
about any new sex partners” and “Have you ever had anal sex, meaning ‘penis in 
rectum/anus sex’?” The CDC recommends interactive client-centered counsel-
ing, tailored to the person’s speciﬁc risk factors and situation.62
See Chapter 3, Interviewing and the 
Health History, pp. 94–95, on eliciting 
the sexual history, and Chapter 13, 
Male Genitalia and Hernias, pp. 548–
549, on risk factors for HIV infection. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  14 |
 
Female Genitalia 
581
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Training in prevention counseling improves effectiveness. Consult the excellent 
websites recommended by the CDC such as:
■ Effective interventions. HIV prevention that works—at http://effectiveinter 
ventions.org
■ Project Respect—at http://depts.washington.edu/nnptc/
Options for Family Planning. The CDC notes that “Teen pregnancy has 
declined to the lowest rates in seven decades, yet still ranks highest among the 
developed countries.”63 Signiﬁcant health disparities remain: In 2013, non-
Hispanic black, Hispanic, and American Indian/Alaska Native teen birth rates 
were still one and a half to two times higher than the rate for non-Hispanic white 
teens. Almost half of U.S. pregnancies are unintended. Among pregnancies in 
teens ages 15 to 19 years and younger than age 15 years, the percentage of 
unintended pregnancy climbs to over 80% and 98%, respectively. It is important 
to counsel girls and women about the timing of ovulation in the menstrual cycle 
and how to plan or prevent pregnancy. Be familiar with the numerous options 
for contraception and their effectiveness listed below.64
Failure rates are lowest for the subdermal implant, IUD, female sterilization, and 
vasectomy at less than 0.8% per year (<1 pregnancy/100 women/yr) and highest 
for male and female condoms, withdrawal, sponge in parous women, fertility 
awareness methods, and spermicides at more than 18% per year (or ≥18 preg-
nancies/100 women/yr). Failure rates for injectables, oral contraceptives, the 
patch, vaginal ring, and diaphragm range from 6% to 12% per year (or 6 to 12 
pregnancies/100 women/yr).
Take the time to understand the patient or couple’s concerns and preferences, and 
respect these preferences whenever possible. Continued use of a preferred method 
is superior to a more effective method that is abandoned. For teenagers, a conﬁden-
tial setting eases discussion of topics that may seem private and difﬁcult to explore.
Types of Family Planning Methods
Methods
Types of Contraception
Natural
Fertility awareness/periodic abstinence, with-
drawal, lactation
Barrier
Male condom, female condom, diaphragm, cervi-
cal cap, sponge
Implantable
IUD, subdermal implant of levonorgestrel
Pharmacologic/hormonal
Spermicide, oral contraceptives (estrogen and pro-
gesterone; progestin only), estrogen/progester-
one injectables and patch, hormonal vaginal 
contraceptive ring, emergency contraception
Surgery (permanent)
Tubal ligation; transcervical sterilization; vasectomy
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Reproductive health. Contraception. Updated 
April 22, 2015. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/UnintendedPregnancy/Contra-
ception.htm. Accessed May 21, 2015.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
582 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Menopause and Hormone Replacement Therapy. For many 
women, menopause is a profound transition that brings psychological and 
physiologic changes ranging from mood shifts to hot ﬂashes to vaginal drying 
and bone loss. Be well informed about the risks and beneﬁts of HRT with estrogen 
and progesterone, a topic women ask about frequently. Following publication 
of the Women’s Health Initiative trials investigating use of postmenopausal 
estrogen plus progesterone in 2002 and estrogen alone in 2004,65,66 the 
USPSTF, ACOG, the American Heart Association, and the North American 
Menopause Society (NAMS), among others, issued recommendations against 
using HRT for chronic conditions in postmenopausal women. In 2012, the 
USPSTF reafﬁrmed its recommendation against the use of combined estrogen 
and progestin for the primary prevention of chronic clinical conditions in 
postmenopausal women, including women with hysterectomies, citing grade 
D evidence that “there is moderate or high certainty that the service has no net 
beneﬁt or that the harms outweigh the beneﬁts.”67,68 In its 2012 evidence 
review of nine randomized controlled trials from 2002 to 2012, the USPSTF 
concluded that “estrogen plus progestin and estrogen alone decreased risk for 
fractures but increased risk for stroke, thromboembolic events, gallbladder 
disease, and urinary incontinence. Estrogen plus progestin increased risk for 
breast cancer and probable dementia, whereas estrogen alone decreased risk 
for breast cancer.” The American Heart Association, ACOG, and NAMS 
recommend against the use of postmenopausal hormone therapy for primary 
or secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease.69–71 ACOG notes that there 
is some evidence that transdermal estrogen therapy may have thrombosis-
sparing properties and also ﬁnds insufﬁcient evidence for recent claims that 
compounded bioidentical hormones are superior to conventional menopausal 
HRT. The USPSTF, ACOG, and NAMS advise that use of HRT for menopausal 
vasomotor symptoms be individualized, low dose, and for the shortest 
acceptable duration, usually in the range of 1 to 2 years.
Website Resources for Clinicians and Patients
The websites below provide updated information on health promotion and counsel-
ing for cervical and ovarian cancer, STIs and HIV, options for family planning, and 
menopause. More speciﬁc references are listed in the References on pp. 604–606.
● American Cancer Society—cervical and ovarian cancer at http://www.cancer.org/ 
● American College of Physicians—clinical practice guidelines at https://www 
.acponline.org/clinical_information/guidelines/
● American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists—clinical guidelines at 
http://www.acog.org/About-ACOG/ACOG-Departments/Deliveries-Before-
39-Weeks/ACOG-Clinical-Guidelines
● Centers for Disease Control and Prevention—STIs and HIV at http://www 
.cdc.gov/std/
● National Cancer Institute—cervical and ovarian cancer at http://www.cancer.gov/
● North American Menopause Society—for professionals at http://www 
.menopause.org/for-professionals
● U.S. Preventive Services Task Force—recommendations for primary care practice 
at http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name/recommendations
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  14 |
 
Female Genitalia 
583
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Approach to the Pelvic Examination. Many students feel uneasy 
during their ﬁrst pelvic examinations. This is normal. At the same time, patients 
have their own concerns. Some women have had painful, embarrassing, or even 
demeaning experiences during previous pelvic examinations; others may be 
facing a pelvic examination for the ﬁrst time. Some women fear what the clinician 
may ﬁnd, and how ﬁndings may affect their lives. Asking the patient’s permission 
to perform the examination shows courtesy, respect, and the expectation that the 
examination is collaborative. Explaining the steps of what you are about to do 
will also be greatly appreciated. If a Pap smear is to be collected using the glass-
slide technique, time the examination so that it does not occur during menses, 
because blood can interfere with interpretation.
Take steps to help a woman having her ﬁrst pelvic examination know what to 
expect. Use three-dimensional models, show her the equipment, let her handle 
the speculum, and explain each step both in advance and during the examina-
tion to help her learn about her body and feel comfortable. A careful, gentle 
technique is especially important for minimizing any pain or discomfort.
The woman’s response to the pelvic examination may reveal clues about her feel-
ings about the examination and her sexuality. If she pulls away, adducts her 
thighs, or reacts negatively to the examination, you can gently comment, “I 
notice you are having some trouble relaxing. Is it just being here, or are you 
troubled by the examination?…Is anything worrying you?” Behaviors that seem 
to present an obstacle may lead you to a better understanding of your patient’s 
concerns. Adverse reactions may signal prior physical or sexual abuse and should 
be explored.72
Pelvic examinations during adolescence should respond to indications such as 
menstrual abnormalities (amenorrhea, excessive bleeding, or dysmenorrhea); 
unexplained abdominal pain; vaginal discharge; the prescription of contracep-
tives; bacteriologic and cytologic studies in a sexually active girl; and the patient’s 
request for assessment.
Techniques of Examination
In liquid-based cytology, blood cells 
can be filtered out. 
See Chapter 18, Assessing Children: 
Infancy Through Adolescence, 
pp. 900–901. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Important Areas of Examination
External Examination
Internal Examination
Mons pubis
Labia majora and minora
Urethral meatus, clitoris
Vaginal introitus
Perineum
Vagina, vaginal walls
Cervix
Uterus, ovaries
Pelvic muscles
Rectovaginal wall
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
584 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Helping the patient to relax is essential for an adequate examination. Adopting 
the tips recommended helps enhance the patient’s comfort. Always wear gloves, 
both during the examination and when handling equipment and specimens. 
Plan ahead, so that any needed equipment and culture media are readily at hand.
Male examiners should be accompanied by female chaperones. Female examin-
ers should also be assisted if the patient is physically or emotionally disturbed, 
or if help is needed with the examination.
Sexual Assault. Cases of sexual assault merit special evaluation. Sexual 
assault includes rape, unwanted genital touching, and forced exposure to 
pornography. Rape is a legal term; in the United States, rape refers to “any 
penetration of a body oriﬁce (mouth, vagina, or anus) involving force or the 
threat of force or incapacity (i.e., associated with young or old age, cognitive or 
physical disability, or drug or alcohol intoxication) and nonconsent.”73 The 
lifetime prevalence of sexual assault ranges from 13% to 39% among women and 
3% among men. The National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey 
report of 2011 revealed that 19.3% of women and 1.7% of men have been raped 
during their lifetimes.74 Only two thirds of rape victims report the assault to their 
primary care provider, only 20% to 40% present for clinical evaluation, and less 
than 40% report rape to law enforcement. Optimally, rape victims should 
receive care from a trained team at a rape crisis center or emergency room that 
can provide support, treatment of injuries, and documentation of evidence. 
Trauma may be extensive, and the time limit for evidence collection is usually 72 
to 120 hours. Evidence collection requires patient permission at each step and 
involves multistep protocols that can take up to 6 hours to perform. Emotional 
support and prevention of STIs and pregnancy should be addressed.
Tips for the Successful Pelvic Examination
The Patient
The Examiner
Avoids intercourse, douching, or use 
of vaginal suppositories for 24 to  
48 hrs before examination
Empties her bladder before the exami-
nation
Lies supine, with head and shoulders 
elevated, arms at her sides or folded 
across the chest to enhance eye 
contact and reduce tightening of 
abdominal muscles
Obtains permission; selects chaperone
Explains each step of the examination 
in advance
Drapes the patient from midabdomen to 
knees; depresses the drape between 
the knees to provide eye contact with 
patient
Avoids unexpected or sudden move-
ments
Chooses a speculum that is the correct 
size
Warms the speculum with tap water
Monitors the comfort of the examina-
tion by watching the patient’s face
Uses excellent but gentle technique, 
especially when inserting the 
 speculum (see pp. 587–588)
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  14 |
 
Female Genitalia 
585
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Seek supervision and consultation as you learn the complex psychological, 
clinical, and legal dimensions of caring for these patients, and review guidelines 
and recommendations from the World Health Organization, ACOG, and the 
CDC.75–77
Choosing Equipment. Assemble the equipment below, and review the 
supplies and procedures of your own facility before taking cultures and other 
samples. You will need:
■ A movable source of good light
■ A vaginal speculum of appropriate size
■ Water-soluble lubricant
■ Equipment for taking Pap smears, bacteriologic cultures and DNA probes, 
or other diagnostic testing materials, such as potassium hydroxide and nor-
mal saline
Specula are either metal or plastic and come in two basic shapes, named for 
Pedersen and Graves (Fig. 14-7). Both are available in small, medium, and large 
sizes. The medium Pedersen specu-
lum is usually most comfortable for 
sexually active women. The narrow-
bladed Pedersen speculum is best for 
the patient with a small introitus, such 
as a virgin or an elderly woman. The 
Graves specula are best for parous 
women with vaginal prolapse.
Before using a speculum, practice 
opening and closing its blades, lock-
ing the blades in an open position, 
and releasing them again. The instruc-
tions in this chapter apply to a metal 
speculum; you can easily adapt them 
to a plastic speculum by handling it 
before use.
When using a plastic speculum, warn 
the patient that it typically makes a 
loud click and may pinch when locked 
or released, causing discomfort.
Positioning the Patient. Drape 
the patient appropriately and then assist 
her into the lithotomy position. Place 
one heel, then the other into the 
stirrups. She may be more comfortable 
in socks or shoes than bare feet. Then 
F I G U R E  1 4 - 7 .  Specula, from left to right: small metal Pedersen, medium metal 
Pedersen, medium metal Graves, large metal Graves, and large plastic Pedersen.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
586 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
ask her to slide all the way down the examining table until her buttocks extend 
slightly beyond the edge. Her thighs should be ﬂexed, abducted, and externally 
rotated at the hips. Make sure her head is supported with a pillow.
External Examination
Assess the Sexual Maturity of an Adolescent Patient. You can 
assess pubic hair during either the abdominal or the pelvic examination. Note its 
characteristics and distribution, and rate it according to the Tanner stages, 
described on p. 901.
Examine the External Genitalia. Seat yourself comfortably and warn 
the patient that you will be touching her genital area. Inspect the mons pubis, 
labia, and perineum. Separate the labia and inspect:
■ The labia minora
■ The clitoris
■ The urethral meatus
■ The vaginal opening, or introitus
Note any inﬂammation, ulceration, discharge, swelling, or nodules. Palpate any 
lesions.
Bartholin Glands. If the patient 
reports labial swelling, examine the 
Bartholin glands. Insert your index ﬁn-
ger into the vagina near the posterior 
introitus (Fig. 14-8). Place your thumb 
outside the posterior part of the labium 
majus. Palpate each side in turn, at 
approximately the “4-o’clock” and 
“8-o’clock” positions, between your 
ﬁnger and thumb, checking for swell-
ing or tenderness. Note any discharge 
exuding from the duct opening of the 
gland. If any is present, culture it.
Delayed puberty is often familial or 
related to chronic illness. It may also 
reflect disorders of the hypothalamus, 
anterior pituitary gland, or ovaries. 
Excoriations or itchy, small, red maculo-
papules suggest pediculosis pubis (lice 
or “crabs”), often found at the bases of 
the pubic hairs. 
An enlarged clitoris is seen in mascu-
linizing endocrine disorders. 
Inspect for urethral caruncle, prolapse 
of the urethral mucosa (p. 597), and 
tenderness in interstitial cystitis. 
For descriptions of herpes simplex, 
Behçet disease, syphilitic chancre, and 
epidermoid cyst, see Table 14-1, 
Lesions of the Vulva, p. 596. 
F I G U R E  1 4 - 8 .  Palpate the Bartholin 
gland.
A Bartholin gland may become acutely 
or chronically infected, resulting in 
swelling. See Table 14-2, Bulges and 
Swelling of the Vulva, Vagina, and 
Urethra, p. 597. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  14 |
 
Female Genitalia 
587
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Internal Examination
Insert the Speculum. Select a speculum of appropriate size and shape, 
and moisten it with warm water. (Lubricants or gels may interfere with cytologic 
studies and bacterial or viral cultures.) Let the patient know you are about to insert 
the speculum and apply downward pressure. Some clinicians carefully enlarge the 
vaginal introitus by lubricating one ﬁnger with water and applying downward 
pressure at its lower margin, then palpate the location of the cervix in order to 
angle the speculum more accurately. Enlarging the introitus can ease insertion 
of the speculum and the patient’s comfort. With your other hand (usually the 
left), introduce the closed speculum past your ﬁngers at a downward slope 
(Fig. 14-9). Avoid pulling on the pubic hair or pinching the labia as you open 
and close the speculum. Separating the labia majora with your right hand helps 
to avoid this.
F I G U R E  1 4 - 9 .  Gently insert the speculum.
The Small Introitus
Many virginal vaginal oriﬁces admit only a single examining ﬁnger. Modify your 
technique so that you insert only your index ﬁnger. Using a small Pedersen spec-
ulum may allow limited inspection. When the vaginal oriﬁce is even smaller, an 
adequate bimanual examination can be performed by placing one ﬁnger in the 
rectum rather than in the vagina, but warn the patient ﬁrst.
Similar techniques may be indicated for an older woman if the introitus has 
become atrophied and tight.
An imperforate hymen occasionally 
delays menarche. Check for this possi-
bility when menarche seems unduly 
late in relation to the development of 
a girl’s breasts and pubic hair. 
Two methods help you to avoid placing pressure on the sensitive urethra: 
(1) when inserting the speculum, hold it at an angle (Fig. 14-10), and then 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
588 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
(2) slide the speculum inward along the posterior wall of the vagina (Fig. 14-11), 
applying downward pressure to keep the vaginal introitus relaxed.
F I G U R E  1 4 - 1 0 .  Entry angle.
F I G U R E  1 4 - 1 1 .  Angle at full 
insertion.
After placing the speculum in the vagina, remove your ﬁngers of your other hand 
from the introitus. Rotate the speculum into a horizontal position, maintaining 
pressure posteriorly, and insert it to its full length (Fig. 14-12). Do not open the 
blades of the speculum prematurely.
F I G U R E  1 4 - 1 2 .  Insert the speculum to full length.
Inspect the Cervix. Open the speculum carefully. Rotate and adjust the 
speculum until it cups the cervix and brings it into full view (Fig. 14-13). Fix the 
speculum in its open position by tightening the thumbscrew. Position the light 
until you can see the cervix well. When the uterus is retroverted, the cervix 
points more anteriorly than illustrated. If you have difﬁculty ﬁnding the cervix, 
withdraw the speculum slightly and reposition it on a different slope. If a 
discharge obscures your view, wipe it away gently with a large cotton swab.
See retroversion of the uterus, p. 601. 
See Table 14-4, Variations in the Cervical 
Surface, p. 599; Table 14-5, Shapes of 
the Cervical Os, p. 600; and Table 14-6, 
Abnormalities of the Cervix, p. 600. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  14 |
 
Female Genitalia 
589
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Note the color of the cervix; its position and surface characteristics; and any 
ulcerations, nodules, masses, bleeding, or discharge. Inspect the cervical os for 
discharge.
F I G U R E  1 4 - 1 3 .  Gently open and ﬁx the speculum.
Look for lateral displacement of the 
cervix in endometriosis involving the 
uterosacral ligaments. 
A yellowish discharge on the endocer-
vical swab commonly represents 
mucopurulent cervicitis from C. tra-
chomatis, N. gonorrhoeae, or herpes 
simplex (p. 572). Raised, friable, or 
lobed wart-like lesions are seen with 
condylomata or cervical cancer. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Obtain Specimens for Cervical Cytology (Pap Smears). Obtain 
one specimen from the endocervix and another from the ectocervix, or a 
combination specimen using the cervical brush (“broom”). For best results the 
patient should not be menstruating. She should avoid intercourse and use of 
douches, tampons, contraceptive foams or creams, or vaginal suppositories for 
48 hours before the examination. For sexually active women ages 26 years or 
younger, and for other asymptomatic women at increased risk of infection, plan 
to culture the cervix routinely for chlamydia.78
Obtaining the Pap Smear: Options for  
Specimen Collection
Cervical Broom
Many clinicians use a plastic brush tipped with 
a broom-like fringe to collect a single speci-
men containing both squamous and columnar 
epithelial cells. Rotate the tip of the brush in 
the cervical os, in a full clockwise direction, 
then place the sample directly into preserva-
tive so that the laboratory can prepare the 
slide (liquid-based cytology).
Alternatively, stroke each side of the brush on the glass slide. Promptly place 
the slide in solution or spray with a ﬁxative as described on the next page.
Use of the cervical broom and liquid-
based cytology is increasingly com-
mon and can also be used to test for 
chlamydia and gonorrhea. 
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
590 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Inspect the Vagina. Withdraw the speculum slowly while observing the 
vaginal walls. As the speculum clears the cervix, release the thumbscrew and 
maintain the open position of the speculum with your thumb. During withdrawal, 
inspect the vaginal mucosa, noting its color and any inﬂammation, discharge, 
ulcers, or masses.
Check for bulging in the vaginal wall. Remove either the upper or lower blade of 
the speculum (or use a single-blade speculum) and ask the woman to bear down 
so that you can assess the location of vaginal wall relaxation or the degree of 
uterine prolapse.
Close the speculum as it emerges from the introitus, avoiding both excessive 
stretching or pinching of the mucosa.
See Table 14-3, Vaginal Discharge,  
p. 598. 
Vaginal discharge often accompanies 
infection from Candida, Trichomonas 
vaginalis, and bacterial vaginosis. 
Diagnosis depends on laboratory 
tests because the sensitivity and spec-
ificity of discharge characteristics are 
low.79,80 Vaginal cancer is rare; diethyl-
stilbestrol (DES) exposure in utero 
and HPV infection are risk factors. 
Use of the lower blade as a retractor 
during bearing down helps expose 
anterior vaginal wall defects such as 
cystoceles; likewise, use of the upper 
blade helps expose rectoceles. The 
standardized Pelvic Organ Quantifica-
tion (POP-Q) system and diagram is 
widely used.81 See Table 14-2, Bulges 
and Swelling of the Vulva, Vagina, and 
Urethra, p. 597. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Obtaining the Pap Smear: Options for  
Specimen Collection (continued )
Cervical Scrape
Place the longer end of the scraper in the cer-
vical os. Press, turn, and scrape in a full circle, 
making sure to include the transformation zone 
and the squamocolumnar junction. Smear the 
specimen on a glass slide. Set the slide in a safe 
spot that is easy to reach. Note that doing the 
cervical scrape ﬁrst reduces the presence of 
red blood cells, which sometimes appear after 
rotating the endocervical brush.
Endocervical Brush
Place the endocervical brush in the cervical os. 
Roll it between your thumb and index ﬁnger, 
clockwise and counterclockwise. Remove the 
brush and smear the glass slide using a gentle 
painting motion to avoid destroying any cells. 
Place the slide into an ether–alcohol solution at 
once, or spray it promptly with a special ﬁxative.
Note that for pregnant women, a cotton-
tipped applicator, moistened with saline, is 
advised in place of the endocervical brush.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  14 |
 
Female Genitalia 
591
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Perform a Bimanual Examination. Lubricate the index and middle 
ﬁngers of one of your gloved hands, and from a standing position, insert your 
lubricated ﬁngers into the vagina, again exerting pressure primarily posteriorly. 
Your thumb should be abducted, your ring and little ﬁngers ﬂexed into your 
palm. Pressing inward on the perineum with your ﬂexed ﬁngers causes little, if 
any, discomfort and allows you to position your palpating ﬁngers correctly. Note 
any nodularity or tenderness in the vaginal wall, including the region of the 
urethra and the bladder anteriorly.
■ Palpate the cervix, noting its position, shape, consistency, regularity, mobility, 
and tenderness. Normally, the cervix can be moved somewhat without pain. 
Feel the fornices around the cervix.
■ Palpate the uterus. Place your 
other hand on the abdomen 
about midway between the 
umbilicus and the symphysis 
pubis. While you elevate the 
cervix and uterus with your 
pelvic hand, press your abdom-
inal hand in and down, trying 
to grasp the uterus between 
your two hands (Fig. 14-14). 
Note its size, shape, consis-
tency, and mobility, and iden-
tify any tenderness or masses.
Now slide the ﬁngers of your pelvic hand into the anterior fornix and palpate 
the body of the uterus between your hands. In this position, your pelvic 
ﬁngers can feel the anterior surface of the uterus, and your abdominal hand 
can feel part of the posterior surface.
If you cannot feel the uterus with either of these maneuvers, it may be tipped 
posteriorly (retrodisplaced). Slide your pelvic ﬁngers into the posterior for-
nix and feel for the uterus butting against your ﬁngertips. An obese or poorly 
relaxed abdominal wall may also prevent you from feeling the uterus even 
when it is located anteriorly.
Stool in the rectum may simulate a 
rectovaginal mass, but unlike a malig-
nant mass, it can usually be dented by 
digital pressure. Rectovaginal exami-
nation confirms the distinction. 
Cervical motion tenderness and/or 
adnexal tenderness are hallmarks of PID, 
ectopic pregnancy, and appendicitis. 
F I G U R E  1 4 - 1 4 .  Palpate the uterus.
See Table 14-7, Positions of the 
Uterus, p. 601, and Table 14-8, Abnor-
malities of the Uterus, p. 602. 
Uterine enlargement suggests preg-
nancy, uterine myomas (fibroids), or 
malignancy. 
Nodules on the uterine surfaces sug-
gest myomas, or fibroids (see p. 602). 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
See retroversion and retroflexion of the 
uterus (p. 601). 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
592 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Palpate each ovary. Place your ab-
dominal hand on the right lower 
quadrant, and your pelvic hand in 
the right lateral fornix (Fig. 14-15). 
Press your abdominal hand in 
and down, trying to push the ad-
nexal structures toward your pel-
vic hand. Try to identify the right 
ovary or any adjacent adnexal 
masses. By moving your hands 
slightly, slide the adnexal struc-
tures between your ﬁngers, if 
possible, and note their size, 
shape, consistency, mobility, and 
tenderness. Repeat the procedure 
on the left side.
Normal ovaries are somewhat tender. They are usually palpable in slender 
relaxed women, but are difﬁcult or impossible to feel in women who are 
obese or tense.
Assess the Pelvic Floor Muscles for Strength and Tenderness. 
After palpating the cervix, uterus, and ovaries, withdraw your examining ﬁngers 
just clear of the cervix. Then spread them against the vaginal walls. Ask the 
patient to squeeze around your ﬁngers as long and as hard as she can. Snug 
compression of your ﬁngers, moving them upward and inward, that lasts 3 or 
more seconds is full strength. Check for strength, tenderness during contraction, 
appropriate relaxation after contraction, and endurance in all four vaginal 
quadrants. Then, with your ﬁngers still placed against the vaginal walls inferiorly, 
ask the patient to cough several times or to bear down (Valsalva maneuver). Look 
for any urinary leakage during increased abdominal pressure. Watch for 
abdominal muscle overrecruitment or tightening of the adductor or gluteal 
muscles.
F I G U R E  1 4 - 1 5 .  Palpate the ovaries.
Within 3 to 5 years after menopause, 
the ovaries become atrophic and usu-
ally nonpalpable. In postmenopausal 
women, investigate a palpable ovary 
for possible ovarian cyst or  ovarian 
cancer. Pelvic pain, bloating, increased 
abdominal size, and urinary tract 
symptoms are more common in 
women with ovarian cancer.47 
Adnexal masses can also arise from a 
tubo-ovarian abscess, salpingitis or 
inflammation of the fallopian tubes 
from PID, or ectopic pregnancy. Distin-
guish such a mass from a uterine 
myoma. See Table 14-9, Adnexal 
Masses, p. 603. 
Muscle weakness arises from aging, 
vaginal deliveries, and neurologic 
conditions, and contributes to the 
urine leakage of stress incontinence 
during increased abdominal pressure. 
Overrecruitment with tightening, 
vaginal wall tenderness, and referred 
pain signal pelvic pain from pelvic 
floor spasm, interstitial cystitis, vulvo-
dynia, and urethral spasm. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  14 |
 
Female Genitalia 
593
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Perform a Rectovaginal Examination if Indicated. The rectovaginal 
examination (Fig. 14-17) has three primary purposes: to palpate a retroverted 
uterus, the uterosacral ligaments, cul-de-sac, and adnexa; to screen for colorectal 
cancer in women ages 50 years or older; and to assess pelvic pathology.
After withdrawing your ﬁngers from the bimanual examination, change your 
gloves and lubricate your ﬁngers as needed (see note below on lubricants). Slowly 
reintroduce your index ﬁnger into the vagina and your middle ﬁnger into the rec-
tum. Ask the patient 
to strain down as 
you do this to relax 
her anal sphincter. 
Mention that this 
may stimulate an 
urge to move her 
bowels, but this will 
not occur. Apply 
pressure against the 
anterior and lateral 
walls with the exam-
ining ﬁngers, and 
downward pressure 
with the hand on 
the abdomen.
Symphysis pubis
Perineal body
Levator ani muscles
Superficial transverse
perineal muscle
Bulbocavernosus muscle
Ischiocavernosus muscle
F I G U R E  1 4 - 1 6 .  Palpate the pelvic ﬂoor muscles.
In patients with pelvic pain or vaginal wall tenderness, palpate the external pel-
vic ﬂoor muscles in a clockwise rotation to identify trigger points (Fig. 14-16).
Trigger point tenderness in these 
muscles accompanies pelvic floor 
spasm and pelvic floor dysfunction 
from trauma, interstitial cystitis, or 
fibromyalgia. Pelvic floor disorders, 
present in ∼25% of all women and 
≥30% of older women, include urinary 
and fecal incontinence, pelvic organ 
prolapse, and other sensory and emp-
tying abnormalities of the lower uri-
nary and GI tracts.2 
Recall that the ischiocavernosus and 
bulbocavernosus muscles are inner-
vated by the pudendal nerve, so pain 
may be referred to the perineum and 
urogenital structures. Trigger-point 
pain over the levator ani, innervated 
by the sacral nerve roots S3 to S5, may 
be referred to the vagina. See also  
p. 569. 
Retroverted
uterus
F I G U R E  1 4 - 1 7 .  Examine the rectovaginal area.
Nodularity and thickening of the 
uterosacral ligaments occur in 
 endometriosis, also pain with  
uterine movement. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
594 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Check the rectal vault for masses. If fecal blood testing is planned, change gloves 
to avoid contaminating fecal material with any blood provoked by collecting the 
Pap smear. After the examination, wipe off the external genitalia and rectum, or 
offer tissues to the patient so that she can do it herself.
See Chapter 15, The Anus, Rectum, 
and Prostate, pp. 621–623. 
Using Lubricants
If you handle a tube of lubricant during a pelvic or rectal examination, let the 
lubricant drop onto your gloved ﬁngers without allowing contact between the 
tube and the gloves. This prevents contaminating the tube by touching it with 
your gloved ﬁngers after completing the speculum examination. If you or your 
assistant inadvertently contaminates the tube, discard it. Small disposable 
tubes for use with only one patient circumvent this problem.
Hernias
Hernias of the groin occur in women as well as men, but they are much less 
common. The examination techniques are basically the same as for men (see 
pp. 553–555). A woman should also stand up to be examined. To feel an indirect 
inguinal hernia, however, palpate in the labia majora and upward to just lateral 
to the pubic tubercles.
Special Techniques
Assessing Urethritis. To evaluate 
possible urethritis or inﬂammation of the 
paraurethral glands, insert your index ﬁnger 
into the vagina and milk the  urethra gently 
outward from the inside (Fig. 14-18). Note 
any discharge from or about the urethral 
meatus. If present, culture it.
Indirect inguinal hernias are the most 
common type of hernias in women. 
Femoral hernias rank second. 
F I G U R E  1 4 - 1 8 .  Milk the 
urethra.
Causes of urethritis include infection 
from C. trachomatis and N. gonor-
rhoeae. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  14 |
 
Female Genitalia 
595
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
Note that initially you may use sentences to describe your ﬁndings; later you will 
use phrases.
Recording Your Findings
Recording the Physical Examination—Female 
Genitalia
“No inguinal adenopathy. External genitalia without erythema, lesions, or 
masses. Vaginal mucosa pink. Cervix parous, pink, and without discharge. 
Uterus anterior, midline, smooth, and not enlarged. No adnexal tenderness. Pap 
smear obtained. Rectovaginal wall intact. Rectal vault without masses. Stool 
brown and negative for fecal blood.”
OR
“Bilateral shotty inguinal adenopathy. External genitalia without erythema 
or lesions. Vaginal mucosa and cervix coated with thin white homogeneous 
discharge with mild ﬁshy odor. After swabbing cervix, no discharge visible in 
the cervical os. Uterus midline; no adnexal masses. Rectal vault without masses. 
Stool brown and negative for fecal blood. pH of vaginal discharge >4.5”
These findings are consistent with 
bacterial vaginosis. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
596 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
596 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 14-1 Lesions of the Vulva
Cystic
nodule
in skin
Epidermoid Cyst
A small ﬁrm round cystic nodule in the labia suggests an 
epidermoid cyst. These are yellowish in color. Look for the 
dark punctum marking the blocked opening of the gland.
Warts
Venereal Wart (Condyloma Acuminatum)
Warty lesions on the labia and within the vestibule are  
often condyloma acuminata from infection with human 
papillomavirus.
Syphilitic Chancre
This ﬁrm painless ulcer from primary syphilis forms ∼21 d 
after exposure to Treponema pallidum. It may remain hidden 
and undetected in the vagina and heals regardless of treatment 
in 3–6 wks.
Flat,
gray
papules
Secondary Syphilis (Condyloma Latum)
Large raised, round or oval, ﬂat-topped gray or white lesions 
point to condylomata lata. These are contagious and, along 
with rash and mucous membrane sores in the mouth, vagina, 
or anus, are manifestations of secondary syphilis.
Shallow
ulcers on
red bases
Genital Herpes
Shallow small painful ulcers on red bases are suspicious for 
infection from genital herpes simplex virus 1 or 2. Ulcers may 
take 2–4 wks to heal. Recurrent outbreaks of localized vesicles, 
then ulcers are common.
Carcinoma of the Vulva
An ulcerated or raised red vulvar lesion in an elderly woman 
may be a vulvar carcinoma, usually a squamous cell carcinoma 
arising on the labia.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  14 |
 
Female Genitalia 
597
Table 14-2  Bulges and Swelling of the  
Vulva, Vagina, and Urethra 
Cystocele
A cystocele is a bulge of the 
upper two thirds of the 
anterior vaginal wall, 
together with the bladder 
above it. It results from 
weakened anterior 
supporting tissues.
Cystocele
Urethrocele
Cystourethrocele
When the entire anterior 
vaginal wall, together with 
the bladder and urethra, 
produces the bulge, a 
cystourethrocele is present.  
A groove sometimes deﬁnes 
the border between the 
urethrocele and cystocele, 
but is not always present.
Caruncle
Urethral Caruncle
A urethral caruncle is a small 
red benign tumor visible at 
the posterior urethral 
meatus. It occurs chieﬂy in 
postmenopausal women and 
usually causes no symptoms. 
Occasionally, a carcinoma of 
the urethra is mistaken for a 
caruncle. To check, palpate 
the urethra through the 
vagina for thickening, 
nodularity, or tenderness, 
and palpate for inguinal 
lymphadenopathy.
Prolapsed 
urethral 
mucosa
Prolapse of the  
Urethral Mucosa
Prolapsed urethral mucosa 
forms a swollen red ring 
around the urethral meatus. 
It usually occurs before 
menarche or after 
menopause. Identify the 
urethral meatus at the center 
of the swelling to make this 
diagnosis.
Labial swelling
Bartholin Gland  
Infection
Causes of a Bartholin gland 
infection include trauma, 
gonococci, anaerobes  
like bacteroides and 
peptostreptococci, and 
C. trachomatis. Acutely, the 
gland appears as a tense, hot, 
very tender abscess. Look for 
pus emerging from the duct 
or erythema around the duct 
opening. Chronically, a 
nontender cyst is felt that 
may be large or small.
Bulge
Rectocele
A rectocele is a herniation of 
the rectum into the posterior 
wall of the vagina, resulting 
from a weakness or defect in 
the endopelvic fascia.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
598 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
598 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 14-3 Vaginal Discharge
Discharge from a vaginal infection must be distinguished from a physiologic discharge. A physiologic discharge is clear or white, 
may contain white clumps of epithelial cells, and is not malodorous. To distinguish vaginal from cervical discharges, use a large 
cotton swab to wipe off the cervix. If no cervical discharge is present in the os, suspect a vaginal origin and consider the causes 
below. Note that the diagnosis of cervicitis or vaginitis hinges on careful collection and analysis of the appropriate laboratory 
specimens.79,80
Trichomonal 
Vaginitis
Candidal Vaginitis
Bacterial Vaginosis
Lactobacilli
Cause
Trichomonas vaginalis, a 
protozoan; often but not 
always acquired sexually
Candida albicans, a yeast 
(normal overgrowth of 
vaginal ﬂora); many factors 
predispose, including 
antibiotic therapy
Bacterial overgrowth 
probably from anaerobic 
bacteria; often transmitted 
sexually
Discharge
Yellowish green or gray, 
possibly frothy; often 
profuse and pooled in the 
vaginal fornix; may be 
malodorous
White and curdy; may be 
thin but typically thick; not 
as profuse as in trichomonal 
infection; not malodorous
Gray or white, thin, 
homogeneous, malodorous; 
coats the vaginal walls; 
usually not profuse, may be 
minimal
Other Symptoms
Pruritus (though not usually 
as severe as with Candida 
infection); pain on urination 
(from skin inﬂammation or 
possibly urethritis); 
dyspareunia
Pruritus; vaginal soreness; 
pain on urination (from skin 
inﬂammation); dyspareunia
Unpleasant ﬁshy or musty 
genital odor; reported to 
occur after intercourse
Vulva and Vaginal Mucosa
Vestibule and labia minora 
may be erythematous; the 
vaginal mucosa may be 
diffusely reddened, with 
small red granular spots or 
petechiae in the posterior 
fornix; in mild cases, the 
mucosa looks normal
The vulva and even the 
surrounding skin are often 
inﬂamed and sometimes 
swollen to a variable extent; 
the vaginal mucosa is often 
reddened, with white 
tenacious patches of 
discharge; the mucosa may 
bleed when these patches are 
scraped off; in mild cases, 
the mucosa looks normal
The vulva and vaginal 
mucosa usually appear 
normal
Laboratory Evaluation
Scan saline wet mount for 
trichomonads
Scan potassium hydroxide 
(KOH) preparation for the 
branching hyphae of 
Candida
Scan saline wet mount for clue 
cells (epithelial cells with 
stippled borders); sniff for 
ﬁshy odor after applying KOH 
(“whiff test”); test the vaginal 
secretions for pH > 4.5
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  14 |
 
Female Genitalia 
599
Table 14-4 Variations in the Cervical Surface
Two kinds of epithelia cover the cervix: (1) shiny pink squamous epithelium, which resembles the vaginal epithelium, and  
(2) deep red, plushy columnar epithelium, which is continuous with the endocervical lining. These meet at the squamocolumnar 
junction. When this junction is at or inside the cervical os, only squamous epithelium is seen. A ring of columnar epithelium is 
often visible to a varying extent around the os—the result of a normal process that accompanies fetal development, menarche, 
and the ﬁrst pregnancy.a
Squamous epithelium
Squamous epithelium
Columnar epithelium
Retention cyst
Cervical polyp
As estrogen stimulation increases during adolescence, all or 
part of this columnar epithelium is transformed into squamous 
epithelium by a process termed metaplasia. This change may 
block the secretions of columnar epithelium and cause retention 
cysts, also called nabothian cysts. These appear as translucent 
nodules on the cervical surface and have no pathologic 
signiﬁcance.
A cervical polyp usually arises from the endocervical canal, 
becoming visible when it protrudes through the cervical os. It 
is bright red, soft, and rather fragile. When only the tip is 
seen, it cannot be differentiated clinically from a polyp 
originating in the endometrium. Polyps are benign but may 
bleed.
aTerminology is in ﬂux. Other terms for the columnar epithelium visible on the ectocervix are ectropion, ectopy, and eversion.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
600 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
600 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 14-5 Shapes of the Cervical Os 
Normal
Oval
 
Slit-like
Types of Lacerations from Delivery
Bilateral transverse
 
Stellate
 
Unilateral transverse
Table 14-6 Abnormalities of the Cervix
Mucopurulent Cervicitis
Mucopurulent cervicitis produces purulent yellow drainage 
from the cervical os, usually from Chlamydia trachomatis, 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, or herpes infection. These infections  
are sexually transmitted and may occur without symptoms  
or signs.
  
Carcinoma of the Cervix
Carcinoma of the cervix begins in an area of metaplasia. In its 
earliest stages, it cannot be distinguished from a normal 
cervix. In later stages, an extensive, irregular, cauliﬂower-like 
growth may develop. Early frequent intercourse, multiple 
partners, smoking, and infection with human papillomavirus 
increase the risk for cervical cancer.
Vaginal adenosis
Columnar epithelium
Collar
Fetal Exposure to Diethylstilbestrol (DES)
Daughters of women who took DES during pregnancy are at 
greatly increased risk for several abnormalities, including  
(1) columnar epithelium that covers most or all of the cervix, 
(2) vaginal adenosis, i.e., extension of this epithelium to the 
vaginal wall, and (3) a circular collar or ridge of tissue, of 
varying shapes, between the cervix and vagina. Much less 
common is an otherwise rare carcinoma of the upper vagina.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  14 |
 
Female Genitalia 
601
Table 14-7 Positions of the Uterus
Retroversion and retroﬂexion are usually normal variants.
Body of the uterus 
may not be palpable
Palpable through
rectum
Normal angle 
maintained
Cervix faces
forward
Retroversion of the Uterus
Retroversion of the uterus refers to a tilting backward of the entire uterus, including both the body and the cervix. It is a 
common variant occurring in approximately 20% of women. Early clues on pelvic examination are a cervix that faces forward 
and a uterine body that cannot be felt by the abdominal hand. In moderate retroversion, the body may not be palpable with either 
hand. In marked retroversion, the body can be felt posteriorly, either through the posterior fornix or through the rectum. A 
retroverted uterus is usually both mobile and asymptomatic. Occasionally, such a uterus is ﬁxed and immobile, held in place by 
conditions such as endometriosis or PID.
May be palpable
through rectum
Angled back
Retroﬂexion of the Uterus
Retroﬂexion of the uterus refers to a backward 
angulation of the body of the uterus in relation to  
the cervix. The cervix maintains its usual position.  
The body of the uterus is often palpable through the 
posterior fornix or through the rectum.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
602 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
602 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 14-8 Abnormalities of the Uterus
Myomas
Myomas of the Uterus (Fibroids)
Myomas are very common benign uterine tumors. 
They may be single or multiple and vary greatly in 
size, occasionally reaching large proportions. They 
feel like ﬁrm irregular nodules that are continuous 
with the uterine surface. Occasionally, a myoma 
projecting laterally is confused with an ovarian 
mass; a nodule projecting posteriorly can be 
mistaken for a retroﬂexed uterus. Submucosal 
myomas project toward the endometrial cavity 
and are not palpable, although they may be 
suspected because of an enlarged uterus.
Normal position
1st degree
1
2
2nd degree
3rd degree
Prolapse of the Uterus
Prolapse of the uterus results from weakness of the 
supporting structures of the pelvic ﬂoor and is 
often associated with a cystocele and rectocele. In 
progressive stages, the uterus becomes retroverted 
and descends down the vaginal canal to the 
outside:
■  In ﬁrst-degree prolapse, the cervix is still well 
within the vagina.
■ In second-degree prolapse, it is at the introitus.
■  In third-degree prolapse (procidentia), the cervix 
and vagina are outside the introitus.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  14 |
 
Female Genitalia 
603
Table 14-9 Adnexal Masses
Adnexal masses typically result from disorders of the fallopian tubes or ovaries. Three examples—often hard to differentiate—are 
described. Note that inﬂammatory disease of the bowel (such as diverticulitis), carcinoma of the colon, and a pedunculated 
myoma of the uterus may simulate an adnexal mass.
Ovarian Cysts and Ovarian Cancer
Ovarian cysts and tumors may cause adnexal masses on one or both sides. 
Later, they may extend out of the pelvis. Cysts tend to be smooth and 
compressible, tumors more solid and often nodular. Uncomplicated cysts 
are not usually tender.
Small (≤6 cm in diameter), mobile, cystic masses in a young woman are 
usually benign and often disappear after the next menstrual period. 
Diagnosis of polycystic ovary syndrome rests on exclusion of several endocrine 
disorders and two of the three features listed: ovulatory dysfunction, 
androgen excess (hirsutism, acne, alopecia, elevated serum testosterone), 
and conﬁrmation of polycystic ovaries on ultrasound. Roughly half of 
affected women are obese, more than 40% have metabolic syndrome, and 
∼40% have impaired glucose tolerance or diabetes.82,83
Ovarian cancer is relatively rare and usually presents at an advanced stage. 
Symptoms include pelvic pain, bloating, increased abdominal size, and urinary 
tract symptoms; often there is a palpable ovarian mass.47 Currently, there are no 
reliable screening tests. A strong family history of breast or ovarian cancer is an 
important risk factor but occurs in only 5% of cases.
Ectopic Pregnancy, Including Rupture
Ectopic pregnancy results from implantation of the fertilized ovum outside 
the endometrial cavity, primarily in the fallopian tube (90% of cases).21,22 
Ectopic pregnancy occurs in 1% to 2% of pregnancies worldwide and 
remains an important cause of maternal morbidity and mortality. Clinical 
presentation ranges from subacute, in ∼80–90% of cases, to shock from 
rupture and intraperitoneal hemorrhage (10–30% of cases). Abdominal 
pain, adnexal tenderness, and abnormal uterine bleeding are the most 
common clinical features. In more than half of ectopic pregnancies, there is 
a palpable adnexal mass that is typically large, ﬁxed, and ill-deﬁned, at times 
with adherent omentum or small or large bowel. In milder cases, there may 
be a prior history of amenorrhea or other symptoms of a pregnancy.
Risk factors include tubal damage from PID, prior ectopic pregnancy, prior 
tubal surgery, age older than 35 yrs, presence of an IUD, subfertility (has 
altered tubal integrity), and assisted reproductive techniques.
Pelvic Inﬂammatory Disease
PID is due to “spontaneous ascension of microbes from the cervix or 
vagina to the endometrium, fallopian tubes, and adjacent structures.”84 
85% of cases involve STIs or bacterial vaginosis affecting the fallopian 
tubes (salpingitis) or the tubes and ovaries (salpingo-oophoritis), primarily 
N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis. Hallmarks of acute disease are adnexal, 
cervical, and uterine compression tenderness. The diagnosis is imprecise, 
however—only 75% have conﬁrmed pathogens on tubal laparoscopy. If 
not treated, a tubo-ovarian abscess may ensue; 18% of treated patients 
report infertility after 3 years. Infection of the fallopian tubes and ovaries 
may also follow childbirth or gynecologic surgery.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
604 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
References
 1. Johnson CT, Hallock JL, Bienstock JL, et al. (eds). Chapter 26, 
Anatomy of the female pelvis. Johns Hopkins Manual of Gynecology 
and Obstetrics. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott 
Williams and Wilkins; 2015:338.
 2. Tarney CM. Ch.42, Urinary incontinence and pelvic ﬂoor disor-
ders. Tarnay C.M. Tarnay, Christopher M. In: DeCherney AH, 
Nathan L, Laufer N, et al., eds. Current Diagnosis & Treatment: 
Obstetrics & Gynecology, 11e. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2013. 
Available at http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com.libproxy.unm.
edu/content.aspx?bookid=498&Sectionid=41008634. Accessed 
May 16, 2015.
 3. Freeman EW, Sammel MD, Lin H, et al. Clinical subtypes of pre-
menstrual syndrome and responses to sertraline treatment. Obstet 
Gynecol. 2011;118:1293.
 4. Pachman DR, Jones JM, Loprinzi CL. Management of menopause-
associated vasomotor symptoms: Current treatment options, chal-
lenges and future directions. Int J Womens Health. 2010;2:123.
 5. North American Menopause Society. Estrogen and progestogen use 
in postmenopausal women: 2010 position statement of the North 
American menopause society. Menopause. 2010;17:242.
 6. Coverdale JH, Balon R, Roberts LW. Teaching sexual history- 
taking: a systematic review of educational programs. Acad Med. 
2011;86:1590.
 7. Pancholy AB, Goldenhar L, Fellner AN, et al. Resident education 
and training in female sexuality: results of a national survey. Sex 
Med. 2011;8:361.
 8. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexual orientation 
and health among U.S. adults. National Health Interview Survey, 
2013. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/lgbthealth/. Accessed 
May 10, 2015.
 9. Gates GJ, Newport F. Gallup Special Report: The US LGBT adult popu-
lation. Washington, DC: Gallup, Inc; 2013. See also Gates GJ, New-
port F. Special Report: 3.4% of U.S. Adults Identify as LGBT. 
October 18, 2012. Available at http://www.gallup.com/poll/158066/
special-report-adults-identify-lgbt.aspx. Accessed May 11, 2015.
 10. Gates GJ. Demographics and LGBT health. J Health Soc Behav. 
2013;54:72.
 11. Institute of Medicine. The Health of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and 
Transgender People: Building a Foundation for Better Understanding. 
Washington, DC: National Institutes of Health; 2011. See also 
Report at https://www.iom.edu/Reports/2011/The-Health-of-Les-
bian-Gay-Bisexual-and-Transgender-People.aspx March 31, 2011. 
Accessed May 11, 2015.
 12. Daniel H, Butkus R, for the Health and Public Policy Committee of 
the American College of Physicians. Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and 
transgender health disparities: Executive summary of a policy 
position paper from the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern 
Med. 2015;163:135.
 13. National LGBT Education Center. Available at http://www.lgbtheal-
theducation.org./ Accessed May 24, 2015.
 14. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
and transgender health. Updated July 15, 2014. Available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/lgbthealth./ Accessed May 24, 2015.
 15. Williams Institute, UCLA. Available at http://williamsinstitute.law.
ucla.edu./ Accessed May 24, 2015.
 16. Barbara AM, Doctor F, Chaim G. Asking the right questions 2. 
Talking with clients about sexual orientation and gender identity 
in mental health, counselling and addiction settings. Toronto Can-
ada: Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 2007. Available at 
http://knowledgex.camh.net/amhspecialists/Screening_Assessment/
assessment/ARQ2/Pages/default.aspx. Accessed May 16, 2015.
 17. Clark RD, Williams AA. Patient preferences in discussing sexual 
dysfunctions in primary care. Fam Med. 2014;46:124.
 18. Hatzichristou D, Rosen RC, Derogatis LR, et al. Recommendations 
for the clinical evaluation of men and women with sexual dysfunc-
tion. J Sex Med. 2010;7(1 Pt 2):337.
 19. Platano G, Margraf J, Alder J, et al. Psychosocial factors and thera-
peutic approaches in the context of sexual history taking in men: 
a study conducted among Swiss general practitioners and urolo-
gists. J Sex Med. 2008;5:2533.
 20. Kruszka PS, Kruszka SJ. Evaluation of acute pelvic pain in women. 
Am Fam Physician. 2010;82:141.
 21. Orazulike NC, Konje JC. Diagnosis and management of ectopic 
pregnancy. Women’s Health (London). 2013;9:373.
 22. Barnhart KT. Ectopic pregnancy. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:379.
 23. Karnath BM, Breitkopf DM. Acute and chronic pelvic pain in 
women. Hospital Physician. 2007;43:41.
 24. Origoni M, Maggiore RMU, Salvatore S, et al. Neurobiological 
mechanisms of pelvic pain. Biomed Res Int. 2014. Available at 
http://www.hindawi.com/journals/bmri/2014/903848/cta/
 25. Shin JH, Howard FM. Management of chronic pelvic pain. Curr 
Pain Headache Rep. 2011;15:377.
 26. International Pelvic Pain Society. History and physical. Pelvic pain 
assessment form. Available at http://www.pelvicpain.org/Profes-
sional/Documents-and-Forms.aspx. Accessed May 23, 2015.
 27. Giudice LC. Endometriosis. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:2389.
 28. Sawaya GF, Kulasingam S, Denberg T, et al. Cervical cancer screen-
ing in average-risk women: Best practice advice from the Clinical 
Guidelines Committee of the American College of Physicians. Ann 
Intern Med. 2015;162:851.
 29. Centers for Disease Control and Surveillance. 2013 sexually transmitted 
disease surveillance. Human papillomavirus. Available at http://www.
cdc.gov/std/stats13/other.htm#hpv. Accessed May 17, 2015.
 30. Moyer A, on behalf of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. 
Screening for cervical cancer: U.S. Preventive Services Task 
Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2012;150: 
880.
 31. American Congress of Obstetrician and Gynecologists. ACOG 
Committee on Practice Bulletins–Gynecology. ACOG Practice Bul-
letin No. 131: Screening for cervical cancer. Cervical cytology 
screening. Obstet Gynecol. 2012;120:1222.
 32. Saslow D, Solomon D, Lawson HW, et al. American Cancer Society, 
American Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology, and 
American Society for Clinical Pathology screening guidelines for 
the prevention and early detection of cervical cancer. CA Cancer J 
Clin. 2012;62:147.
 33. Bloomﬁeld HE, Olson A, Greer N, et al. Screening pelvic examina-
tions in asymptomatic, average-risk adult women: An evidence 
report for a clinical practice guideline from the American College 
of Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161:46.
 34. Qaseem A, Humphrey LL, Harris R, et al. Screening pelvic exami-
nation in adult women: a clinical practice guideline from the 
American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161:67.
 35. Smith RA, Manassaram-Baptiste D, Brooks D, et al. Cancer screen-
ing in the United States, 2015: a review of current American cancer 
society guidelines and current issues in cancer screening. CA Can-
cer J Clin. 2015;65:30.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  14 |
 
Female Genitalia 
605
REFERENCES
 36. Solomon D, Davey D, Kurman R, et al. The 2001 Bethesda system: 
terminology for reporting results of cervical cytology. JAMA. 
2004;291:2990.
 37. Wright TC, Cox JT, Massad JS. 2001 consensus guidelines for the 
management of women with cervical cytologic abnormalities. 
JAMA. 2002;287:2120.
 38. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Human papillomavi-
rus: HPV information for clinicians, April 2007, p. 18. Cached–pdf 
available under public.health.oregon.gov https://www.google.com
/#q=cdc+human+papillomavirus+hpv+information+for+clinician
s+april+2007. Accessed May 19, 2015.
 39. Baseman JG, Kulasingam SL, Harris TG, et al. Evaluation of pri-
mary cervical cancer screening with an oncogenic human papil-
lomavirus DNA test and cervical cytologic ﬁndings among women 
who attended family planning clinics in the United States. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol. 2008;199:26.e1–8.
 40. Kulasingam SL, Hughes JP, Kiviat NB, et al. Evaluation of human 
papillomavirus testing in primary screening for cervical abnor-
malities: comparison of sensitivity, speciﬁcity, and frequency of 
referral. JAMA. 2002;288:1749.
 41. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, Centers for Dis-
ease Control and Prevention. Human papillomavirus vaccination. 
Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices. MMWR. 2014;63(RR #5):1–30.
 42. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Human papillomavi-
rus. HPV Vaccine Information for Clinicians–Fact Sheet. July 8, 
2012. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/std/hpv/STDFact-HPV-vac-
cine-hcp.htm. Accessed May 18, 2015.
 43. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Youth risk behavior 
surveillance–United States 2013. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/
healthyyouth/data/yrbs/results.htm. Accessed May 19, 2015.
 44. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Condom effective-
ness. Fact sheet for public health personnel. Updated March 25, 
2013. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/condomeffectiveness/latex.
html. Accessed May 19, 2015.
 45. Pierce Campbell CM, Lin HY, Fulp W, et al. Consistent condom use 
reduces the genital human papillomavirus burden among high-
risk men: the HPV infection in men study. J Infect Dis. 2012;208:373.
 46. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Addendum to Screening for 
ovarian cancer: Evidence update for the U.S. Preventive Services 
Task Force reafﬁrmation recommendation statement. Other sup-
porting document for ovarian cancer: screening, September 2012. 
Available at http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/
Document/addendum-to-screening-for-ovarian-cancer-evidence-
update-for-the-us-preventive-services-task-force-reafﬁrmation-rec-
ommendation-statement/ovarian-cancer-screening#conclusions. 
Accessed May 19, 2015.
 47. Jayson GC, Kohn EC, Kitchener HC, et al. Ovarian cancer. Lancet. 
2014;384(9951):1376.
 48. Rauh-Hain JA, Krivak TC, del Carmen MG, et al. Ovarian cancer 
screening and early detection in the general population. Rev Obstet 
Gyneco. 2011;4:15.
 49. National Cancer Institute. Genetics of breast and gynecologic can-
cers–for health professionals (PDQ®). Updated April 3, 2015. 
Available at http://www.cancer.gov/types/breast/hp/breast-ovarian-
genetics-pdq. Accessed May 19, 2015.
 50. National Cancer Institute. Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary 
Peritoneal Cancer Prevention–for health professionals 
(PDQ®). Who is at risk? Updated May 15, 2015. Available at 
http://www.cancer.gov/types/ovarian/hp/ovarian-prevention-
pdq. Accessed May 19, 2015.
 51. Sherman ME, Piedmonte M, Mai PL, et al. Pathologic ﬁndings at 
risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy: primary results from Gyne-
cologic Oncology Group Trial GOG-0199. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32: 
3275.
 52. Dorigo O, Berek JS. Personalizing CA125 levels for ovarian cancer 
screening. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2011;4:1356.
 53. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2013 Sexually trans-
mitted disease surveillance. Chlamydia. Updated December 16, 
2014. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/std/stats13/chlamydia.htm. 
Accessed May 19, 2015.
 54. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Pelvic inﬂammatory 
disease–CDC fact sheet. Updated May 4, 2015. Available at http://
www.cdc.gov/std/pid/stdfact-pid-detailed.htm. Accessed May 20, 
2015.
 55. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted 
diseases. STDs and infertility. Updated December 16, 2014. Avail-
able at http://www.cdc.gov/std/infertility/default.htm. Accessed 
May 19, 2015.
 56. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted 
diseases. Updated May 15, 2015. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/
std/default.htm. Accessed May 19, 2015.
 57. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Recommendations (search 
“Category – Infectious diseases”). Page current May 2015. Avail-
able at http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Search. 
Accessed May 25, 2015.
 58. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. HIV in the United 
States: At a glance. Updated May 11, 2015. Available at http://www.
cdc.gov/hiv/statistics/basics/ataglance.html. Accessed May 25, 
2015.
 59. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. HIV/AIDS. HIV among 
women. Updated March 6, 2015. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/
hiv/risk/gender/women/facts/index.html. Accessed May 20, 
2015.
 60. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. September 2014. Sexually 
transmitted infections. Behavioral counseling. Current as of March 
2015. Available at http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/
Page/Topic/recommendation-summary/sexually-transmitted-
infections-behavioral-counseling1?ds=1&s=Counseling. Accessed 
May 20, 2015.
 61. O’Connor EA, Lin JS, Burda BU, et al. Behavioral sexual risk-
reduction counseling in primary care to prevent sexually transmit-
ted infections: a systematic review for the U.S. Preventive Services 
Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161:874.
 62. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2010 STD treatment 
guidelines. Clinical prevention guidance. Updated January 28, 
2011. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment/2010/ 
clinical.htm. Accessed May 20, 2015.
 63. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Reproductive health. 
Teen pregnancy–About teen pregnancy. Updated May 19, 2015. 
Available at http://www.cdc.gov/teenpregnancy/about/index.htm. 
See also Unintended pregnancy prevention. Available at http://
www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/UnintendedPregnancy/index.
htm. Accessed May 20, 2015.
 64. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Reproductive health. 
Contraception. Updated April 22, 2015. Available at http://www.
cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/UnintendedPregnancy/Contracep-
tion.htm. Accessed May 21, 2015.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
606 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
 65. Rossouw JE, Anderson GL, Prentice RL, et al; Writing Group for 
the Women’s Health Initiative Investigators. Risks and beneﬁts of 
estrogen plus progestin in healthy postmenopausal women: prin-
cipal results from the Women’s Health Initiative randomized con-
trolled trial. JAMA. 2002;288:321.
 66. Anderson GL, Limacher M, Assaf AR, et al; Women’s Health Initia-
tive Steering Committee. Effects of conjugated equine estrogen in 
postmenopausal women with hysterectomy: the Women’s Health 
Initiative randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2004;291:1701.
 67. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Menopausal hormone ther-
apy: preventive medication. October 2012. Available at http://
www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Topic/recommenda-
tion-summary/menopausal-hormone-therapy-preventive-
medication?ds=1&s=hormone replacement therapy. Accessed 
May 21, 2015.
 68. Nelson HD, Walker M, Zakher B, et al. Menopausal hormone ther-
apy for the primary prevention of chronic conditions: a systematic 
review to update the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recom-
mendations. Ann Intern Med. 2012;157:104.
 69. Mosca L, Benjamin EJ, Berra K, et al. Effectiveness-based guide-
lines for the prevention of cardiovascular disease in women—2011 
update: a guideline from the American Heart Association. Circula-
tion. 2011;123:1243.
 70. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Postmeno-
pausal estrogen therapy: Route of administration and risk of 
venous thromboembolism. Bulletin 556; April 2013. Available at 
http://www.acog.org/Resources-And-Publications/Committee-
Opinions/Committee-on-Gynecologic-Practice/Postmenopausal-
Estrogen-Therapy. Hormone therapy and heart disease. Bulletin 
565; June 2013. Compounded bioidentical menopausal hormone 
therapy. Bulletin 532; August 2012. Available at http://www.acog.
org/Resources-And-Publications/Committee-Opinions/Commit-
tee-on-Gynecologic-Practice/Compounded-Bioidentical-Meno-
pausal-Hormone-Therapy. Accessed May 21, 2015.
 71. North American Menopause Society. The 2012 hormone therapy 
position statement of: The North American Menopause Society. 
Menopause. 2012;19:257.
 72. Weitlauf JC, Frayne SM, Finney JW, et al. Sexual violence, post-
traumatic stress disorder, and the pelvic examination: how do 
beliefs about the safety, necessity, and utility of the examination 
inﬂuence patient experiences? J Women’s Health. 2010;19:1271.
 73. Linden JA. Care of the adult patient after sexual assault. N Engl J 
Med. 2011;365:834.
 74. Breiding MJ, Smith SG, Basile KC, et al. Prevalence and character-
istics of sexual violence, stalking, and intimate partner violence 
victimization–national intimate partner and sexual violence sur-
vey, United States, 2011. MMWR Surveill Summ. 2014;63:1.
 75. World Health Organization. Sexual and reproductive health. Sex-
ual violence. Available at http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/
topics/violence/sexual_violence/en/. See also Violence and injury 
prevention. Guidelines for medico-legal care for victims of sexual 
violence. Available at http://www.who.int/violence_injury_preven-
tion/pu. Accessed May 22, 2015.
 76. American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Sexual 
assault. Bulletin 592. April 2014. Available at http://www.acog.org/
Resources-And-Publications/Committee-Opinions/Committee-
on-Health-Care-for-Underserved-Women/Sexual-Assault. 
Accessed May 22, 2015.
 77. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2010 STD treatment 
guidelines. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment/2010/
default.htm. Accessed May 22, 2015.
 78. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted 
diseases. STD and HIV screening recommendations. Updated 
December 16, 2014. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/std/preven-
tion/screeningreccs.htm. Accessed May 20, 2015.
 79. Wilson JF. In the clinic: vaginitis and cervicitis. Ann Intern Med. 
2009;151:ITC3–1.
 80. Eckhert LO. Acute vulvovaginitis. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:1244.
 81. Bump RC, Mattiasson A, Bo K, et al. The standardization of termi-
nology of female pelvic organ prolapse and pelvic ﬂoor dysfunc-
tion. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1996;175:10.
 82. Legro RS, Arslanian SA, Ehrmann DA, et al. Diagnosis and treat-
ment of polycystic ovary syndrome: an Endocrine Society clinical 
practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 20(1398):4565.
 83. Ehrmann LA. Polycystic ovary syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2005; 
96:593.
 84. Brunham RC, Gottleib SL, Paavonen J. Pelvic inﬂammatory dis-
ease. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:2039.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  15 |
 
The Anus, Rectum, and Prostate  
607
The sigmoid colon terminates at the rectum, which lies against the sacrum and coc-
cyx, then merges with the short segment of the anal canal (Fig. 15-1). The rectum 
extends from the rectosigmoid junction, anterior to the S3 vertebra, to the anorectal 
junction at the tip of the coccyx. The external margin of the anal canal is poorly 
C H A P T E R 
15
The Anus, Rectum,  
and Prostate
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate 
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 14: Male Genitalia, Rectum, Anus, and Prostate; 
Vol. 15: Female Genitalia, Anus, and Rectum)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com
Anatomy and Physiology
Valve of Houston
Peritoneal
reflection
Rectum
Prostate
Anorectal junction
Anal canal
Urethra
Bladder
Seminal vesicle
F I G U R E  1 5 - 1 .  Anus and rectum—sagittal view.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
608 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
demarcated, but its moist hairless appearance usually distinguishes it from the sur-
rounding perianal skin. The muscle actions of the voluntary external anal sphincter 
and the involuntary internal anal sphincter normally hold the anal canal closed. The 
internal anal sphincter is an extension of the muscular coat of the rectal wall.
Note carefully the angle of the anal canal, on a line roughly between the anus and 
umbilicus. Unlike the rectum, the canal is liberally supplied by somatic sensory 
nerves, and a poorly directed ﬁnger or instrument will produce pain.
A serrated line marking the change from skin to mucous membrane demarcates 
the anal canal from the rectum (Fig. 15-2). This anorectal junction, often called 
the pectinate or dentate line, is also the boundary between somatic and visceral 
nerve supplies. It is easily visible on anoscopic or endoscopic examination, but 
is not palpable.
Valve of Houston
Rectum
Anorectal junction
Internal anal sphincter
External anal sphincter
Anal canal
Median sulcus
Lateral lobe
Prostate
Levator ani muscle
F I G U R E  1 5 - 2 .  Anus and rectum—coronal view showing the anterior wall.
In the male, the prostate gland surrounds the urethra and lies next to the bladder 
outlet. The prostate gland is small during childhood, but between puberty and 
approximately age 20 years, it increases roughly ﬁvefold in size. Prostate volume 
further expands as the gland becomes hyperplastic (see p. 623). The right and 
left lateral lobes lie against the anterior rectal wall, where they are palpable as a 
rounded, heart-shaped structure approximately 2.5 cm long. They are separated 
by a shallow median sulcus or groove, also palpable. Note that the anterior and 
central areas of the prostate cannot be examined. The seminal vesicles, shaped 
like rabbit ears above the prostate, are also not normally palpable.
In the female, the uterine cervix usually is palpable through the anterior wall 
of the rectum.
The rectal wall contains three inward foldings, called valves of Houston. The low-
est of these can sometimes be felt, usually on the patient’s left. Most of the rectum 
that is accessible to digital examination does not have a peritoneal surface, except 
for the anterior rectum, which you may be able to reach with the tip of your 
examining ﬁnger.
There may be tenderness from perito-
neal inflammation or nodularity if 
there are peritoneal metastases. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  15 |
 
The Anus, Rectum, and Prostate  
609
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Other chapters have addressed many of the symptoms and signs related to the 
anorectal area and the prostate. To review brieﬂy, ask about any change in the 
frequency of bowel function, the size or caliber of the stools, diarrhea or consti-
pation, or any abnormal color of the stools. Return to the discussion on 
pp. 459–460 of these symptoms as well as queries about blood in the stool, ranging 
from black tarry stools (melena), to bloody stools (hematochezia), to bright-red 
blood per rectum. Also ask about the presence of mucus in the stool.
■ Be sure to ask about any personal or family history of colonic polyps or 
colorectal cancer. Is there any personal history of IBD?
■ Is there any pain on defecation? Any itching? Any extreme tenderness in 
the anus or rectum? Is there mucopurulent discharge or bleeding? Any 
ulcerations? Does the patient have anal intercourse?
■ Is there any history of anal warts or anal ﬁssures?
The Health History
Common or Concerning Symptoms and Signs
● Change in bowel habits
● Blood in the stool
● Pain with defecation; rectal bleeding or tenderness
● Anal warts or ﬁssures
● Weak urinary stream
● Burning with urination
● Blood in the urine
See Table 11-4, Constipation, p. 494 
and Table 11-5, Black and Bloody 
Stool, p. 495. 
Change in stool caliber, especially 
pencil-thin stools, may warn of colon 
cancer. Blood in the stool may be from 
polyps, carcinoma, gastrointestinal 
bleeding, or hemorrhoids; mucus may 
accompany villous adenoma, intestinal 
infections, inflammatory bowel disease 
(IBD), or irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). 
Positive answers to these questions 
indicate increased risk for colorectal 
cancer and need for further testing. 
(See Screening Recommendations, 
Chapter 11, pp. 468–470.) 
Anorectal pain, itching, tenesmus, or 
discharge or bleeding from infection 
or rectal abscess suggest proctitis. 
Causes include gonorrhea, chlamydia, 
lymphogranuloma venereum, recep-
tive anal intercourse, ulcerations of 
herpes simplex, or chancres of primary 
syphilis (see Table 13-1, Sexually 
Transmitted Infections of Male 
Genitalia, p. 557). Itching in younger 
patients may be from pinworms. 
Genital warts may arise from human 
papillomavirus (HPV) or condylomata 
lata in secondary syphilis. Anal fissures 
are seen in proctitis and Crohn disease. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
610 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
■ In men, review the pattern of urination (see p. 462). Does the patient have 
difﬁculty starting or holding back the urine stream? Is the ﬂow weak? What 
about frequent urination, especially at night? Is there any blood in the urine 
or semen or pain with ejaculation?
■ Also, in men, has there been sudden onset of irritative urinary tract symp-
toms (frequency, urgency, pain with urination), perineal and low back pain, 
malaise, fever, or chills?
These genitourinary symptoms sug-
gest benign prostatic hyperplasia 
(BPH) or prostate cancer, especially in 
men older than 70 years.1 
The American Urological Association 
(AUA) Symptom Score helps quantify 
BPH severity and guide management 
decisions.2 See Table 15-1, BPH Symp-
tom Score: American Urological  
Association, p. 620. 
These symptoms suggest possible 
acute prostatitis. 
Health Promotion and 
Counseling: Evidence and 
Recommendations
Important Topics for Health Promotion  
and Counseling
● Prostate cancer prevention and screening
● Colorectal cancer prevention and screening
● Counseling for sexually transmitted infections
Prostate Cancer Prevention and Screening. Prostate cancer is the 
most frequently diagnosed nonskin cancer in the United States and the second 
leading cause of cancer death in men (Fig. 15-3).3 The advent of prostate-
speciﬁc antigen (PSA) testing in the late 1980s has been strongly associated with 
an increasing number of men diagnosed with prostate cancer: by 2000, nearly 
60% of American men reported PSA testing4; and the lifetime risk of diagnosis 
with prostate cancer increased from 9% in 19855 to 15% in 2011.6 However, 
the lifetime risk of dying from prostate cancer has remained around 3%.6
Figure 15-4 shows age-adjusted cancer incidence and mortality rates based on 
data from the National Cancer Institute’s Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End 
Results (SEER) program.6
Risk Factors. Age, ethnicity, and family history are the strongest risk fac-
tors for prostate cancer. Several guidelines suggest targeting these high-risk men 
for early screening.7,8
F I G U R E  1 5 - 3 .
Discuss prostate 
cancer screening.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  15 |
 
The Anus, Rectum, and Prostate  
611
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Year
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
250
200
150
100
50
0
Rate per 100,000 Men
Incidence
Mortality
F I G U R E  1 5 - 4 .  Prostate cancer age-adjusted incidence and mortality rates, 
United States, 1975 to 2012.
Risk Factors for Prostate Cancer
● Age. Prostate cancer is rare before age 40 years; however, incidence rates begin 
increasing rapidly after age 50 years.6 The median age at diagnosis is 66 years.
● Ethnicity. African American men have the highest incidence and mortality 
rates from prostate cancer in the United States and among the highest in the 
world.6,9 Compared to white men, a higher percentage of African American 
men are diagnosed with prostate cancer before age 50 years. They are also 
more likely to present with an advanced-stage cancer, even after adjusting for 
access to care.10,11
● Family history. Genetics appear to play an important role in prostate cancer 
risk. For men with one aﬀected ﬁrst-degree relative, namely, a father or brother, 
risk of developing prostate cancer increases twofold; for men with two or three 
aﬀected ﬁrst-degree relatives, risk increases 5- to 11-fold.12 The BRCA1 and 
BRCA2 mutations also appear to confer increased risk of prostate cancer.13
● Other risk factors. Although the evidence is less convincing, other potential 
risk factors include Agent Orange exposure among Vietnam veterans, diets 
high in animal fat, obesity, and cigarette smoking.14–16 However, BPH, a com-
mon ﬁnding in older men, is not a risk factor for prostate cancer.
Prevention. Primary prevention aims to reduce the burden of disease 
through interventions that prevent cancer from developing. There is no convinc-
ing evidence that any lifestyle modiﬁcation, such as consuming diets high in fruits 
and vegetables or increasing physical activity, can prevent prostate cancer. Several 
large studies have evaluated chemoprevention—giving a medication or dietary 
supplement—to prevent prostate cancer from developing. The 5α-reductase 
inhibitors (5-ARIs) ﬁnasteride and dutasteride block the conversion of testoster-
one to the more potent dihydrotestosterone, shrink prostate tissue, and are rou-
tinely used to treat men with BPH.1 Because male hormones are associated with 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
612 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
developing prostate cancer, the 5-ARI medications have been considered for cancer 
chemoprevention. Randomized controlled trials have shown that taking these 
medications reduced the risk of developing prostate cancer by about 25%, an 
absolute decrease of about 5 percentage points.17,18 However, these medications 
were also associated with an increased risk for developing more aggressive prostate 
cancers. Consequently, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has ruled against 
marketing these medications for cancer prevention.19 A large randomized, placebo-
controlled trial of the antioxidant vitamin E and the micronutrient selenium failed 
to show that these agents protected against prostate cancer.20 In fact, men taking 
vitamin E had a slightly increased risk for developing prostate cancer.21
Prostate Cancer Screening. Another key strategy for reducing the bur-
den of cancer is screening, also known as secondary prevention. Screening for prostate 
cancer means offering diagnostic tests such as the PSA test or the digital rectal exam-
ination (DRE) to men with no signs or symptoms of prostate cancer. If the PSA is 
abnormal (usually a level >4.0 ng/mL) or the DRE is abnormal (due to a palpable 
nodule, area of induration, or asymmetry), then men are referred for the diagnostic 
gold standard—the prostate biopsy. Ideally, screening allows cancers to be found at 
an early stage so that men can be offered curative aggressive treatments like surgery 
or radiation. However, prostate cancer screening tests are not very accurate, so 
screening programs have been controversial.
Prostate Cancer Screening Tests: Prostate-Speciﬁc 
Antigen and the Digital Rectal Examination
PSA. PSA is a glycoprotein produced by prostatic epithelial cells that can be ele-
vated by cancer, but also by BPH, prostate infections, or ejaculation, causing 
results that are false positives. About 12 in 100 men have a PSA screening test 
above the level of 4 ng/mL, but only 30% of these men will have prostate cancer 
on biopsy (the positive predictive value).7 Overall, using a PSA level of 4 ng/mL 
to deﬁne abnormal detects only 21% of prostate cancers (sensitivity), but 51% of 
aggressive cancers, based on the microscopic appearance of cancer cells. The 
associated speciﬁcity is 91%, which is the proportion of men without prostate 
cancer with a normal test. Numerous modiﬁcations of PSA have been proposed 
to increase its accuracy, including measuring changes over time (velocity), the 
proportion of PSA that is not bound to protein (free), and the PSA density 
(based on the prostate volume) as well as adjusting the cut-oﬀ for abnormal 
based on the patient’s age or race. However, none of these strategies has been 
shown to improve outcomes, and guidelines recommend against them.
DRE. The DRE explores for palpable abnormalities such as nodules, induration, 
or asymmetry in the peripheral posterior and lateral areas of the prostate gland 
closest to the examining ﬁnger; the DRE is unable to detect cancers in the 
anterior and central areas of the gland. The sensitivity of DRE is 59%, and the 
speciﬁcity is 94%.22 An estimated 28% of men with an abnormal DRE will have 
prostate cancer on biopsy (positive predictive value). However, the majority 
of prostate cancers detected by DRE have already spread beyond the prostate 
gland, making them more diﬃcult to cure.23 Furthermore, the DRE is not very 
reproducible (low kappa score)—even urologists have problems agreeing with 
each other whether the DRE is abnormal.24
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  15 |
 
The Anus, Rectum, and Prostate  
613
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Evidence about Screening. Prostate cancer screening has been very contro-
versial. Some professional organizations began recommending routine screen-
ing with the PSA in the early 1990s,25,26 even though, as noted by the U.S. 
Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), there was insufﬁcient evidence that 
screening reduces prostate cancer mortality.27
The strongest evidence supporting screening comes from studies that randomize 
subjects to screening or no screening, then follow these groups for many years 
to determine if screening reduces prostate cancer mortality. Two major studies, 
the European Randomized Study of Screening for Prostate Cancer (ERSPC)28 and 
the Prostate, Lung Colorectal, and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial (PLCO),29 
were conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of screening. However, the study 
results, ﬁrst reported in 2009, were conﬂicting.
The ERSPC, which randomized over 160,000 men ages 55 to 69 years in seven 
European countries to receive either PSA screening alone every 2 to 4 years or 
no screening, found that screening reduced death from prostate cancer by about 
20%.28 The absolute risk reduction, however, was 0.7 in 1,000—meaning that 
1,400 men would need to be screened twice in 9 years—and 48 cancers 
detected—to prevent one prostate cancer death. A recent update after 13 years 
of follow-up reported that the number of men needing screening and the num-
ber of cancers to be detected to prevent one prostate cancer death had dropped 
to 800 and 27, respectively.30 However, the ERSPC screening group also had a 
70% higher risk of diagnosis with prostate cancer. This is concerning because 
evidence suggests that 42% to 66% of PSA-detected cancers are overdiag-
nosed—meaning that they would never cause problems during a man’s life-
time.31 Nonetheless, most men with screen-detected cancers undergo aggressive 
treatment with surgery or radiation,32 which frequently leads to complications 
such as erectile dysfunction, urinary incontinence, and bowel problems that 
adversely affect quality of life.33
The PLCO randomized over 75,000 American men ages 50 to 74 years to either 
screening with PSA and DRE or a control group with no screening.29 The PLCO 
found no survival beneﬁt for screening after 13 years of follow-up, although the 
screening arm had a 12% increased risk for cancer diagnosis.34 However, the 
validity of the PLCO results has been questioned because many of the men 
enrolled had already been screened before the study began, a substantial propor-
tion of the men in the control group were also being screened during the study, 
and only a fraction of men with abnormal PSA tests underwent biopsy.35
Screening Guidelines from Major Organizations. Major professional organi-
zations, including the USPSTF,33 the American Cancer Society (ACS),7 and the 
AUA,8 have all issued guidelines in recent years, summarized below. The USP-
STF has issued a grade D rating for prostate cancer screening, recommending 
against screening for asymptomatic men regardless of age, race, or family his-
tory. The USPSTF concluded that the harms of screening outweigh the beneﬁts. 
The other organizations encourage providers to address screening average-risk 
patients beginning at ages 50 or 55 years. Providers are encouraged to support 
shared decision making because cancer-screening decisions are complex and 
very sensitive to patient preferences regarding the potential beneﬁt and harms 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
614 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
of screening. If the patient agrees to screening, PSA testing is recommended ev-
ery 1 to 2 years; the DRE is considered optional. Providers should stop offering 
screening when patients reach age 70 years, or whenever their life expectancy 
drops below 10 years. Providers can consider offering screening beginning at 
age 40 or 45 years to men at high risk for cancer—African Americans and those 
with a family history of prostate cancer.
Prostate Cancer Screening Guidelines
American Urological 
Association8
American Cancer Society7
United States Preventive 
Services Task Force33
Shared decision 
making
Yes
Yes (consider using decision aid)
Yes (when patient requests 
screening)
Age to begin oﬀer-
ing screening
Average-risk
High-risk
40 yrs
40 yrs
50 yrs
40–45 yrs
No recommendation
Age to stop oﬀering 
screening
Life expectancy
 <10 yrs
Life expectancy
 <10 yrs
No recommendation
Screening tests
PSA
DRE (optional)
PSA
DRE (optional)
No recommendation
Frequency of 
screening
Annual
Annual (biennial when PSA 
< 2.5 ng/mL)
No recommendation
Biopsy referral  
criteria
PSA ≥ 4 ng/mL
Abnormal DRE
Individualized risk assessment for 
PSA levels 2.5–4 ng/mL
No recommendation
Abbreviations: PSA, prostate-speciﬁc antigen; DRE, digital rectal examination.
Shared Decision Making. Helping patients make informed decisions about 
screening can be challenging because of limited provider time for discussion of 
these issues. One strategy, recommended by the ACS, is to use patient prostate 
cancer screening decision aids, which can be provided in advance of a clinic 
visit.7 Decision aids are educational tools that present facts about prostate can-
cer, discuss the options for screening and treatment, elicit patient values for 
the outcomes, and provide guidance for discussing screening with a provider. 
Studies have shown that using decision aids increases knowledge, reduces un-
certainty about making decisions, and increases engagement in the decision-
making process, although the effect on getting tested has been variable.36 A list 
of decision aids for prostate cancer screening available online is below. When 
providers discuss prostate cancer with patients, the American College of Physi-
cians recommends eliciting the patient’s preferences and documenting them in 
the clinical record.37
Resources for Prostate Cancer Information. Encourage men to take advan-
tage of the many resources available to help them make decisions about prostate 
cancer screening.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  15 |
 
The Anus, Rectum, and Prostate  
615
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Colorectal Cancer Prevention and Screening. In 2008, both the 
USPSTF and a collaborative multiorganizational group, consisting of the ACS 
Colorectal Cancer Advisory Group, the U.S. Multi-Society Task Force 
on Colorectal Cancer, and the American College of Radiology Colon Cancer 
Committee, issued updated guidelines for colorectal cancer screening.38,39 These 
guidelines are reviewed in Chapter 11, The Abdomen, on pp. 469–470. An 
abbreviated summary is provided below.
■ Offer patients at average risk for colorectal cancer a range of screening options 
beginning at age 50 years: annual screening with high-sensitivity fecal occult 
blood tests (including guaiac-based hemoccult tests and fecal immunochem-
ical tests), colonoscopy every 10 years, or sigmoidoscopy every 5 years 
(which can be combined with high-sensitivity fecal occult blood testing per-
formed every 3 years). The multiorganizational group also endorsed the 
options of double-contrast barium enema or computed tomography colo-
nography every 5 years and periodic fecal DNA testing.39 Guidelines recom-
mend against screening with fecal occult blood testing following a DRE. 
Routine screening should continue until age 75 years.
■ Identify higher-risk persons based on a personal history of colorectal neoplasia 
or long-standing IBD—or a family history of colorectal neoplasia, including 
hereditary syndromes. These individuals will require intensive screening and 
surveillance testing with colonoscopy; screening will begin at a younger age 
and be repeated at shorter intervals than for those at average risk.
Counseling for Sexually Transmitted Infections. Anal intercourse 
places men and women at risk for perianal and rectal abrasions and transmission 
of human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) and other sexually transmitted 
infections (STIs). Protective measures include abstinence from high-risk 
behaviors (see pp. 547–550), use of condoms, vaccinations for hepatitis B and 
HPV, and good hygiene.
Decision Aids for Prostate Cancer Screening
● Testing for Prostate Cancer, American Cancer Society, 2010: 
 http://www.cancer.org/acs/groups/content/@editorial/documents/ 
document/acspc-024618.pdf
● Prostate Cancer Screening: Take Time to Decide, Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention 2013 (see also websites for African Americans and Hispanic 
Americans):  http://www.cdc.gov/cancer/prostate/basic_info/infographic.htm
● Prostate Cancer Screening: Should you get a PSA test?, Mayo Clinic:
 http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/prostate-cancer/in-depth/
prostate-cancer/art-20048087
● PROSDEX: A PSA Decision Aid, University of Cardiﬀ:
 http://prosdex.cf.ac.uk/index_content.htm
● Decision Aid Tool: Cancer Screening with PSA Testing, American Society of 
Clinical Oncology: http://www.asco.org/sites/www.asco.org/ﬁles/psa_pco_
decision_aid_71612.pdf
All websites accessed February 24, 2015.
See also further review of colorectal 
screening guidelines in Chapter 11, 
The Abdomen, pp. 469–470. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
616 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
For many patients and clinicians, the rectal examination is an unwelcome part 
of the physical examination. Although it may cause patient discomfort, it is rarely 
painful. You may choose to omit the rectal examination in adolescents who have 
no relevant complaints. In middle-aged or older adults, it is important for assess-
ing concerning symptoms and may be part of prostate cancer screening. Be sure 
to warn the patient about what he or she may feel—including pressure, possible 
discomfort, and the slow gentle movement of your examining ﬁnger.
The Male Patient
Patient Positioning. Choose one of several suitable patient positions for 
conducting the examination, with input from the patient when needed. Usually, 
the side-lying position (Fig. 15-5) is satisfactory and allows good visualization of 
the perianal and sacrococcygeal areas. Some clinicians ask the patient to stand 
and lean forward with his upper body resting across the examining table and 
hips ﬂexed, although this can seem less digniﬁed. In either position, your 
examining ﬁnger cannot reach the full length of the rectum.
Techniques of Examination
F I G U R E  1 5 - 5 .  Position the patient on the left side.
Ask the patient to lie on his left side with his buttocks close to the edge of the 
examining table near you. Flexing the patient’s hips and knees, especially in the 
upper leg, stabilizes his position and improves visibility. Drape the patient appro-
priately and adjust the light to ensure good visualization of the perirectal and 
anal area. Glove your hands and spread the buttocks apart.
■ Inspect the sacrococcygeal and perianal areas for lumps, ulcers, inﬂammation, 
rashes, or excoriations. Adult perianal skin is normally more pigmented and 
somewhat coarser than the skin over the buttocks. Palpate any abnormal 
areas, noting lumps or tenderness.
For suspicion of a colorectal cancer 
consider lower endoscopy. 
Anal and perianal lesions include 
hemorrhoids, venereal warts, herpes, 
syphilitic chancre, and carcinoma. A 
linear crack or tear suggests anal fis-
sure from large, hard stools, IBD, or 
STIs. Consider pruritus ani if there is 
swollen, thickened, fissured perianal 
skin with excoriations. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  15 |
 
The Anus, Rectum, and Prostate  
617
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Examine the anus and rectum. Lubricate your gloved index ﬁnger, explain to 
the patient what you are going to do, and tell him that the examination may 
trigger an urge to move his bowels but this will not occur. Ask him to bear 
down as if having a bowel movement. Inspect the anus, noting any lesions.
■ Palpate the anal canal. As the patient bears down, place the pad of your 
gloved and lubricated index ﬁnger over the anus (Fig. 15-6A). As the sphinc-
ter relaxes, gently insert your ﬁngertip into the anal canal in the direction 
pointing toward the umbilicus (Fig. 15-6B). If you feel the sphincter tighten, 
pause and reassure the patient. When, in a moment, the sphincter relaxes, 
proceed.
A tender purulent reddened mass 
with fever or chills suggests an anal 
abscess. Abscesses tunneling to the 
skin surface from the anus or rectum 
may form a clogged or draining ano-
rectal fistula. Fistulas may ooze blood, 
pus, or feculent mucus. Consider 
anoscopy or sigmoidoscopy for better 
visualization. 
A
B  
F I G U R E  1 5 - 6 .  Gently examine the anal canal.
Occasionally, severe tenderness prevents entry and internal examination. Do 
not apply force. Instead, place your ﬁngers on both sides of the anus, gently 
spread the oriﬁce, and ask the patient to bear down. 
If you can proceed without undue discomfort to the patient, note:
■ The sphincter tone of the anus. Normally, the muscles of the anal sphinc-
ter close snugly around your ﬁnger. Initial resting tone reﬂects the integ-
rity of the internal anal sphincter. To check external sphincter tone, ask 
the patient to squeeze your ﬁnger with the rectal muscles.
■ Tenderness, if any
■ Induration
■ Irregularities or nodules
■ Palpate the rectal surface. Insert your ﬁnger into the rectum as far as possible. 
Rotate your hand clockwise to palpate as much of the rectal surface as pos-
sible on the patient’s right side, then counterclockwise to palpate the sur-
face posteriorly and on the patient’s left side (Fig. 15-7).
Look for a lesion, such as an anal  
fissure, that might explain  
tenderness. 
Sphincter tightness may occur with 
anxiety, inflammation, or scarring. 
Sphincter laxity occurs in neurologic 
diseases, such as S2–S4 cord lesions, 
and signals possible changes in the uri-
nary sphincter and detrusor muscle. 
Consider testing perianal sensation. 
Induration may be caused by inflam-
mation, scarring, or malignancy. 
See Table 15-2, Abnormalities of the 
Anus, Surrounding Skin, and Rectum, 
pp. 621–622. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
618 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Note any nodules, irregu-
larities, or induration. To 
bring a possible lesion into 
reach, take your ﬁnger off 
the rectal surface, ask the 
patient to bear down, and 
palpate again.
■ Palpate the prostate 
gland. Then rotate 
your hand further 
counterclockwise so 
that your ﬁnger can 
examine the posterior 
surface of the prostate 
gland (Fig. 15-9). By 
turning your body 
slightly away from the 
patient, you can feel 
this area more easily. 
Tell the patient that 
examining his prostate 
gland may prompt an 
urge to urinate.
Sweep your ﬁnger carefully over the prostate 
gland, identifying its lateral lobes and the 
groove of the median sulcus between them 
(Fig. 15-10). Note the size, shape, mobility, 
and consistency of the prostate, and identify 
any nodules or tenderness. The normal pros-
tate is rubbery and nontender, with no evi-
dence of ﬁxity to the surrounding tissues.
If possible, extend your ﬁnger above the pros-
tate to the region of the seminal vesicles and 
the peritoneal cavity and sweep the anterior 
wall. Note any nodules or tenderness.
Gently withdraw your ﬁnger, and wipe the 
anus or give the patient tissues. Note the 
appearance of any fecal matter on your glove.
F I G U R E  1 5 - 7 .  Palpate the rectal surface.
Note any masses with irregular borders 
suspicious for rectal cancer (Fig. 15-8). 
F I G U R E  1 5 - 8 .  Rectal cancer.
F I G U R E  1 5 - 9 .  Palpate the prostate gland.
F I G U R E  1 5 - 1 0 .  Palpate 
the prostate lobes and median 
sulcus.
See Table 15-3, Abnormalities of the 
Prostate, p. 623. 
Findings include a rectal “shelf” of peri-
toneal metastases (see p. 615) or the 
tenderness of peritoneal inflammation. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  15 |
 
The Anus, Rectum, and Prostate  
619
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
The Female Patient
The rectum is usually examined after examining the female genitalia while the 
woman is in the lithotomy position. This position allows you to conduct the 
bimanual examination, delineate a possible adnexal or pelvic mass, test 
the integrity of the rectovaginal wall, and may help you to palpate a cancer high 
in the rectum.
If only a rectal examination is needed, the lateral position is satisfactory and 
affords a better view to the perianal and sacrococcygeal areas. Use the same 
techniques for examination that you use for men. Note that the cervix is read-
ily palpated through the anterior rectal wall. Sometimes, a retroverted uterus 
is also palpable. Do not mistake either of these, or a vaginal tampon, for a 
suspicious mass.
Recording Your Findings
Note that initially you may use sentences to describe your ﬁndings; later you will 
use phrases.
Recording the Anus, Rectum, and  
Prostate Examination
“No perirectal lesions or ﬁssures. External sphincter tone intact. Rectal vault 
without masses. Prostate smooth and nontender with palpable median sulcus. 
(Or in a female, uterine cervix nontender.) Stool brown; no fecal blood.”
OR
“Perirectal area inﬂamed; no ulcerations, warts, or discharge. Unable to exam-
ine external sphincter, rectal vault, or prostate because of spasm of external 
sphincter and marked inﬂammation and tenderness of anal canal.”
OR
“No perirectal lesions or ﬁssures. External sphincter tone intact. Rectal vault 
without masses. Left lateral prostate lobe with 1 × 1 cm ﬁrm, hard nodule; right 
lateral lobe smooth; median sulcus obscured. Stool brown; no fecal blood.”
These findings suggest proctitis from 
infectious cause. 
These findings are suspicious for 
prostate cancer. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
620 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
620 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 15-1  BPH Symptom Score: American Urological 
Association
Score or ask the patient to score each of the questions below. Higher scores (maximum 35) indicate more severe symptoms; 
scores ≤7 are considered mild and generally do not warrant treatment.
PART A
Not at 
All
Less 
Than 1 
Time in 5
Less 
Than 
Half the 
Time
About 
Half the 
Time
More 
Than 
Half the 
Time
Almost 
Always
Total 
Points 
for Each 
Row
1.  Incomplete emptying: Over the 
past month, how often have 
you had a sensation of not 
emptying your bladder 
completely after you ﬁnished 
urinating?
0
1
2
3
4
5
2.  Frequency: Over the past 
month, how often have you had 
to urinate again <2 hours after 
you ﬁnished urinating?
0
1
2
3
4
5
3.  Intermittency: Over the past 
month, how often have you 
stopped and started again 
several times when you 
urinated?
0
1
2
3
4
5
4.  Urgency: Over the past month, 
how often have you found it 
difﬁcult to postpone urination?
0
1
2
3
4
5
5.  Weak stream: Over the past 
month, how often have you had 
a weak urinary stream?
0
1
2
3
4
5
6.  Straining: Over the past month, 
how often have you had to 
push or strain to begin 
urination?
0
1
2
3
4
5
PART B
None
1 Time
2 Times
3 Times
4 Times
5 Times
Points for 
Part B
7.  Nocturia: Over the past month, 
how many times did you most 
typically get up to urinate from 
the time you went to bed at night 
until the time you got up in the 
morning?
0
1
2
3
4
5
TOTAL PARTS A and B (maximum 35)________
Adapted from: Madsen FA, Bruskewitz RC. Clinical manifestations of benign prostatic hyperplasia. Urol Clin North Am. 1995:22:291.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  15 |
 
The Anus, Rectum, and Prostate  
621
Table 15-2  Abnormalities of the Anus,  
Surrounding Skin, and Rectum 
Pilonidal Cyst and Sinus
Location
A pilonidal cyst is a fairly common, probably congenital, 
abnormality located in the midline superﬁcial to the coccyx 
or the lower sacrum. Look for the opening of a sinus tract, 
sometimes with a small tuft of hair surrounded by a halo of 
erythema. Pilonidal cysts are generally asymptomatic, except 
for slight drainage, but abscess formation and secondary sinus 
tracts may occur.
External Hemorrhoids 
(Thrombosed )
External hemorrhoids are 
dilated hemorrhoidal veins 
that originate below the 
pectinate line that are covered 
with skin. They seldom 
produce symptoms unless 
thrombosis occurs. 
Thrombosis causes acute local 
pain that increases with 
defecation and sitting. A 
tender, swollen, bluish, ovoid 
mass is visible at the anal 
margin.
Internal Hemorrhoids 
(Prolapsed )
Anterior
Posterior
Internal hemorrhoids are 
enlargements of the normal 
vascular cushions located 
above the pectinate line, 
usually not palpable. Internal 
hemorrhoids may cause 
bright-red bleeding, 
especially during defecation. 
They may also prolapse 
through the anal canal and 
appear as reddish, moist, 
protruding masses, typically 
located in one or more of the 
positions illustrated.
Prolapse of the Rectum
On straining for a bowel movement, the rectal mucosa, with 
or without its muscular wall, may prolapse through the anus, 
appearing as a doughnut or rosette of red tissue. A prolapse 
involving only mucosa is relatively small and shows radiating 
folds, as illustrated. When the entire bowel wall is involved, 
the prolapse is larger and covered by concentrically circular 
folds.
(continued)
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
622 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
622 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 15-2  Abnormalities of the Anus,  
Surrounding Skin, and Rectum (Continued )
Anal Fissure
Fissure
Sentinel tag
Anorectal Fistula
Opening
Fistula
An anal ﬁssure is a very painful oval ulceration of the anal 
canal, found most commonly in the midline posteriorly, less 
commonly in the midline anteriorly. Its long axis lies 
longitudinally. There may be a swollen “sentinel” skin tag just 
below it. Gentle separation of the anal margins may reveal the 
lower edge of the ﬁssure. The sphincter is spastic; the 
examination is painful. Local anesthesia may be required.
An anorectal ﬁstula is an inﬂammatory tract or tube that 
opens at one end into the anus or rectum and at the other end 
onto the skin surface (as shown here) or into another viscus. 
An abscess usually antedates such a ﬁstula. Look for the 
ﬁstulous opening or openings anywhere in the skin around 
the anus.
Polyps of the Rectum
Polyps of the rectum are fairly common. Variable in size and 
number, they can develop on a stalk (pedunculated) or lie on 
the mucosal surface (sessile). They are soft and may be difﬁcult 
or impossible to feel even when in reach of the examining 
ﬁnger. Endoscopy and biopsy are needed for differentiation of 
benign from malignant lesions.
Cancer of the Rectum
Illustrated here is the ﬁrm, nodular, rolled edge of an 
ulcerated cancer.
Rectal Shelf
Widespread peritoneal metastases from any source may 
develop in the area of the peritoneal reﬂection anterior to the 
rectum. A ﬁrm to hard nodular rectal “shelf” may be just 
palpable with the tip of the examining ﬁnger. In a woman, 
this shelf of metastatic tissue develops in the rectouterine 
pouch, behind the cervix and the uterus.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  15 |
 
The Anus, Rectum, and Prostate  
623
Table 15-3 Abnormalities of the Prostate 
Normal Prostate Gland
As palpated through the anterior rectal wall, the normal prostate is a rounded, heart-
shaped structure approximately 2.5 cm long. The median sulcus can be palpated 
between the two lateral lobes. Only the posterior surface of the prostate is palpable. 
Anterior and central lesions, including those that obstruct the urethra, are not 
detectable by physical examination.
Prostatitis
Acute bacterial prostatitis, illustrated here, presents with fever and urinary tract 
symptoms such as frequency, urgency, dysuria, incomplete voiding, and sometimes 
low back pain. The gland feels tender, swollen, “boggy,” and warm. Examine it gently. 
More than 80% of infections are caused by gram-negative aerobes such as Escherichia 
coli, Enterococcus, and Proteus. In men younger than age 35 yrs, consider sexual 
transmission of Neisseria gonorrhea and Chlamydia trachomatis.
Chronic bacterial prostatitis is associated with recurrent urinary tract infections, usually 
from the same organism. Men may be asymptomatic or have symptoms of dysuria or 
mild pelvic pain. The prostate gland may feel normal, without tenderness or swelling. 
Cultures of prostatic ﬂuid usually show infection with E. coli.
It may be challenging to distinguish these conditions from the more common chronic 
pelvic pain syndrome, seen in up to 80% of symptomatic men who report obstructive  
or irritative symptoms on voiding but show no evidence of prostate or urinary tract 
infection. Physical examination ﬁndings are not predictable, but examination is 
needed to assess any prostate induration or asymmetry suggestive of carcinoma.
Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia
BPH is a nonmalignant enlargement of the prostate gland that increases with age, 
present in more than 50% of men by age 50 yrs. Symptoms arise both from smooth-
muscle contraction in the prostate and bladder neck and from compression of the 
urethra. They may be irritative (urgency, frequency, nocturia), obstructive (decreased 
stream, incomplete emptying, straining), or both, and are seen in more than one third 
of men by age 65 yrs. The affected gland may be normal in size, or may feel 
symmetrically enlarged, smooth, and ﬁrm, though slightly elastic; there may be 
obliteration of the median sulcus and more notable protrusion into the rectal lumen.
Prostate Cancer
Prostate cancer is suggested by an area of hardness in the gland. A distinct hard 
nodule that alters the contour of the gland may or may not be palpable. As the cancer 
enlarges, it feels irregular and may extend beyond the conﬁnes of the gland. The 
median sulcus may be obscured. Hard areas in the prostate are not always malignant. 
They may also result from prostatic stones, chronic inﬂammation, and other 
conditions.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
624 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
References
 1. McVary, KT. BPH: epidemiology and comorbidities. Am J Manag 
Care 2006;12(5 Suppl):S122.
 2. Barry MJ, Fowler FJ Jr., O’Leary MP, et al. The American Urological 
Association symptom index for benign prostatic hyperplasia. The 
Measurement Committee of the American Urological Association. 
J Urol. 1992;148:1549.
 3. Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2015. CA Cancer J 
Clin. 2015;65:5.
 4. Ross LE, Coates RJ, Breen N, et al. Prostate-speciﬁc antigen test use 
reported in the 2000 National Health Interview Survey. Prev Med. 
2004;38:732.
 5. Seidman H, Mushinski MH, Gelb SK, et al. Probabilities of eventu-
ally developing or dying of cancer–United States, 1985. CA Cancer 
J Clin. 1985;35:36.
 6. Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al. (eds). SEER Cancer Sta-
tistics Review, 1975–2012. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. 
http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2012/, based on November 2014 
SEER data submission, posted to the SEER website, April 2015.
 7. Wolf AM, Wender RC, Etzioni RB, et al. American Cancer Society 
guideline for the early detection of prostate cancer: update 2010. 
CA Cancer J Clin. 2010;60:70.
 8. Carter HB, Albertsen PC, Barry MJ, et al. Early detection of prostate 
cancer: AUA Guideline. J Urol. 2013;190:419.
 9. Jemal A, Center MM, DeSantis C, et al. Global patterns of cancer 
incidence and mortality rates and trends. Cancer Epidemiol Bio-
markers Prev. 2010;19:1893.
 10. Parker PM, Rice KR, Sterbis JR, et al. Prostate cancer in men less 
than the age of 50: a comparison of race and outcomes. Urology. 
2011;78:110.
 11. Hoffman RM, Gilliland FD, Eley JW, et al. Racial and ethnic differ-
ences in advanced-stage prostate cancer: the Prostate Cancer Out-
comes Study. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2001;93:388.
 12. Steinberg GD, Carter BS, Beaty TH, et al. Family history and the 
risk of prostate cancer. Prostate. 1990;17:337.
 13. Bancroft EK, Page EC, Castro E, et al. Targeted Prostate Cancer 
Screening in BRCA1 and BRCA2 Mutation Carriers: Results from 
the Initial Screening Round of the IMPACT Study. Eur Urol. 2014; 
66(3):489–499.
 14. Chamie K, DeVere White RW, Lee D, et al. Agent Orange exposure, 
Vietnam War veterans, and the risk of prostate cancer. Cancer. 
2008;113:2464.
 15. Sinha R, Park Y, Graubard BI, et al. Meat and meat-related com-
pounds and risk of prostate cancer in a large prospective cohort 
study in the United States. Am J Epidemiol. 2009;170:1165.
 16. Huncharek M, Haddock KS, Reid R, et al. Smoking as a risk factor 
for prostate cancer: a meta-analysis of 24 prospective cohort stud-
ies. Am J Public Health. 2010;100:693.
 17. Thompson IM, Goodman PJ, Tangen CM, et al. The inﬂuence of 
ﬁnasteride on the development of prostate cancer. N Engl J Med. 
2003;349:215.
 18. Andriole GL, Bostwick DG, Brawley OW, et al. Effect of dutasteride 
on the risk of prostate cancer. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1192.
 19. Theoret MR, Ning YM, Zhang JJ, et al. The risks and beneﬁts of 
5alpha-reductase inhibitors for prostate-cancer prevention. N Engl 
J Med. 2011;365:97.
 20. Lippman SM, Klein EA, Goodman PJ, et al. Effect of selenium 
and vitamin E on risk of prostate cancer and other cancers: the 
Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT). JAMA. 
2009;301:39.
 21. Klein EA, Thompson IM Jr., Tangen CM, et al. Vitamin E and the 
risk of prostate cancer: the Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Preven-
tion Trial (SELECT). JAMA. 2011;306:1549.
 22. Hoogendam A, Buntinx F, de Vet HC. The diagnostic value of dig-
ital rectal examination in primary care screening for prostate can-
cer: a meta-analysis. Fam Pract. 1999;16:621.
 23. Coley CM, Barry MJ, Fleming C, et al. Early detection of prostate 
cancer. Part I: Prior probability and effectiveness of tests. The 
American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 1997;126:394.
 24. Smith DS, Catalona WJ. Interexaminer variability of digital rectal 
examination in detecting prostate cancer. Urology. 1995;45:70.
 25. Mettlin C, Jones G, Averette H, et al. Deﬁning and updating the 
American Cancer Society guidelines for the cancer-related checkup: 
prostate and endometrial cancers. CA Cancer J Clin. 1993;43:42.
 26. Early detection of prostate cancer and use of transrectal ultra-
sound. In: Association AU, ed. American Urological Association 1992 
Policy Statement Book. Baltimore, MA: American Urological Asso-
ciation; 1992.
 27. Harris R, Lohr KN. Screening for prostate cancer: an update of the 
evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern 
Med. 2002;137:917.
 28. Schroder FH, Hugosson J, Roobol MJ, et al. Screening and pros-
tate-cancer mortality in a randomized European study. N Engl J 
Med. 2009;360:1320.
 29. Andriole GL, Crawford ED, Grubb RL 3rd, et al. Mortality results 
from a randomized prostate-cancer screening trial. N Engl J Med. 
2009;360:1310.
 30. Schroder FH, Hugosson J, Roobol MJ, et al. Screening and prostate 
cancer mortality: results of the European Randomised Study of 
Screening for Prostate Cancer (ERSPC) at 13 years of follow-up. 
Lancet. 2014;384:2027.
 31. Draisma G, Etzioni R, Tsodikov A, et al. Lead time and overdiag-
nosis in prostate-speciﬁc antigen screening: importance of meth-
ods and context. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2009;101:374.
 32. Cooperberg MR, Broering JM, Carroll PR. Time trends and local 
variation in primary treatment of localized prostate cancer. J Clin 
Oncol. 2010;28:1117.
 33. Moyer VA. Screening for prostate cancer: U.S. Preventive Services Task 
Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2012;157:120.
 34. Andriole GL, Crawford ED, Grubb RL, 3rd, et al. Prostate cancer 
screening in the randomized Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovar-
ian Cancer Screening Trial: mortality results after 13 years of 
follow-up. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2012;104:125.
 35. Hoffman RM. Clinical practice. Screening for prostate cancer. 
N Engl J Med. 2011;365:2013.
 36. Volk RJ, Hawley ST, Kneuper S, et al. Trials of decision aids for 
prostate cancer screening: a systematic review. Am J Prev Med. 
2007;33:428.
 37. Qaseem A, Barry MJ, Denberg TD, et al. Screening for prostate can-
cer: a guidance statement from the Clinical Guidelines Committee 
of the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2013;158:761.
 38. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for colorectal can-
cer. Recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2008;149:627.
 39. Levin B, Lieberman DA, McFarland B, et al. Screening and surveil-
lance for the early detection of colorectal cancer and adenomatous 
polyps, 2008: a joint guideline from the American Cancer Society, 
the US Multi-Society Task Force on Colorectal Cancer, and the 
American College of Radiology. CA Cancer J Clin. 2008;58:130.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
625
Musculoskeletal disorders are the leading primary diagnosis during ofﬁce visits 
in the United States.1 In 2012, these disorders totaled 93 million visits, or 10% 
of all ambulatory care visits, highlighting the need for competent ofﬁce examina-
tions. Arthritis affects one in ﬁve Americans, or 22% of the adult population, and 
is the leading cause of disability, costing well above $128 billion a year.2 Spinal 
disorders are the fourth highest diagnostic group for ofﬁce visits. In 2010, 29% 
of Americans reported low back pain alone.3 Low back symptoms, one of the top 
20 reasons for ofﬁce visits, represent a continuing clinical challenge;1 many cases 
are “nonspeciﬁc,” yet they are one of the most common and expensive causes of 
work-related disability.4
Each of the major joints has unique anatomy and directional movement. In this 
chapter, the Anatomy and Physiology section and Techniques for Examination 
are combined to help students apply their knowledge of the anatomy and function 
of each joint to the speciﬁc examination techniques needed. These sections fol-
low a head-to-toe sequence, beginning with the jaw and joints of the upper 
extremities and ending with the ankles and feet. For each joint, look for sections 
on: Joint Overview, which describes the distinguishing anatomical and func-
tional characteristics of the joint; Bony Structures and Joints; Muscle Groups and 
Additional Structures; and Techniques of Examination, which presents examina-
tion techniques speciﬁc to that joint—inspection, palpation of bony and soft 
tissue structures, range of motion (the arc of measurable joint movement in a 
single plane), and maneuvers for testing joint function and stability. Sharpen 
your skills of inspection as you examine the surface structures and contours of 
each joint. Learn to visualize the joint’s underlying anatomy. Visualization 
helps trigger the examination techniques and maneuvers you will need to per-
form next. 
C H A P T E R
16
The Musculoskeletal  
System
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate 
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 16: Musculoskeletal System)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com
F I G U R E  1 6 - 1 .  Exercise is key to 
health.
Prevalence for most conditions varies 
by gender. Osteoarthritis (OA), for 
example, is more common in women, 
especially in the knee. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
626 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
APPROACH TO MUSCULOSKELETAL DISORDERS
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
The ﬁrst goal of your evaluation of musculoskeletal disorders is to characterize 
the patient’s complaint in terms of four key features. Is the joint problem:
■ Articular or extra-articular
■ Acute (usually <6 weeks) or chronic (usually >12 weeks)
■ Inﬂammatory or noninﬂammatory
■ Localized (monoarticular) or diffuse (polyarticular)
Review the anatomical terminology that pertains to the joints and the useful 
algorithm in Figure 16-2. The authors note that, “This approach is remarkably 
effective and relies on clinical and historic features, rather than laboratory testing, 
to diagnose many common . . . disorders.”5
Approach to Musculoskeletal 
Disorders
Joint Anatomy—Important Terms
● Articular structures include the joint capsule and articular cartilage, the 
synovium and synovial ﬂuid, intra-articular ligaments, and juxta-articular bone. 
Articular cartilage is composed of a collagen matrix containing charged ions 
and water, allowing the cartilage to change shape in response to pressure or 
load, acting as a cushion for underlying bone. Synovial ﬂuid provides nutrition to 
the adjacent relatively avascular articular cartilage.
● Extra-articular structures include periarticular ligaments, tendons, bursae, 
muscle, fascia, bone, nerve, and overlying skin.
● Ligaments are rope-like bundles of collagen ﬁbrils that connect bone to bone.
● Tendons are collagen ﬁbers connecting muscle to bone.
● Bursae are pouches of synovial ﬂuid that cushion the movement of tendons 
and muscles over bone or other joint structures.
Articular disease typically involves 
swelling and tenderness of the entire 
joint, crepitus, instability, “locking,” or 
deformity, and limits both active and 
passive range of motion due to either 
stiffness or pain.5 
Extra-articular disease typically 
involves “point or focal tenderness in 
regions adjacent to articular struc-
tures” and limits active range of 
motion. Extra-articular disease rarely 
causes swelling, instability, or joint 
deformity. 
Age also provides clues to causes of joint pain.5
■ If age <60 years, consider repetitive strain or overuse syndromes like tendini-
tis or bursitis, crystalline arthritis (gout; crystalline pyrophosphate deposition 
disease [CPPD]) (males), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), psoriatic arthritis and 
reactive (Reiter) arthritis (in inﬂammatory bowel disease [IBD]), and infec-
tious arthritis from gonorrhea, Lyme disease, or viral or bacterial infections.
■ If age >60 years, look for OA, gout and pseudogout, polymyalgia rheumatica 
(PMR), osteoporotic fracture, and septic bacterial arthritis.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
	
C h a p t e r  16  |
 
The Musculoskeletal System 	
627
Approach to Musculoskeletal Disorders
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1–3
>3
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Initial history and physical examination
to determine
1. Is it intra- or extra-articular?
2. Is it acute or chronic?
3. Is inflammation present?
4. How many/which joints are involved?
Nonarticular condition
Consider
• Trauma/fracture
• Fibromyalgia
• Polymyalgia rheumatica
• Bursitis
• Tendinitis
Chronic inflammatory
mono/oligoarthritis
Consider
• Indolent infection
• Psoriatic arthritis
• Reiter syndrome
• Pauciarticular JA
Consider
• Psoriatic arthritis
• Reiter syndrome
Unlikely to be 
rheumatoid arthritis
Consider
• SLE
• Scleroderma
• Polymyositis
Are PIP, MCP, or
MTP joints
involved?
Chronic inflammatory
polyarthritis
Is involvement
symmetric?
Rheumatoid
arthritis
Consider
• Acute arthritis
   • Infectious arthritis
   • Gout
   • Pseudogout
   • Reiter syndrome
• Initial presentation
  of chronic arthritis
Is inflammation present?
1. Is there prolonged morning stiffness?
2. Is there soft tissue swelling?
3. Are there systemic symptoms?
4. Is the ESR or CRP elevated?
Musculoskeletal complaint
Is it intra-articular?
Is complaint >6 wks?
Chronic
noninflammatory
arthritis
Are DIP, CMC1, hip, or
knee joints involved?
Chronic
inflammatory
arthritis
How many
joints involved?
Chronic
Acute
Unlikely to be 
osteoarthritis
Consider
• Charcot arthritis
Osteoarthritis
KEY:
CMC = Carpometacarpal
CRP  = C-reactive protein
DIP  = Distal interphalangeal
ESR  = Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
JA  
= Juvenile arthritis
MCP  = Metacarpophalangeal
MTP  = Metatarsophalangeal
PIP  = Proximal interphalangeal
PMR  = Polymyalgia rheumatica
SLE  = Systemic lupus
Approach to Musculoskeletal Complaints
Adapted from: Kasper DL, Braunwald E, Fauci AS, et al., eds. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 16th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005.
F i g u r e  1 6 - 2 .   Algorithm for diagnosis of musculoskeletal complaints. SOURCE: Cush 
JJ, Lipsky PE. In: Longo DL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al. (eds). Chapter 331, Approach to Articular and Musculoskeletal Disorders, in 
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. 18th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2012.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
628 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
APPROACH TO MUSCULOSKELETAL DISORDERS
Types of Joints
To evaluate joint function, it is important to know the types of joints and how 
they articulate, or interconnect, and the role of bursae in easing joint movement. 
There are three primary types of joint articulation—synovial, cartilaginous, and 
ﬁbrous—which allow varying degrees of movement.
Joints
Type of Joint
Extent of Movement
Example
Synovial
Freely movable
Knee, shoulder
Cartilaginous
Slightly movable
Vertebral bodies of the spine
Fibrous
Immovable
Skull sutures
Synovial Joints. The bones of these 
joints do not touch each other, and the 
joint articulations are freely movable within 
the limits of the surrounding ligaments 
(Fig. 16-3). The bones are covered by 
articular cartilage and separated by a 
synovial cavity that cushions joint 
movement. A synovial membrane lines the 
synovial cavity and secretes a small amount 
of viscous lubricating ﬂuid, the synovial 
ﬂuid. The membrane is attached at the 
margins of the articular cartilage and 
pouched or folded to accommodate joint 
movement. Surrounding the joint is a 
ﬁbrous joint capsule, which is strengthened 
by ligaments extending from bone to bone.
Cartilaginous Joints. These joints, 
such as the intervertebral joints and the 
symphysis pubis, are slightly movable 
(Fig. 16-4). Fibrocartilaginous discs 
separate the bony surfaces. At the center 
of each disc is the nucleus pulposus, 
somewhat gelatinous ﬁbrocartilaginous 
material that serves as a cushion or shock 
absorber between bony surfaces.
Bone
Synovial membrane
Articular
cartilage
Synovial cavity
Ligament
Joint space
Joint capsule
F I G U R E  1 6 - 3 .  Synovial joint.
Vertebral body
Nucleus pulposus
of the disc
Disc
Ligament
F I G U R E  1 6 - 4 .  Cartilaginous joint.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
629
APPROACH TO MUSCULOSKELETAL DISORDERS
Fibrous Joints. In these joints, such 
as the sutures of the skull, intervening 
layers of ﬁbrous tissue or cartilage hold 
the bones together (Fig. 16-5). The bones 
are almost in direct contact, which allows 
no appreciable movement.
Synovial Joints and Bursae
As you learn to examine the musculoskeletal system, focus on relating the anat-
omy of the joint to its movement.
F I G U R E  1 6 - 5 .  Fibrous joint.
Synovial Joints
Type of Joint
Articular Shape
Movement
Example
Spheroidal 
(ball and 
socket)
Convex surface in 
concave cavity
Wide-ranging –
ﬂexion, exten-
sion, abduction, 
adduction, 
rotation, cir-
cumduction
Shoulder, hip
Hinge
Flat, planar
Motion in one 
plane; ﬂexion, 
extension
Interphalan-
geal joints of 
hand and 
foot; elbow
Condylar
Convex or concave
Movement of two 
articulating 
surfaces not 
dissociable
Knee; temporo-
mandibular 
joint
Many of the joints we examine are synovial, or movable, joints. The shape of the 
articulating surfaces of synovial joints, as well as the surrounding soft tissues, 
determines the direction and extent of joint motion. Younger people and women 
tend to have increased soft tissue laxity, leading to increased range of motion 
(“double-jointed”).
Spheroidal Joints. Spheroidal joints 
have a ball-and-socket conﬁguration—a 
rounded, convex surface articulating with a 
concave cuplike cavity, allowing a wide 
range of rotatory movement, as in the 
shoulder and hip (Fig. 16-6).
F I G U R E  1 6 - 6 .  Spheroidal joint 
(ball and socket).
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
630 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Hinge Joints. Hinge joints are ﬂat, 
planar, or slightly curved, allowing only a 
gliding motion in a single plane, as in ﬂexion 
and extension of the digits (Fig. 16-7).
Condylar Joints. Condylar joints, such 
as the knee, have articulating surfaces that are 
convex or concave (Fig. 16-8). These joints 
allow ﬂexion, extension, rotation, and motion 
in the coronal plane.
Bursae. Bursae are roughly disc-shaped 
synovial sacs that ease joint action and allow 
adjacent muscles or muscles and tendons to 
glide over each other during movement. They 
lie between the skin and the convex surface of 
a bone or joint, as in the prepatellar bursa of 
the knee (p. 684) or in areas where tendons or 
muscles rub against bone, ligaments, or other 
tendons or muscles, as in the subacromial 
bursa of the shoulder (pp. 648–652).
As you examine joints, knowing the underlying joint anatomy and allowable 
movement will help you assess degenerative disorders and trauma. Your knowl-
edge of the soft tissue structures, ligaments, tendons, and bursae will help you 
evaluate inﬂammatory disorders and overuse syndromes.
F I G U R E  1 6 - 7 .  Hinge joint.
F I G U R E  1 6 - 8 .  Condylar joint.
The Health History
Common or Concerning Symptoms
● Joint pain: articular or extra-articular, acute or chronic, inﬂammatory or  
noninﬂammatory, localized or diﬀuse
● Joint pain: associated constitutional symptoms and systemic manifestations 
from other organ systems
● Neck pain
● Low back pain
Joint pain is a leading complaint of patients seeking health care. In addition to 
eliciting the seven features of any joint pain, adopt the tips below to guide your 
subsequent examination and diagnosis:
See Chapter 3, Interviewing and the 
Health History, for the seven features 
of pain, pp. 79–80. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
631
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Joint Pain: Identifying Important Characteristics
Articular or Extra-articular. Begin by asking “Do you have any pains in 
your joints?” Joint pain may be articular or extra-articular. Ask the patient to 
point to the pain.
■ If pain is localized to only one joint, it is monoarticular. Pain originating in 
the small joints of the hands and feet is more sharply localized than pain in 
larger joints. Pain from the hip joint is especially deceptive. True pain from 
the hip joint is typically described in the groin. Sacral/sacroiliac pain is often 
in the buttock, and trochanteric pain from bursitis occurs on the lateral 
thigh.
■ Joint pain may be polyarticular, involving several joints, typically four or 
more. If polyarticular, what is the pattern of involvement . . . migrating from 
joint to joint or steadily spreading from one joint to multiple joints? Is the 
involvement symmetric, affecting similar joints on both sides of the body?
■ Joint pain may also be extra-articular, involving bones, muscles, and tissues 
around the joint such as the tendons, bursae, or even overlying skin. Gener-
alized “aches and pains” are called myalgias if in muscles, and arthralgias if 
there is pain but no evidence of arthritis.
Note that the symptoms of decreased joint movement and stiffness can help you 
decide if the pain is articular.
■ To assess decreased or limited movement, ask about changes in activity due to 
problems with the involved joint, for example, in the ability to walk, stand, 
lean over, sit or sit up, rise from a sitting position, pinch, grasp, turn a page, 
or open a door handle or jar. Common activities like combing hair, brushing 
teeth, eating, dressing, and bathing may also be affected.
■ Musculoskeletal stiffness refers to a perceived tightness or resistance to move-
ment, in contrast to normal movement that is limber.
Tips for Assessing Joint Pain
● Ask the patient to “point to the pain.” This may save considerable time 
because many patients have trouble pinpointing pain location in words.
● Clarify and record when the pain started and the mechanism of injury, particu-
larly if there is a history of trauma. 
● Determine whether the pain is articular or extra-articular, acute or chronic, 
inﬂammatory or noninﬂammatory, and localized (monoarticular) or diﬀuse 
(polyarticular).
Pain in a single joint suggests injury, 
monoarticular arthritis, or extra- 
articular causes like tendinitis or bur-
sitis. Lateral hip pain with focal ten-
derness over the greater trochanter is 
typical of trochanteric bursitis. 
In rheumatic fever or gonococcal 
arthritis, there is a migratory pattern 
of spread; in RA, the pattern is addi-
tive and progressive with symmetric 
involvement. Inflammatory arthriti-
des are more common in women. 
Extra-articular pain occurs in inflam-
mation of bursae (bursitis), tendons 
(tendinitis), or tendon sheaths (tenosy-
novitis) as well as in sprains from 
stretching or tearing of ligaments. 
In articular joint pain there is 
decreased active and passive range  
or motion and morning stiffness or 
“gelling” (see page 633); in nonarticu-
lar joint pain, there is periarticular 
tenderness and only passive range of 
motion remains intact. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
632 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Acute or Chronic. Acute joint pain typically lasts up to 6 weeks; chronic 
pain lasts >12 weeks.
Assess the onset, duration, quality, and severity of the joint symptoms. Onset is 
especially important. Did the pain or discomfort develop rapidly over the course 
of a few hours or insidiously over weeks or even months? Has the pain 
progressed slowly or ﬂuctuated, with periods of improvement and worsening? 
How long has the pain lasted? What is it like over the course of a day? . . . In the 
morning?… As the day wears on?
If more rapid in onset, how did the pain arise? Was there an acute injury or 
overuse from repetitive motion of the same part of the body? If the pain comes 
from trauma, what was the mechanism of injury or the speciﬁc series of events 
that caused the joint pain? Furthermore, what aggravates or relieves the pain? 
What are the effects of exercise, rest, and therapy?
Inﬂammatory or Noninﬂammatory. Try to determine whether the joint 
pain is inﬂammatory or noninﬂammatory. Different mechanisms appear to be 
involved—interleukins and tumor necrosis factor in inﬂammatory joint pain, 
and prostaglandins, chemokines, and growth factors in noninﬂammatory pain.8
Ask about the four cardinal features of inﬂammation—swelling, warmth, and 
redness, in addition to pain. Several of these features are best assessed on exam-
ination, but patients can often guide you to points of inﬂammation and pain. 
Also ask about fever or chills. 
Elicit any pattern of stiffness. Is it worse in the morning but gradually better with 
activity? Or is there an intermittent “gel phenomenon,” namely brief periods of 
daytime stiffness following inactivity that usually last from 30 to 60 minutes then 
get worse again with movement?
Localized or Diffuse. Ask the patient which joints are painful. Joint pain 
can be monoarticular, oligoarticular involving two to four joints, or polyarticular. 
If there is pain in more than one joint, is the pattern of involvement symmetric 
or asymmetric?
Severe pain of rapid onset in a red 
swollen joint suggests acute septic 
arthritis or crystalline arthritis (gout; 
CPPD).6,7 In children, consider osteomy-
elitis in a bone contiguous to a joint. 
See Table 16-1, Patterns of Pain in and 
Around the Joints, pp. 696–697. 
Inflammatory disorders have many 
causes5: infectious (Neisseria gonor-
rhoeae or Mycobacterium tuberculosis), 
crystal-induced (gout, pseudogout), 
immune-related (RA, systemic lupus ery-
thematosus [SLE]), reactive (rheumatic 
fever, reactive arthritis), or idiopathic. 
In noninflammatory disorders, 
consider trauma (rotator cuff tear), 
repetitive use (bursitis, tendinitis), 
degenerative changes (OA), or 
fibromyalgia. 
Inflammation with fever and chills is 
seen in septic arthritis; also consider 
crystalline arthritis. 
Morning stiffness that gradually 
improves with activity is more com-
mon in inflammatory disorders like RA 
and PMR9–11; intermittent stiffness 
and gelling are seen in OA.12 
Monoarticular arthritis can be trau-
matic, crystalline, or septic. Oligoartic-
ular arthritis occurs in infection from 
gonorrhea or rheumatic fever, con-
nective tissue disease, and OA. Polyar-
thritis may be viral or inflammatory 
from RA, SLE, or psoriasis.8 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
633
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Joint Pain: Associated Constitutional Symptoms and Systemic Man-
ifestations from Other Organ Systems. Some joint problems have associ-
ated constitutional symptoms such as fever, chills, rash, fatigue, anorexia, weight 
loss, and weakness.
In inﬂammatory conditions, initial laboratory tests such as the erythrocyte sedi-
mentation rate, C-reactive protein, platelet count, and hematocrit are helpful.
Some joint disorders have systemic manifestations in other organ systems that 
provide important clues to diagnosis. Ask about any family history of joint or 
muscle disorders. Watch for the symptoms, signs, and disorders below.
Involvement is usually symmetric in 
RA, SLE, and ankylosing spondylitis 
and asymmetric in psoriatic, reactive 
(Reiter), and IBD-associated arthritis. 
Constitutional symptoms are com-
mon in RA, SLE, PMR, and other 
inflammatory arthritides. High fever 
and chills suggest an infectious cause. 
Leukemia can infiltrate the synovium; 
chemotherapy can also cause joint 
pain. 
Joint Pain and Systemic Disorders
● Skin conditions
● Butterﬂy (malar) rash on the cheeks
● Scaly plaques, especially on extensor surfaces, and pitted nails
● Heliotrope rash on the upper eyelid
● Papules, pustules, or vesicles with reddened bases on the distal extremities
● Expanding erythematous “target” or “bull’s eye” patch early in an illness
● Painful subcutaneous nodules especially in pretibial area
● Palpable purpura
● Hives
● Erosions or scaling on the penis and crusted scaling papules on the soles 
and palms
● The maculopapular rash of rubella
● Nailfold capillary changes
● Clubbing of the ﬁngernails (see p. 211)
● Red, burning, and itchy eyes (conjunctivitis), eye pain and blurred vision (uveitis)
● Scleritis
● Preceding sore throat
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Psoriatic arthritis
Dermatomyositis 
Gonococcal arthritis
Lyme disease (erythema chronicum 
migrans)
Sarcoidosis, Behçet disease (erythema 
nodosum)13,14
Vasculitis
Serum sickness, drug reaction
Reactive (Reiter) arthritis (with  
urethritis, uveitis)
Arthritis of rubella
Dermatomyositis, systemic sclerosis
Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy
Reactive (Reiter) arthritis, Behçet  
syndrome,13,14 ankylosing spondylitis
RA, IBD, vasculitis
Acute rheumatic fever or gonococcal 
arthritis
(continued )
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
634 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Neck Pain. Neck pain is also common. If the patient reports neck trauma, 
common in motor vehicle accidents, ask about neck tenderness and consider 
clinical decision rules that identify risk of cervical cord injury. The NEXUS 
criteria and the Canadian C-Spine Rule are highly sensitive and speciﬁc for 
establishing a low probability of cervical spine injury.15–17 Persistent pain after 
blunt trauma or a collision warrants further evaluation.
Neck pain is usually self-limited, but it is important to ask about radiation into 
the arm or scapular area, arm weakness, numbness, or paresthesias.18 Elicit any 
of the “red ﬂag” symptoms listed below.
Low Back Pain. Begin by asking “Do you have any back pain?,”—at least 
40% of adults have low back pain at least once during their lifetime, usually 
between the ages of 30 and 50 years, and low back pain is one of the most 
common reasons for ofﬁce visits. There are numerous clinical guidelines, but 
most categorize low back pain into three groups: nonspeciﬁc (>90%), nerve 
root entrapment with radiculopathy or spinal stenosis (∼5%), and pain from a 
speciﬁc underlying disease (1% to 2%).4,20 Note that the term “nonspeciﬁc low 
back pain” is preferred to “sprain” or “strain.” Using open-ended questions, get 
a clear and complete picture of the problem, especially the location and radiation 
of the pain and any prior history of trauma.
Joint Pain and Systemic Disorders (continued )
● Oral ulcerations
● Pneumonitis; interstitial lung disease
● Diarrhea, abdominal pain, cramping
● Urethritis
● Mental status change, facial or other weakness, stiﬀ neck
RA (usually painless); Behçet disease
RA; systemic sclerosis
IBD, reactive arthritis from Salmonella, 
Shigella, Yersinia, Campylobacter; 
scleroderma
Reactive (Reiter) arthritis, gonococcal 
arthritis
Lyme disease with central nervous 
system involvement 
The NEXUS criteria are normal alert-
ness, no posterior midline cervical 
spine tenderness, no focal neurologic 
deficits, no evidence of intoxication, 
and no painful distracting injury. The 
Canadian C-Spine Rule includes age, 
mechanism of injury, low risk factors 
allowing assessment of range of 
motion, and testing of neck rotation. 
See Table 16-2, Pains in the Neck,  
p. 698. 
Radicular pain signals spinal nerve 
compression and/or irritation, most 
commonly at C7 or C6. Unlike low 
back pain, the principal cause is 
foraminal impingement from 
degenerative joint changes (70% to 
75%), rather than disc herniation 
(20% to 25%).19 
See Table 16-3, Low Back Pain, p. 699. 
Nonspecific low back pain is usually 
from musculoligamentous injuries 
and age-related degenerative pro-
cesses of the intervertebral discs  
and facet joints. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
635
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Determine if the pain is on the midline, over the vertebrae, or off the midline.
Is there radiation into the buttock or lower extremity? Is there any associated 
numbness or paresthesias?
Importantly, is there any associated bladder or bowel dysfunction?
Elicit any key warning signs or “red ﬂags” for serious underlying systemic 
disease.20
For midline back pain, diagnoses 
include musculoligamentous injury; 
disc herniation; vertebral collapse; 
spinal cord metastases; and, rarely, 
epidural abscess. For pain off the mid-
line, assess for muscle strain, sacroili-
itis, trochanteric bursitis, sciatica, and 
hip arthritis as well as for renal condi-
tions like pyelonephritis or stones. 
Sciatica is radicular gluteal and poste-
rior leg pain in the S1 distribution that 
increases with cough or Valsalva (see 
pp. 765–766 for related neurologic 
findings); 85% of cases are associated 
with a disc disorder, usually at L4–L5 
or L5–S1.21 Leg pain that resolves with 
rest and/or lumbar forward flexion 
occurs in spinal stenosis. 
Consider cauda equina syndrome from 
an S2–S4 midline disc or tumor if 
there is bowel or bladder dysfunction 
(usually urinary retention with over-
flow incontinence), especially if there 
is saddle anesthesia or perineal 
numbness. Pursue immediate imaging 
and surgical evaluation.4 
In cases of low back pain plus another 
indicator, there is a pretest probability 
of serious systemic disease of ∼10%.22 
Red Flags for Low Back Pain from  
Underlying Systemic Disease
● Age <20 years or >50 years
● History of cancer
● Unexplained weight loss, fever, or decline in general health
● Pain lasting more than 1 month or not responding to treatment
● Pain at night or present at rest
● History of intravenous drug use, addiction, or immunosuppression
● Presence of active infection or human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) infection
● Long-term steroid therapy
● Saddle anesthesia, bladder or bowel incontinence
● Neurologic symptoms or progressive neurologic deﬁcit
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
636 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Health Promotion and 
Counseling: Evidence and 
Recommendations
Important Topics for Health Promotion  
and Counseling
● Nutrition, weight, and physical activity
● Low back pain
● Osteoporosis: risk factors, screening, and assessing fracture risk
● Treating osteoporosis and preventing falls
The integrity of the musculoskeletal system brings many features of a healthy 
lifestyle into play—nutrition, ﬁtness, optimal weight, and prevention of injury. 
Each joint has speciﬁc vulnerabilities to trauma and wear. Proper lifting, avoid-
ing falls, household safety measures, and a balanced physical activity program 
protect and preserve well-functioning joints and muscles and prevent or delay 
the onset of arthritis, chronic back pain, and osteoporosis, all important targets 
for Healthy People 2020.25
Nutrition, Weight, and Physical Activity. Healthy habits directly 
beneﬁt the skeleton and muscles. Good nutrition supplies calcium for bone 
mineralization and bone density. A healthy weight reduces excess mechanical 
stress on weight-bearing joints like the hips and knees.
The Healthy People 2020 objectives set goals 
for physical activity aimed at increasing the pro-
portion of adults meeting guidelines for aerobic 
and muscle-strengthening physical activity 
(Fig. 16-9).26 These goals are based on the 2008 
Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans,27 an 
evidence-based report that highlights the ben-
eﬁts of physical activity, including risk reduc-
tion for early death, cardiovascular disease, 
hypertension, type 2 diabetes, breast and colon 
cancer, obesity, osteoporosis, falls, and depres-
sion. Physical activity also helps improve sleep 
quality and cognitive function in older adults.
See Chapter 4, Beginning the Physical 
Examination: General Survey, Vital 
Signs, and Pain, pp. 114–118, for fur-
ther discussion of nutrition and weight. 
F I G U R E  1 6 - 9 .  Encourage 
physical activity.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
637
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
The report includes guidelines to help sedentary people gradually build up their 
activity level, starting with 10 minutes of exercise a day. Guided exercise regi-
mens help reduce sports and exercise injuries, which are a signiﬁcant source of 
musculoskeletal disorders.
Low Back Pain. The estimated lifetime prevalence of low back pain in the 
United States population is over 80%.28 Spinal disorders are among the most 
frequent reasons for adult outpatient visits,29 and the annual U.S. economic 
costs attributed to diagnosing and managing low back pain and lost productivity 
exceed $100 billion.27 Most patients with acute low back pain get better within 
6 weeks; for patients with nonspeciﬁc symptoms, clinical guidelines emphasize 
reassurance, staying active, analgesics, muscle relaxants, and spinal manipulation 
therapy.30 Overall, about 10% to 15% of patients with acute low back pain 
develop chronic symptoms, often associated with long-term disability.28 Factors 
associated with poor outcomes include inappropriate beliefs that low back pain 
is a serious clinical condition, maladaptive pain-coping behaviors (avoiding 
work, movement, or other activities for fear of causing back damage), multiple 
nonorganic physical examination ﬁndings, psychiatric disorders, poor general 
health, high levels of baseline functional impairment, and low work 
satisfaction.4,24 Review the nonorganic physical ﬁndings (the Waddell signs) on 
p. 674.31 Appropriate treatments for chronic low back pain include treatments 
for acute low back pain as well as back exercises and behavioral therapy.30 
Opioids should be used cautiously, given their adverse effects and risks for 
abuse.32
Osteoporosis: Risk Factors, Screening, and Assessing Fracture 
Risk. Osteoporosis is a common U.S. health problem—9% of adults over 
age 50 years have osteoporosis at the femoral neck or lumbar spine, including 
16% of women and 4% of men.33 Half of all postmenopausal women sustain 
an osteoporosis-related fracture during their lifetime; 25% develop vertebral 
deformities; and 15% suffer hip fractures that increase risk of chronic pain, 
disability, loss of independence, and increased mortality.34 Although mortality 
rates are declining, about 3 in 10 patients die in the year following a hip 
fracture.35 Men are also at risk: the lifetime risk for an osteoporotic fracture in 
men over age 50 years is 1 in 4, and men are more likely than women to die in 
the year following a hip fracture. Nearly half of adults age ≥50 years has 
osteopenia, representing well over 30 million people, including about 
12 million men.36 The majority of fragility fractures actually occur among 
osteopenic adults.
Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans
● At least 2 hours and 30 minutes a week of moderate-intensity, or 1 hour and  
15 minutes a week of vigorous-intensity, aerobic physical activity, or an 
equivalent combination
● Moderate- or high-intensity muscle-strengthening activity that involves all 
major muscle groups on 2 or more days a week
See Table 16-3, Low Back Pain, p. 699, 
for serious causes of low back pain, 
including back pain with sciatica or 
neurogenic claudication, compression 
fracture, malignancy, ankylosing spon-
dylitis, and infection including osteo-
myelitis. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Studies show that psychosocial factors, 
now called “yellow flags,” strongly 
affect the course of low back 
pain.20,23,24 Ask about anxiety, depres-
sion, and work stress. Assess any mal-
adaptive coping, inappropriate fears or 
beliefs, or tendency to somatization. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
638 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Screening Recommendations. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force 
(USPSTF) gives a grade B recommendation supporting osteoporosis screening 
for women age ≥65 years and for younger women whose 10-year fracture risk 
equals or exceeds that of an average-risk 65-year-old white woman.34 The USP-
STF ﬁnds that evidence about risks and beneﬁts for men is insufﬁcient (I state-
ment) for recommending routine screening. However, the American College of 
Physicians recommends that clinicians periodically assess older men for osteo-
porosis risk and measure bone density for those at increased risk who are candi-
dates for drug therapy.37 Screen your patients for the many risk factors listed on 
the preceding page, and proceed to further assessment.
Measuring Bone Density. Bone strength depends on bone quality, bone 
density, and overall bone size. Because there is no direct measure of bone strength, 
bone mineral density (BMD)—which provides roughly 70% of bone strength—is 
used as a reasonable surrogate. Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scan-
ning of the lumbar spine and femoral neck is the optimal standard for measuring 
bone density, diagnosing osteoporosis, and guiding treatment decisions. DEXA 
measurement of bone density at the femoral neck is considered the best predictor 
of hip fracture.
The World Health Organization (WHO) scoring criteria for T scores and Z scores, 
measured in standard deviations (SDs), are used worldwide. A 1.0 SD decrease 
in BMD is associated with a twofold increased risk for a fragility fracture.
Risk Factors for Osteoporosis
● Postmenopausal status in women
● Age ≥50 years
● Prior fragility fracture
● Low body mass index
● Low dietary calcium
● Vitamin D deﬁciency
● Tobacco and excessive alcohol use
● Immobilization
● Inadequate physical activity
● Osteoporosis in a ﬁrst-degree relative, particularly with history of fragility 
fracture
● Clinical conditions such as thyrotoxicosis, celiac sprue, IBD, cirrhosis, chronic 
renal disease, organ transplantation, diabetes, HIV, hypogonadism, multiple 
myeloma, anorexia nervosa, and rheumatologic and autoimmune disorders
● Medications such as oral and high-dose inhaled corticosteroids, anticoagu-
lants (long-term use), aromatase inhibitors for breast cancer, methotrexate, 
selected antiseizure medications, immunosuppressive agents, proton-pump 
inhibitors (long-term use), and antigonadal therapy for prostate cancer
Bone mass peaks by age 30 years. 
Bone loss from age-related declines in 
estrogen and testosterone is initially 
rapid, then slows and becomes con-
tinuous. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
639
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Bone densitometry scoring also includes Z scores representing comparisons with 
age-matched controls. These measurements are useful for determining whether 
bone loss is caused by an underlying disease or condition.
Assessing Fracture Risk. The USPSTF recommends using WHO’s Frac-
ture Risk Assessment (FRAX) calculator. The FRAX calculator generates a 10-year 
osteoporotic fracture risk based on age; gender; weight; height; parental fracture 
history; use of glucocorticoids; presence of RA or conditions associated with 
secondary osteoporosis; tobacco and heavy alcohol use; and, when available, 
femoral neck BMD. The FRAX calculator also provides a 10-year hip fracture 
risk. The website for the FRAX Calculator for Assessing Fracture Risk for the 
United States is http://www.shef.ac.uk/FRAX/tool.jsp?country=9.
FRAX has been validated for African American, Hispanic, and Asian women in 
the United States and has calculators that are continent- and country-speciﬁc.
The USPSTF recommends using a 10-year osteoporotic fracture risk threshold of 
9.3% when considering bone density screening in women ages 50 to 64 years. 
Screening decisions for women in this age range should account for meno-
pausal status, clinical judgment, and patient preferences and values.
Treating Osteoporosis and Preventing Falls
Calcium and Vitamin D. Calcium, the most abundant mineral in the 
body, is essential for bone health, muscle function, nerve transmission, vascular 
function, and intracellular signaling and hormonal secretion.38 Less than 1% of 
total body calcium supports these metabolic functions; the remaining 99% is 
stored in teeth and bones. Serum calcium is tightly regulated. The body relies on 
bone tissue, and not dietary calcium, to maintain stable concentrations in blood, 
muscle, and intracellular ﬂuid. Bone is subject to constant remodeling from cal-
cium deposition and resorption; the balance between these processes varies dur-
ing the different stages of life.
Humans acquire vitamin D from sunlight, food, and dietary supplements.38 Vita-
min D from the skin and diet is metabolized in the liver to 25-hydroxyvitamin 
D (25[OH]D), the best determinant of vitamin D status. Serum 25[OH]D is then 
metabolized in the kidneys to 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25[OH]2D), the most 
active form of vitamin D. Without vitamin D, less than 25% of dietary calcium 
is absorbed. Parathyroid hormone (PTH) enhances renal tubular absorption of 
calcium and stimulates the conversion of 25[OH]D to 1,25[OH]2D. PTH also 
activates osteoblasts, which lay down new bone matrix, and indirectly stimulates 
osteoclasts, which dissolve bone matrix.
World Health Organization Bone Density Criteria
● Osteoporosis: T score < −2.5 (>2.5 SDs below the young adult mean)
● Osteopenia: T score between −1.0 and −2.5 (1.0 to 2.5 SDs below the young 
adult mean)
A previous low-impact fracture from 
standing height or lower is the great-
est risk factor for subsequent fracture. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
640 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
In 2010, the Institute of Medicine (IOM) issued dietary intake recommendations 
for calcium and vitamin D (see below).39 The IOM report concluded that serum 
25[OH]D levels of 20 ng/mL are sufﬁcient to maintain bone health and warned 
of potential adverse effects with levels above 50 ng/mL. The IOM reported insuf-
ﬁcient evidence to establish nutritional requirements based on studies of the ben-
eﬁts of vitamin D relating to cardiovascular disease, cancer, diabetes, infections, 
immune disorders, and other extraskeletal conditions. The USPSTF also cited 
insufﬁcient evidence for determining whether beneﬁts outweighed the harms of 
screening for vitamin D deﬁciency in asymptomatic adults (I statement).40
Based on review of randomized controlled trial data, the USPSTF also made 
recommendations about vitamin D and calcium supplementation for the primary 
prevention of fractures. They concluded that evidence was insufﬁcient to recom-
mend supplementation in premenopausal women or men (I statement). Although 
evidence for supplementation in postmenopausal women was similarly insufﬁ-
cient, the USPSTF did advise against daily supplements <400 International Units 
of vitamin D3 and <1,000 mg of calcium (grade D).41
Meta-analyses have suggested that calcium supplements for osteoporosis are associ-
ated with an increased risk for cardiovascular disease events, especially myocar-
dial infarctions.42 However, several subsequent expert reviews concluded that 
available evidence did not support a causal association between calcium supple-
ments and cardiovascular disease risk; authors advised that individuals with 
inadequate dietary calcium intake should use supplements to promote bone 
health.43,44 Combined calcium and vitamin D supplementation is associated with 
a slightly increased risk for kidney stones.41 No studies have reported harm asso-
ciated with calcium intake from dietary sources.
Recommended Dietary Intakes of Calcium and 
Vitamin D for Adults (Institute of Medicine 2010)
Age Group
Calcium (Elemental) mg/d
Vitamin D IU/d
19–50 yrs
1,000
600
51–70 yrs
 Women
1,200
600
 Men
1,000
600
71 and older
1,200
800
Source: Ross AC, Manson JE, Abrams SA, et al. The 2011 report on dietary reference intakes for cal-
cium and vitamin D from the Institute of Medicine: what clinicians need to know. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab. 2011;96:53.
There are two main forms of calcium supplements, calcium carbonate and cal-
cium citrate. Supplements contain variable amounts of elemental calcium.38 
Patients can read these amounts on the Supplement Facts panel. Calcium car-
bonate is less expensive and should be consumed with food. Calcium citrate is 
absorbed more easily in individuals with reduced levels of stomach acid and can 
be taken with or without food. Calcium absorption depends on the total amount 
consumed at one time—absorption diminishes at higher doses. Counsel patients 
to take doses of 500 mg at two separate times each day. Vitamin D supplements 
See Table 4-5, Nutrition Counseling: 
Sources of Nutrients, p. 143, for food 
sources of calcium and vitamin D. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
641
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
are available in two forms, D2 (ergocalciferol) and D3 (cholecalciferol); D3 
increases serum 25(OH)D levels more effectively than D2.45
Antiresorptive and Anabolic Agents. Antiresorptive agents inhibit 
osteoclast activity and slow bone remodeling, allowing better mineralization of 
bone matrix and stabilization of the trabecular microarchitecture. These agents 
include bisphosphonates, selective estrogen-receptor modulators (SERMs), cal-
citonin, and postmenopausal estrogen. Bisphosphonates are considered the ﬁrst-
line therapy for osteoporosis. Randomized placebo-controlled trials have shown 
that bisphosphonates, SERMs, estrogen, calcitonin, and PTH signiﬁcantly reduce 
risks for vertebral fractures in postmenopausal women; evidence is less conclu-
sive for nonvertebral fractures, and there are no trial data for treating men.46 
Estrogen therapy is now contraindicated due to associated risks of breast cancer 
and vascular thrombosis.47 Bisphosphonates have been linked to rare risks of 
osteonecrosis of the jaw and atypical femur fractures, and SERMs increase the 
risk for thromboembolic events.46
Anabolic agents such as PTH stimulate bone formation by acting primarily on 
osteoblasts but require subcutaneous administration and monitoring for hyper-
calcemia. PTH is reserved for patients with severe osteoporosis (T scores < −3.5 
or < −2.5 with a fragility fracture) or those who have failed or not tolerated other 
therapies.48
Preventing Falls. More than one in three adults over age 65 years fall 
each year. Falls are the leading cause of fatal and nonfatal injuries among older 
adults and account for over $20 billion in direct clinical costs.49,50 Falls can 
result in loss of independence in up to 30% of those suffering injuries that limit 
their mobility. One third of community-dwelling adults will remain in a nurs-
ing home for at least 1 year following a hip fracture. Risk factors for falls include 
increasing age, impaired gait and balance, postural hypotension, loss of 
strength, medication use, comorbid illness, depression, cognitive impairment, 
and visual deﬁcits.
The USPSTF gives a grade B recommendation for providing exercise or physi-
cal therapy and/or vitamin D supplementation to prevent falls among at-risk 
community-dwelling adults ages ≥65 years.51 Effective exercise interventions 
target balance, gait, and strength training. The USPSTF also recommends daily 
vitamin D supplementation of 600 to 800 International Units; it found insuf-
ﬁcient evidence for or against interventions such as vision correction, discon-
tinuing medications, education or counseling, and home hazard modiﬁcations. 
However, poor lighting, stairs, chairs at awkward heights, slippery or irregular 
surfaces, and ill-ﬁtting shoes are environmental hazards that are readily cor-
rected. Work with your patients and their families to modify such risks when-
ever possible, and request home health assessments to target needed home 
safety measures.
See Chapter 14, Female Genitalia,  
p. 582, for discussion of hormone 
replacement therapy. 
See also Chapter 20, Assessing Older 
Adults, for Further Assessment for 
Preventing Falls, pp. 987–989. 
Once injured, articular cartilage is 
replaced by less resilient fibrocarti-
lage, increasing risk of pain and OA. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
642 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
During the interview, the patient has shared his or her ability to carry out normal 
activities of daily living. Keep the patient’s baseline level of function in mind as 
you perform the musculoskeletal examination.
During the general survey, you have assessed the patient’s general appearance, 
body proportions, and ease of movement. Now visualize the underlying anatomy 
of the joints and recall pertinent elements of the history, for example, the mech-
anism of injury if there is trauma, or the time course of symptoms and limitations 
in function in arthritis.
Your examination should be systematic. Include inspection, palpation of bony 
structures and related joint and soft tissue structures, assessment of range of 
motion, and special maneuvers to test speciﬁc movements. Recall that the ana-
tomical shape of each joint determines its range of motion. There are two 
phases to range of motion: active (by the patient) and passive (by the examiner).
If patients have painful joints, move them gently, or let the patients demonstrate 
the movements themselves, showing you how they manage. For injured joints, 
consider an x-ray before attempting movement.
Examination of Speciﬁc Joints: 
Anatomy and Physiology and 
Techniques of Examination
Steps for Examining the Joints
1. Inspect for joint symmetry, alignment, bony deformities, and swelling
2. Inspect and palpate surrounding tissues for skin changes, nodules, muscle 
atrophy, tenderness
3. Assess range of motion and maneuvers to test joint function and stability 
and the integrity of ligaments, tendons, bursae, especially if pain or trauma
4. Assess any areas of inﬂammation, especially tenderness, swelling, warmth, 
redness
Acute involvement of only one joint 
suggests trauma, septic arthritis, or 
crystalline arthritis. RA is typically 
polyarticular and symmetrical.10,52–54 
Malalignment occurs in Dupuytren 
contracture (p. 704), bow-legs (genu 
varum) or knock-knees (genu valgum). 
Tips for Successful Examination of the 
Musculoskeletal System
● During inspection, look for symmetry of involvement. Is the change in joints 
symmetric on both sides of the body, or is the change only in one or two joints? 
Note any deformities or malalignment of bones or joints.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
643
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
The detail needed for examining joints varies widely. This section presents exam-
ination techniques for both comprehensive and targeted assessment of joint 
function. Patients with extensive or severe musculoskeletal problems will require 
more time.
Review the ﬂowchart showing the Approach to Musculoskeletal Complaints 
(Fig. 16-2, p. 627) to help organize your approach to the examination. Inspect 
and palpate any joints with signs of inﬂammation.
Look for subcutaneous nodules in RA 
or rheumatic fever; effusion in trauma; 
crepitus over inflamed joints in OA or 
over the inflamed tendon sheaths of 
tenosynovitis. 
Decreased range of motion is present 
in arthritis, joints with tissue inflam-
mation or surrounding fibrosis, or 
bony fixation (ankylosis). Anterior cru-
ciate ligament (ACL) laxity occurs in 
knee trauma; muscle atrophy and 
weakness is seen in RA. 
Tips for Successful Examination of the 
Musculoskeletal System (continued )
● Use inspection and palpation to assess the surrounding tissues, noting skin 
changes, subcutaneous nodules, and muscle atrophy. Note any crepitus, an 
audible or palpable crunching during movement of tendons or ligaments over 
bone or areas of cartilage loss. This may occur in joints without pain but is 
more signiﬁcant when associated with symptoms or signs.
● Test range of motion and maneuvers (described for each joint) to demon-
strate limitations in range of motion or joint instability from excess mobility of 
joint ligaments, called ligamentous laxity.
● Finally, test muscle strength to aid in the assessment of joint function (for 
these techniques, see Chapter 17, pp. 743–748).
See briefer examination techniques 
for patients without joint symptoms 
in Chapter 1, Overview: Physical 
Examination and History Taking,  
pp. 12–13, and Chapter 4, Beginning 
the Examination: General Survey, Vital 
Signs, and Pain, p. 122. 
Palpable bogginess or doughiness of 
the synovial membrane indicates 
synovitis, which is often accompanied 
by effusion. Palpable joint fluid is 
present in effusion, tenderness over 
the tendon sheaths in tendinitis.
Increased warmth is seen in arthritis, 
tendinitis, bursitis, and osteomyelitis. 
Diffuse tenderness and warmth over a 
thickened synovium suggest arthritis 
or infection; focal tenderness suggests 
injury and trauma. 
Redness over a tender joint suggests 
septic or crystalline arthritis, or possi-
bly RA. 
Assessing the Four Signs of Inﬂammation
● Swelling. Palpable swelling may involve: (1) the synovial membrane, which can 
feel boggy or doughy; (2) eﬀusion from excess synovial ﬂuid within the joint 
space; or (3) soft tissue structures, such as bursae, tendons, and tendon 
sheaths.
● Warmth. Use the backs of your ﬁngers to compare the involved joint with  
its unaﬀected contralateral joint, or with nearby tissues if both joints are 
involved.
● Redness. Redness of the overlying skin is the least common sign of inﬂamma-
tion near the joints and is usually seen in more superﬁcial joints like ﬁngers, 
toes, and knees.
● Pain or tenderness. Try to identify the speciﬁc anatomic structure that is  
tender.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
644 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Temporomandibular Joint
Overview, Bony Structures, 
and Joints. The temporo-
mandibular joint (TMJ) is the 
most active joint in the body, 
opening and closing up to 
2,000 times a day (Figs. 16-10 
and 16-11). It is formed by the 
fossa and articular tubercle of 
the temporal bone and the con-
dyle of the mandible. It lies 
midway between the external 
acoustic meatus and the zygo-
matic arch.
A ﬁbrocartilaginous disc cush-
ions the action of the condyle of 
the mandible against the syno-
vial membrane and capsule of 
the articulating surfaces of the 
temporal bone. Therefore, it is a 
condylar synovial joint.
Muscle Groups and Additional Structures. The principal muscles 
opening the mouth are the external pterygoids (Fig. 16-12). Closing the mouth are 
the muscles innervated by cranial 
nerve V, the trigeminal nerve—
the masseter, the temporalis, and 
the internal pterygoids (see 
p. 716).
F I G U R E  1 6 - 1 0 .  Temporomandibular joint.
Zygomatic arch
Temporal bone
External acoustic meatus
Articular disc
Condyle of mandible
Articular tubercle
F I G U R E  1 6 - 1 1 .  Temporomandibular joint, inset.
Temporalis (cut)
Articular disc of
temporomandibular joint
External pterygoid
Internal pterygoid
Masseter (cut)
F I G U R E  1 6 - 1 2 .  TMJ muscles.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
645
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Techniques of Examination
Inspection and Palpation. Inspect the face for symmetry. Inspect the 
TMJ for swelling or redness. Swelling may appear as a rounded bulge approxi-
mately 0.5 cm anterior to the external auditory meatus.
To locate and palpate the joint, place 
the tips of your index ﬁngers just in 
front of the tragus of each ear and ask 
the patient to open his or her mouth 
(Fig. 16-13). The ﬁngertips should 
drop into the joint spaces as the mouth 
opens. Check for smooth range of 
motion; note any swelling or tender-
ness. Snapping or clicking may be felt 
or heard in normal people.
Palpate the muscles of mastication:
■ The masseters, externally at the angle of the mandible
■ The temporal muscles, externally during clenching and relaxation of the jaw
■ The pterygoid muscles, internally between the tonsillar pillars at the mandible
Range of Motion and Maneuvers. The TMJ has glide and hinge motions 
in its upper and lower portions, respectively. Grinding or chewing consists pri-
marily of gliding movements in the upper compartments.
Range of motion is threefold: ask the patient to demonstrate opening and closing, 
protrusion and retraction (by jutting the mandible forward), and lateral, or side-
to-side, motion. Normally, as the mouth is opened wide, three ﬁngers can be 
inserted between the incisors. During normal protrusion of the jaw, the bottom 
teeth can be placed in front of the upper teeth.
The Shoulder
Overview. The glenohumeral joint of the shoulder is distinguished by wide-
ranging movement in all directions. This joint is largely uninhibited by bony 
structures. The humeral head contacts less than one third of the surface area of 
the glenoid fossa and essentially dangles from the scapula, attached by the joint 
Facial asymmetry is seen in TMJ disor-
ders, a category of orofacial pain with 
multifactorial etiologies; typically, 
there is unilateral chronic pain with 
chewing, jaw clenching, or teeth grind-
ing, often associated with stress and 
accompanied by headache.55,56 Pain 
with chewing also occurs in trigeminal 
neuralgia and temporal arteritis. 
F I G U R E  1 6 - 1 3 .  Palpate the TMJ.
Swelling, tenderness, and decreased 
range of motion signal TMJ inflamma-
tion or arthritis. 
TMJ dislocation can be caused by 
trauma. 
Palpable crepitus or clicking is pres-
ent in poor occlusion, meniscus injury, 
or synovial swelling from trauma. 
In TMJ syndrome, there is pain and 
tenderness with palpation. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
646 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
capsule, the intra-articular capsular ligaments, the glenoid labrum, and a 
meshwork of muscles and tendons.
The shoulder derives its mobility from a complex interconnected structure of 
three joints, three large bones, and three principal muscle groups, often referred 
to as the shoulder girdle. These structures are viewed as dynamic stabilizers, which 
are capable of movement, or static stabilizers, which are incapable of movement.
■ Dynamic stabilizers: These consist of the SITS muscles of the rotator cuff (Supra-
spinatus, Infraspinatus, Teres minor, and Subscapularis), which move the 
humerus and compress and stabilize the humeral head within the glenoid 
cavity.
■ Static stabilizers: These are the bony structures of the shoulder girdle, the 
labrum, the articular capsule, and the glenohumeral ligaments. The labrum 
is a ﬁbrocartilaginous ring that surrounds the glenoid and deepens its socket, 
providing greater stability to the humeral head. The joint capsule is strength-
ened by tendons of the rotator cuff and glenohumeral ligaments, adding to 
joint stability.
Bony Structures. The bony structures of the shoulder include the 
humerus, the clavicle, and the scapula (Fig. 16-14). The scapula is anchored to 
the axial skeleton only by the sternoclavicular joint and inserting muscles, often 
called the scapulothoracic articulation because it is not a true joint.
 Acromioclavicular joint
Acromion
Greater tubercle
Bicipital groove
Lesser tubercle
Glenoid fossa
Coracoid process
Clavicle
Sternoclavicular joint
Manubrium
Scapula
(anterior surface)
Glenohumeral 
joint
Humerus
F I G U R E  1 6 - 1 4 .  Bony anatomy of the shoulder.
Identify the manubrium, the sternoclavicular joint, and the clavicle. Also identify 
the tip of the acromion, the greater tubercle of the humerus, and the coracoid process, 
which are important landmarks of shoulder anatomy.
This muscular meshwork can make it 
difficult to distinguish shoulder from 
neck disorders. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
647
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Joints. Three different joints articulate at the shoulder:
■ The glenohumeral joint. In this joint, the head of the humerus articulates with 
the shallow glenoid fossa of the scapula. This joint is deeply situated and 
normally not palpable. It is a ball-and-socket joint, allowing the arm its wide 
arc of movement—ﬂexion, extension, abduction (movement away from the 
trunk), adduction (movement toward the trunk), rotation, and circumduction.
■ The sternoclavicular joint. The convex medial end of the clavicle articulates 
with the concave hollow in the upper sternum.
■ The acromioclavicular joint. The lateral end of the clavicle articulates with the 
acromion process of the scapula.
Muscle Groups. Three groups of muscles attach at the shoulder:
The Scapulohumeral Group. This group extends from the scapula to the 
humerus and includes the muscles inserting directly on the humerus, namely the 
SITS muscles of the rotator cuff:
■ Supraspinatus—runs above the glenohumeral joint; inserts on the greater 
tubercle
■ Infraspinatus and teres minor—cross the glenohumeral joint posteriorly; insert 
on the greater tubercle
■ Subscapularis (not illustrated)—originates on the anterior surface of the 
scapula and crosses the joint anteriorly; inserts on the lesser tubercle
The 
scapulohumeral 
group rotates the shoul-
der laterally (the rotator 
cuff ) and depresses and 
rotates the head of the 
humerus (Fig. 16-15). 
See pp. 653–654 for dis-
cussion of rotator cuff 
injuries.
Posterior view
Axioscapular group
Scapulohumeral
group
Levator scapulae
Rhomboids
Trapezius
Supraspinatus
Infraspinatus
Deltoid
Teres 
minor
Latissimus
dorsi
F I G U R E  1 6 - 1 5 .  Scapulohumeral and axioscapular 
groups.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
648 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
The Axioscapular Group. This group attaches the scapula to the trunk 
and includes the trapezius, rhomboids, serratus anterior, and levator scapulae 
(Fig. 16-15). These muscles rotate the scapula and pull the shoulder posteriorly.
The Axiohumeral Group. This group attaches 
the humerus to the trunk and includes the pectoralis 
major and minor and the latissimus dorsi (Fig. 16-16). 
These muscles rotate the shoulder internally.
The biceps and triceps, which connect the scapula to 
the bones of the forearm, are also involved in shoulder 
movement, especially forward ﬂexion (biceps) and 
extension (triceps).
Additional Structures. Also important to 
shoulder movement are the articular capsule and bursae. 
Surrounding the glenohumeral joint is a ﬁbrous 
articular capsule formed by the tendon insertions of the 
rotator cuff and other capsular structures. The loose ﬁt 
of the capsule allows the shoulder bones to separate, 
and contributes to the shoulder’s wide range of 
movement. The capsule is lined by a synovial membrane 
with two outpouchings—the subscapular bursa and the 
synovial sheath of the tendon of the long head of the biceps.
To locate the biceps tendon, rotate your arm externally and 
ﬁnd the tendinous cord that runs just medial to the greater 
tubercle (Fig. 16-17). Roll it under your ﬁngers. This is the 
tendon of the long head of the biceps. It runs in the bicipi-
tal groove between the greater and lesser tubercles.
The principal bursa of the shoulder is the subacromial 
bursa, positioned between the acromion and the head of 
the humerus and overlying the supraspinatus tendon. 
Abduction of the shoulder compresses this bursa. Nor-
mally, the supraspinatus tendon and the subacromial 
bursa are not palpable. However, if the bursal surfaces 
are inﬂamed (subacromial bursitis), there may be tender-
ness just below the tip of the acromion, pain with 
abduction and rotation, and loss of smooth movement.
Pectoralis
minor
Pectoralis
major
Latissimus
dorsi
Anterior view
F I G U R E  1 6 - 1 6 .  Axiohumeral group.
Acromion
Coracoid process
Supraspinatus
Supraspinatus tendon
Subscapularis muscle
Subacromial bursa
Long head of
biceps tendon
F I G U R E  1 6 - 1 7 .  Anterior view of the shoulder.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
649
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Techniques of Examination
Inspection. Inspect the shoulder and shoulder girdle anteriorly, then the 
scapulae and related muscles posteriorly.
Note any swelling, deformity, muscle atrophy or fasciculations (ﬁne tremors of the 
muscles), or abnormal positioning.
Look for swelling of the joint capsule anteriorly or a bulge in the subacromial 
bursa under the deltoid muscle. Survey the entire upper extremity for color 
change, skin alteration, or unusual bony contours.
Palpation. Begin by palpating the bony contours and structures of the 
shoulder, then palpate any area of pain.
■ Beginning medially, at the sternoclavicular joint, trace the clavicle laterally 
with your ﬁngers.
■ From behind, follow the bony spine 
of the scapula laterally and upward 
until it becomes the acromion (A), the 
summit of the shoulder (Fig. 16-18). 
Its upper surface is rough and slightly 
convex. Identify the anterior tip of the 
acromion.
■ With your index ﬁnger on top of the acromion, just behind its tip, press 
medially with your thumb to ﬁnd the slightly elevated ridge that marks the 
distal end of the clavicle at the acromioclavicular joint (shown by the arrow). 
Move your thumb medially and down a short step to the next bony promi-
nence, the coracoid process (B) of the scapula.
■ With your thumb on the coracoid process, allow your ﬁngers to fall on and 
grasp the lateral aspect of the humerus to palpate the greater tubercle (C), 
where the SITS muscles insert.
Scoliosis may cause elevation of one 
shoulder. With anterior dislocation  
of the shoulder, the rounded lateral 
aspect of the shoulder appears 
flattened.57 
Atrophy of the supraspinatus and 
infraspinatus with increased 
prominence of scapular spine can 
appear within 2 to 3 weeks of a rotator 
cuff tear; infraspinatus atrophy has a 
positive likelihood ratio (LR) of 2 for 
rotator cuff disease.58 
Swelling from synovial fluid accumu-
lation is rare and must be significant 
before the glenohumeral joint cap-
sule appears distended. Swelling in 
the acromioclavicular joint is easier to 
detect as the joint is more superficial. 
See Table 16-4, Painful Shoulders,  
pp. 700–701. 
A
C
B
F I G U R E  1 6 - 1 8 .  Bony landmarks 
of the shoulder.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
650 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
■ Next, to palpate the biceps tendon in the intertubercular bicipital groove, keep 
your thumb on the coracoid process and your ﬁngers on the lateral aspect of 
the humerus (Fig. 16-19). Remove 
your index ﬁnger and place it halfway 
between the coracoid process and the 
greater tubercle on the anterior sur-
face of the arm. As you check for ten-
don tenderness, rolling the tendon 
under the ﬁngertips may be helpful. 
You can also rotate the glenohumeral 
joint externally, locate the muscle dis-
tally near the elbow, and track the 
muscle and its tendon proximally 
into the intertubercular groove.
■ To examine the subacromial and subdeltoid bursae and the SITS muscles, ﬁrst 
passively extend the humerus by lifting the elbow posteriorly, which rotates 
these structures so that they are anterior to the acromion. Palpate carefully 
over the subacromial and subdeltoid bursae (Figs. 16-20 and 16-21). The 
underlying palpable SITS muscles are:
F I G U R E  1 6 - 1 9 .  Palpate the 
bicipital groove and tendon.
See also Bicipital Tendinitis in Table 16-4, 
Painful Shoulders, pp. 700–701. 
F I G U R E  1 6 - 2 0 .  Extend the 
humerus posteriorly.
Subacromial bursa
Rotator cuff
F I G U R E  1 6 - 2 1 .  Palpate the 
subacromial bursa.
Localized tenderness points to sub-
acromial or subdeltoid bursitis, degen-
erative changes, or calcific deposits in 
the rotator cuff. Swelling suggests a 
bursal tear that communicates with 
the articular cavity. 
■ Supraspinatus—directly under the acromion
■ Infraspinatus—posterior to supraspinatus
■ Teres minor—posterior and inferior to the supraspinatus
■ Subscapularis—inserts anteriorly and is not palpable
■ The ﬁbrous articular capsule and the broad ﬂat tendons of the rotator cuff are 
so closely associated that they must be examined simultaneously. Swelling in 
the capsule and synovial membrane is often best detected by looking down 
on the shoulder from above. Palpate the capsule and synovial membrane 
beneath the anterior and posterior acromion to check for injury or arthritis.
Tenderness over the SITS muscle 
insertions and inability to abduct the 
arm above shoulder level occurs in 
sprains, tears, and tendon rupture of 
the rotator cuff, most commonly the 
supraspinatus. See Table 16-4, Painful 
Shoulders, pp. 700–701. 
Tenderness and effusion suggest gleno-
humeral joint synovitis. If the margins 
of the capsule and synovial membrane 
are palpable, a moderate to large effu-
sion is present; minimal synovitis can-
not be detected on palpation. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
651
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Range of Motion and Maneuvers
Range of Motion. The six motions of the shoulder girdle are flexion, exten-
sion, abduction, adduction, and internal and external rotation.
Standing in front of the patient, watch for smooth ﬂuid movement as the patient 
performs the motions listed in the table below. Learn the speciﬁc muscles respon-
sible for each motion. Note the clear simple instructions that prompt the 
requested patient response. Test muscle strength.
Restricted range of motion occurs in 
bursitis, capsulitis, rotator cuff tears or 
sprains, and tendinitis. 
Shoulder Girdle Range of Motion
Flexion
180º
90º
0º
Principal Muscles Aﬀecting Movement
Anterior deltoid, pectoralis major (clavicu-
lar head), coracobrachialis, biceps brachii
Patient Instructions
“Raise your arms in front of you and over-
head.”
Extension
180º
60º
0º
Principal Muscles Aﬀecting Movement
Latissimus dorsi, teres major, posterior 
deltoid, triceps brachii (long head)
Patient Instructions
“Raise your arms behind you.”
Abduction
Principal Muscles Aﬀecting Movement
Supraspinatus, middle deltoid, serratus 
anterior (via upward rotation of the 
scapula)
Patient Instructions
“Raise your arms out to the side and over-
head.”
Adduction
180º
90º
0º
Principal Muscles Aﬀecting Movement
Pectoralis major, coracobrachialis, latissi-
mus dorsi, teres major, subscapularis
Patient Instructions
“Cross your arm in front of your body.”
(continued )
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Note that to test pure glenohumeral 
motion, the patient should raise the 
arms to shoulder level at 90°, with 
palms facing down. To test scapulo-
thoracic motion, the patient should 
turn the palms up and raise the arms 
an additional 60°. The final 30° tests 
combined glenohumeral and scapulo-
thoracic motion.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
652 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Shoulder Girdle Range of Motion (continued )
Internal Rotation
Principal Muscles Aﬀecting Movement
Subscapularis, anterior deltoid, pectoralis 
major, teres major, latissimus dorsi
Patient Instructions
“Place one hand behind your back and 
touch your shoulder blade.”
Identify the highest midline spinous pro-
cess the patient is able to reach.
External Rotation
    
90º
Principal Muscles Aﬀecting Movement
Infraspinatus, teres minor, posterior 
deltoid
Patient Instructions
“Raise your arm to shoulder level; bend 
your elbow and rotate your forearm 
toward the ceiling.” OR
“Place one hand behind your neck or head 
as if you are brushing your hair.”
Maneuvers. The examination of the shoulder often requires evaluation 
of specific motions and structures. There are more than 150 different maneu-
vers for testing shoulder function, but few are well studied. Common recom-
mended maneuvers based on available evidence and analyses from three recent 
reviews58–60 are described on pp. 653–655. Although performing these maneu-
vers takes supervision and practice, they increase the likelihood of identifying 
shoulder pathology.
Rotator cuff disorders are the most common cause of shoulder pain in primary 
care. Compression of the rotator cuff muscles and tendons between the head of 
the humerus and the acromion causes “impingement signs” or pain during 
shoulder movement. Five maneuvers that have the best LRs and the narrowest 
conﬁdence intervals are currently recommended:58–60 one pain provocation 
test, three strength tests, and one composite test. In composite tests, the 
patient experiences either pain or weakness during the maneuver. Most of 
the data on these tests come from specialty practice settings but remain useful 
for general care.
■ Pain provocation test: painful arc test (subacromial bursa and rotator cuff). This test 
has a positive LR of 3.7, which is the highest of all the rotator cuff maneuvers. 
It also has the best negative LR, 0.36, for ruling out rotator cuff disorders. Other 
common pain provocation tests are the Neer and Hawkins tests, also included 
in the box on next page, although their positive LRs are <2, so they are less 
diagnostic.
An age of ≥60 years and a positive 
drop-arm test are the findings most 
likely to identify a degenerative rota-
tor cuff tear, with positive LRs of 3.2 
and 2.9 to 5.0, respectively. The com-
bined findings of supraspinatus weak-
ness, infraspinatus weakness, and a 
positive impingement sign increase 
the LR of a tear to 48.0; when all three 
are absent, the LR falls to 0.02, virtually 
ruling out the diagnosis.57,61 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
653
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
■ Strength tests: internal rotation lag test (subscapularis), external rotation lag test 
(supraspinatus and infraspinatus), and drop arm test (supraspinatus). These tests 
have positive LRs of 7.2, 5.6, and 3.3, respectively.
■ Composite test: external rotation resistance test (infraspinatus). This test has 
a positive LR of 2.6. Another common composite test is the empty can 
test.
Maneuvers for Examining the Shoulder
Structure57–60
Maneuver/ 
Type of Test
Acromioclavicular 
Joint
Crossover or crossed body 
adduction test. Adduct 
the patient’s arm 
across the chest.
Overall Shoulder 
Rotation
Apley scratch test. Ask the patient to touch the opposite 
scapula using the two motions shown below.
Tests abduction and 
external rotation.
Tests adduction and internal 
rotation.
Rotator Cuﬀ
Pain Provocation 
Tests
Painful arc test. Fully 
adduct the patient’s 
arm from 0° to 180°.
180º
90º
0º
60º
120º
No pain
No pain
Subacromial 
pain
Subacromial 
pain
Pain with adduction is a positive test, 
with a positive LR of 3.7. Acromiocla-
vicular joint tenderness and compres-
sion tenderness have low LRs so are 
not diagnostically helpful.57
Pain during these maneuvers 
suggests a rotator cuff disorder or 
adhesive capsulitis.
Shoulder pain from 60° to 120° is  
a positive test for a subacromial 
impingement/rotator cuff tendinitis 
disorder, with a positive LR 3.7 and a 
helpful negative LR of 0.36. 
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
654 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Maneuvers for Examining the Shoulder (continued )
Structure57–60
Maneuver/ 
Type of Test
Neer impingement sign. 
Press on the scapula to 
prevent scapular 
motion with one hand, 
and raise the patient’s 
arm with the other. 
This compresses the 
greater tuberosity of 
the humerus against 
the acromion.
Hawkins impingement 
sign. Flex the patient’s 
shoulder and elbow to 
90° with the palm fac-
ing down. Then, with 
one hand on the fore-
arm and one on the 
arm, rotate the arm 
internally. This com-
presses the greater 
tuberosity against the 
supraspinatus tendon 
and coracoacromial 
ligament.
Strength Tests
External rotation lag test. 
With the patient’s arm 
ﬂexed to 90° with 
palm up, rotate the 
arm into full external 
rotation.
90º
flexion
20º
abduction
Pain during this maneuver is a positive 
test for a subacromial impingement/
rotator cuff tendinitis disorder, with a 
positive LR ∼1.0 to 1.6.
Pain during this maneuver is a positive 
test for supraspinatus impingement/
rotator cuff tendinitis, with a positive 
LR of ∼1.5. When both the Hawkins and 
Neer signs are absent, the negative LR 
is helpful at 0.1.
Inability of the patient to maintain 
external rotation is a positive test for 
supraspinatus and infraspinatus dis-
orders, with a positive LR of 7.2.
(continued )
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
655
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Maneuvers for Examining the Shoulder (continued )
Structure57–60
Maneuver/ 
Type of Test
Internal rotation lag test. 
Ask the patient to 
place the dorsum of 
the hand on the low 
back with the elbow 
ﬂexed to 90°. Then you 
lift the hand oﬀ the 
back, which further 
internally rotates the 
shoulder. Ask the 
patient to keep the 
hand in this position.
90º
flexion
Drop-arm test. Ask the 
patient to fully abduct 
the arm to shoulder 
level, up to 90°, and 
lower it slowly. Note 
that abduction above 
shoulder level, from 
90° to 120°, reﬂects 
action of the deltoid 
muscle.
Composite tests
External rotation resis-
tance test. Ask the 
patient to adduct and 
ﬂex the arm to 90°, 
with the thumbs 
turned up. Stabilize 
the elbow with one 
hand and apply pres-
sure proximal to the 
patient’s wrist as the 
patient presses the 
wrist outward in exter-
nal rotation.
Empty can test. Elevate 
the arms to 90° and 
internally rotate the 
arms with the thumbs 
pointing down, as if 
emptying a can. Ask 
the patient to resist as 
you place downward 
pressure on the arms.
Inability of the patient to hold the 
hand in this position is positive test for 
a subscapularis disorder, with a posi-
tive LR of 5.6 to 6.2 and an excellent 
negative LR of 0.04.
Weakness during this maneuver is a 
positive test for a supraspinatus rota-
tor cuff tear or bicipital tendinitis, 
with a positive LR of 3.3.
Pain or weakness during this maneu-
ver is a positive test for an infraspina-
tus disorder, with a positive LR of 2.6 
and negative LR of 0.49. Limited 
external rotation points to glenohu-
meral disease or adhesive capsulitis.
Inability of the patient to hold the arm 
fully abducted at shoulder level or 
control lowering the arm is a positive 
test for a suprasinatus rotator cuff 
tear, with a positive LR of 1.3. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
656 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
The Elbow
Overview, Bony Structures, and 
Joints. The elbow helps position the hand in 
space and stabilizes the lever action of the forearm. 
The elbow joint is formed by the humerus and the 
two bones of the forearm, the radius and the ulna 
(Fig. 16-22). Identify the medial and lateral 
epicondyles of the humerus and the olecranon 
process of the ulna.
These bones have three articulations: the humer-
oulnar joint, the radiohumeral joint, and the 
radioulnar joint. All three share a large common 
articular cavity and an extensive synovial lining.
Muscle 
Groups 
and 
Additional 
Structures. Muscles traversing the elbow 
include the biceps and brachioradialis (ﬂexion), 
the brachialis, the triceps (extension), the pronator 
teres (pronation), and the supinator (supination).
Note the location of the olecranon bursa between 
the olecranon process and the skin (Fig. 16-23). 
The bursa is not normally palpable but swells 
and becomes tender when inﬂamed. The ulnar 
nerve runs posteriorly in the ulnar groove 
between the medial epicondyle and the olecra-
non process. The radial nerve is adjacent to the 
lateral epicondyle. On the ventral forearm, the 
median nerve is just medial to the brachial artery 
in the antecubital fossa.
Techniques of Examination
Inspection. Support the patient’s forearm with your opposite hand so 
that the elbow is ﬂexed to about 70°. Identify the medial and lateral epicon-
dyles and the olecranon process of the ulna. Inspect the contours of the elbow, 
including the extensor surface of the ulna and the olecranon process. Note any 
nodules or swelling.
Humerus
Medial epicondyle
Humeroulnar joint
Radioulnar joint
Pronator teres
Ulna
Radius
Brachioradialis
Supinator
Radiohumeral 
joint
Lateral epicondyle
F I G U R E  1 6 - 2 2 .  Left anterior elbow.
Synovial 
membrane
(distended)
Radial nerve
Ulnar nerve
Olecranon process
Medial epicondyle
Olecranon bursa
F I G U R E  1 6 - 2 3 .  Left posterior elbow.
See Table 16-5, Swollen or Tender 
Elbows, p. 702. 
Swelling over the olecranon process is 
suspicious for olecranon bursitis (see 
p. 702); inflammation or synovial fluid 
suggests arthritis. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
657
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Palpation. Palpate the olecranon 
process and press over the epicondyles for 
tenderness (Fig. 16-24).
Palpate the grooves between the epicon-
dyles and the olecranon process, where the 
synovium is most easily examined. Nor-
mally the synovium and olecranon bursae 
are not palpable.
The sensitive ulnar nerve can be palpated 
posteriorly between the olecranon process 
and the medial epicondyle.
Note any displacement of the olecranon process (Figs. 16-25 and 16-26).
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
F I G U R E  1 6 - 2 4 .  Palpate the 
epicondyles.
Tenderness distal to the epicondyle is 
common in lateral epicondylitis (tennis 
elbow) and less common in medial 
epicondylitis (pitcher’s or golfer’s 
elbow). 
F I G U R E  1 6 - 2 5 .  Posterior 
dislocation of the elbow.
F I G U R E  1 6 - 2 6 .  Supracondylar 
fracture of the elbow.
The olecranon is displaced posteriorly 
in posterior dislocation of the elbow 
and supracondylar fracture. 
Range of Motion and Maneuvers. Range of motion includes ﬂexion 
and extension at the elbow and pronation and supination of the forearm, which 
also move the wrist and hand (Fig. 16-27). In the box below, note the speciﬁc 
muscles responsible for each motion and the instructions to the patient.
o°
Supination
Pronation
F I G U R E  1 6 - 2 7 .  Elbow supination 
and pronation.
After injury, preservation of active 
range of motion and full elbow exten-
sion makes fracture highly unlikely. Full 
elbow extension has a sensitivity of 
84% to >98% and specificity of 48% to 
>97% for absence of fracture.62,63 Ten-
derness over the radial head, olecranon, 
or medial epicondyle and bruising, plus 
absent elbow extension, may improve 
these test characteristics.64 Full elbow 
extension also makes intra-articular 
effusion or hemarthrosis unlikely. 
Elbow Range of Motion
Elbow 
Movement
Primary Muscles 
Affecting Movement
Patient Instructions
Flexion
Biceps brachii, brachialis, 
brachioradialis
“Bend your elbow.”
Extension
Triceps brachii, anconeus
“Straighten your elbow.”
Supination
Biceps brachii, supinator
“Turn your palms up, as if 
carrying a bowl of soup.”
Pronation
Pronator teres, pronator 
quadratus
“Turn your palms down.”
The Wrist and Hands
Overview. The wrist and hands form a complex unit of small highly active 
joints used almost continuously during waking hours. There is little protection 
from overlying soft tissue, increasing vulnerability to trauma and disability.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
658 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Bony Structures. The wrist includes 
the distal radius and ulna and eight small 
carpal bones (Fig. 16-28). At the wrist, 
identify the bony tips of the radius and the 
ulna.
Identify the carpal bones distal to the wrist 
joint, each of the ﬁve metacarpals, and the 
proximal, middle, and distal phalanges. 
Note that the thumb has only two phalan-
ges.
Joints. The numerous joints of the 
wrist and hand make the hands unusually 
dextrous.
■ Wrist joints. The wrist joints include the 
radiocarpal or wrist joint, the distal 
radioulnar joint, and the intercarpal 
joints (Fig. 16-29). The joint capsule, 
articular disc, and synovial membrane 
of the wrist join the radius to the ulna 
and to the proximal carpal bones. On 
the dorsum of the wrist, locate the 
groove of the radiocarpal joint. This 
joint provides most of the ﬂexion and 
extension at the wrist because the ulna 
does not articulate directly with the 
carpal bones.
■ Hand joints. The joints of the hand in-
clude the metacarpophalangeal joints 
(MCPs), the proximal interphalangeal 
joints (PIPs), and the distal interphalan-
geal joints (DIPs). Flex the hand and 
ﬁnd the groove marking the MCP joint 
of each ﬁnger (Fig. 16-30). It is distal 
to the knuckle and is best felt on either 
side of the extensor tendon.
Distal
interphalangeal
joint (DIP)
Proximal
interphalangeal
joint (PIP)
Metacarpophalangeal
joint (MCP)
Trapezoid
Trapezium
Scaphoid
Radius
Ulna
Lunate
Triquetrum
Hamate
Capitate
Phalanges
Metacarpal
Carpal
F I G U R E  1 6 - 2 8 .  Bones of the wrist and hand.
Radiocarpal
joint
Intercarpal
joints
Distal
radioulnar
joint
F I G U R E  1 6 - 2 9 .  Joints of the wrist.
Metacarpo-
phalangeal
joint
F I G U R E  1 6 - 3 0 .  Metacarpophalangeal joint.
Degenerative changes at the first car-
pometacarpal joint of the thumb are 
more common in women. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
659
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Muscle Groups. Wrist ﬂexion arises from the two carpal muscles, located 
on the radial and ulnar surfaces. Two radial and one ulnar muscle provide wrist 
extension. Supination and pronation are powered by muscle contraction in the 
forearm.
The thumb is powered by three muscles that form the thenar eminence and 
provide ﬂexion, abduction, and opposition. The muscles of extension are at the 
base of the thumb along the radial margin. Movement in the digits depends on 
action of the ﬂexor and extensor tendons of muscles in the forearm and wrist.
The intrinsic muscles of the hand attaching to the metacarpal bones are involved 
in ﬂexion (lumbricals), abduction (dorsal interossei), and adduction (palmar inter-
ossei) of the ﬁngers.
Additional Structures. Soft tissue structures, especially tendons and 
tendon sheaths, are especially important to movement of the wrist and hand. 
Six extensor tendons and two ﬂexor tendons pass across the wrist and hand to 
insert on the ﬁngers. Through much of their course these tendons travel in 
tunnel-like sheaths, generally palpable only when swollen or inﬂamed.
Be familiar with the structures of the 
carpal tunnel, a channel beneath the 
palmar surface of the wrist and prox-
imal hand (Fig. 16-31). The channel 
contains the sheath and ﬂexor ten-
dons of the forearm muscles and the 
median nerve.
Holding the tendons and tendon 
sheath in place is a transverse liga-
ment, the ﬂexor retinaculum. The 
median nerve lies between the ﬂexor 
retinaculum and the tendon sheath. 
The median nerve provides sensa-
tion to the palm and the palmar sur-
face of most of the thumb, the second 
and third digits, and half of the 
fourth digit. It also innervates the 
thumb muscles of ﬂexion, abduc-
tion, and opposition.
Techniques of Examination
Inspection. Inspect the position of the hands in motion for smooth natu-
ral movement. When the ﬁngers are relaxed they should be slightly ﬂexed; the 
ﬁngernail edges should be in parallel.
Flexor retinaculum
Carpal tunnel
Median nerve
F I G U R E  1 6 - 3 1 .  The carpal tunnel.
Guarded movement suggests injury. 
Flexor tendon damage causes abnor-
mal finger alignment. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
660 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Inspect the palmar and dorsal surfaces of the wrist and hand carefully for swell-
ing over the joints or signs of trauma.
Note any deformities of the wrist, hand, or ﬁnger bones, as well as any angula-
tion.
Observe the contours of the palm, namely the thenar and hypothenar eminences.
Note any thickening of the ﬂexor tendons or ﬂexion contractures in the ﬁngers.
Palpation. At the wrist, palpate 
the distal radius and ulna on the lat-
eral and medial surfaces (Fig. 16-32). 
Palpate the groove of each wrist joint 
with your thumbs on the dorsum of 
the wrist, your ﬁngers beneath it. Note 
any swelling, bogginess, or tenderness.
Diffuse swelling is common in arthritis or 
infection; local swelling suggests a gan-
glion. Laceration, puncture, injection 
marks, burn, or erythema result from 
trauma. See Table 16-6, Arthritis in the 
Hands, p. 703, and Table 16-7, Swellings 
and Deformities of the Hands, p. 704. 
Heberden nodes (DIP joints) and 
Bouchard nodes (PIP joints) are com-
mon findings in OA. In RA, inspect for 
symmetric deformity in the PIP, MCP, 
and wrist joints; later, there is MCP 
subluxation and ulnar deviation. 
Thenar atrophy occurs in median 
nerve compression from carpal tunnel 
syndrome (sensitivity <50%; specificity 
>82% to 99%)65; in ulnar nerve com-
pression, there is hypothenar atrophy. 
Dupuytren flexion contractures in the 
third, ring, and fifth fingers, arise from 
thickening of the palmar fascia (see  
p. 704). Trigger digits are caused by 
stenosing tenosynovitis.66 
F I G U R E  1 6 - 3 2 .  Palpate the wrist 
joint.
Tenderness over the distal radius after 
a fall is suspicious for a Colles fracture. 
Bony step-offs also suggest fracture. 
In RA, there is persisting bilateral 
swelling and/or tenderness. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
661
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Palpate the radial styloid bone and the 
anatomic snuffbox, a hollowed depression 
just distal to the radial styloid process 
formed by the abductor and extensor 
muscles of the thumb (Fig. 16-33). The 
“snuffbox” is more visible with lateral 
extension of the thumb away from the 
hand (abduction).
Palpate the eight carpal bones lying distal 
to the wrist joint, and then each of the 
ﬁve metacarpals and the proximal, mid-
dle, and distal phalanges (Fig. 16-34).
Palpate any other area where you sus-
pect an abnormality.
Compress the MCP joints by squeez-
ing the hand from each side between 
the thumb and ﬁngers. Alternatively, 
use your thumb to palpate each MCP 
joint just distal to and on each side of 
the extensor tendons as your index ﬁn-
ger feels the head of the metacarpal in 
the palm. Note any swelling, bogginess, or tenderness.
Now examine the ﬁngers and thumb. Palpate the medial and lateral aspects of 
each PIP joint between your thumb and index ﬁnger, again checking for swelling, 
bogginess, bony enlargement, or tenderness.
Using the same techniques, examine 
the DIP joints (Fig. 16-36).
F I G U R E  1 6 - 3 3 .  Palpate the 
anatomic snuffbox.
Tenderness over the extensor and 
abductor tendons of the thumb at the 
radial styloid occurs in de Quervain 
tenosynovitis and gonococcal tenosy-
novitis. See Table 16-8, Tendon 
Sheath, Palmar Space, and Finger 
Infections, p. 705. 
“Snuffbox” tenderness with the wrist in 
ulnar deviation and pain at the scaph-
oid tubercle are suspicious for occult 
scaphoid fracture, a common injury.67 
Poor blood supply increases risk of 
scaphoid bone avascular necrosis. 
F I G U R E  1 6 - 3 4 .  Palpate the MCP 
joints.
The MCPs are often boggy or tender 
in RA, but are rarely involved in OA. 
Pain with compression also occurs in 
posttraumatic arthritis. 
There are PIP changes in RA; Bouchard 
nodes in OA. Pain at the base of the 
thumb occurs in carpometacarpal 
arthritis. 
Hard dorsolateral nodules on the DIP 
joints, or Heberden nodes (Fig. 16-35), 
are common in OA; the DIP joints are 
also involved in psoriatic arthritis. 
F I G U R E  1 6 - 3 5 .  Heberden nodes.
F I G U R E  1 6 - 3 6 .  Palpate the DIP 
joints.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
662 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
In any area of swelling or inﬂammation, palpate along the tendons inserting on 
the thumb and ﬁngers.
Wrists: Range of Motion and Maneuvers
Range of Motion. Refer to the table below for specific muscles responsible 
for each movement and use clear instructions that prompt the patient to prop-
erly follow your directions. For techniques of testing wrist muscle strength, turn 
to Chapter 17, The Nervous System, pp. 743–746.
Tenderness and swelling occur in 
tenosynovitis, or inflammation of the 
tendon sheaths. De Quervain tenosy-
novitis involves the extensor and 
abductor tendons of the thumb as 
they cross the radial styloid. See  
Table 16-8, Tendon Sheath, Palmar 
Space, and Finger Infections, p. 706. 
Arthritis, tenosynovitis, and Dupuytren 
contracture all impair range of motion 
(Figs. 16-37 and 16-38). See Table 16-7, 
Swellings and Deformities of the 
Hands, p. 704. 
70°
70°
0°
Extension
Flexion
F I G U R E  1 6 - 3 7 .  Hand ﬂexion 
and extension.
20°
30°
90°
90°
0°
Radial
deviation
Ulnar
deviation
F I G U R E  1 6 - 3 8 .  Radial and 
ulnar deviation.
Wrist Range of Motion
Wrist 
Movement
Primary Muscles 
Affecting Movement
Patient Instructions
Flexion
Flexor carpi radialis, ﬂexor 
carpi ulnaris
“With palms down, point your 
ﬁngers toward the ﬂoor.”
Extension
Extensor carpi ulnaris, 
extensor carpi radialis 
longus, extensor carpi 
radialis brevis
“With palms down, point your 
ﬁngers toward the ceiling.”
Adduction (radial 
deviation)
Flexor carpi ulnaris
“With palms down, bring your 
ﬁngers toward the midline.”
Abduction (ulnar 
deviation)
Flexor carpi radialis
“With palms down, bring your 
ﬁngers away from the 
midline.”
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
See p. 659 for discussion of pronation 
and supination, which also involve 
the wrist and hand.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
663
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Maneuvers. Maneuvers for assessing conditions at the wrist are listed on 
the next page. For complaints of nocturnal hand or arm numbness (paresthe-
sias), dropping objects, inability to twist lids off jars, aching at the wrist or 
even the forearm, and numbness of the ﬁrst three digits, test for carpal tunnel 
syndrome, the most common entrapment neuropathy, involving compression 
of the median nerve. Learn the distribution of the median, radial, and ulnar 
nerve innervations of the wrist and hand (Figs. 16-39 and 16-40). Remember 
to assess more proximal causes of wrist and hand pain arising from cervical 
radiculopathy.
Ulnar
nerve
Median nerve
Radial nerve
F I G U R E  1 6 - 3 9 .  Dorsal surface.
Radial nerve
Ulnar
nerve
Median nerve
F I G U R E  1 6 - 4 0 .  Volar surface.
Forceful repetitive handwork with 
wrist flexion such as keyboarding or 
mail sorting, vibration, cold environ-
ments, wrist anatomy, pregnancy, RA, 
diabetes, and hypothyroidism are risk 
factors for carpal tunnel syndrome. 
You can test sensation as follows:
■ Pulp of the index ﬁnger—median nerve
■ Pulp of the ﬁfth ﬁnger—ulnar nerve
■ Dorsal web space of the thumb and index ﬁnger—radial nerve
Hand Grip. Test hand grip strength by ask-
ing the patient to grasp your second and third 
ﬁngers (Fig. 16-41). This tests function of wrist 
joints, the ﬁnger ﬂexors, and the intrinsic mus-
cles and joints of the hand.
Decreased sensation in the median 
nerve territory is a common sign of 
carpal tunnel syndrome (sensitivity to 
pinprick and two-point discrimination 
<50%; specificity >85%; positive LR of 
hypalgesia is 3.1).67,68 
F I G U R E  1 6 - 4 1 .  Test 
grip strength.
Decreased grip strength is a positive 
test for weakness of the finger flexors 
and/or intrinsic muscles of the hand. 
It also results from inflammatory or 
degenerative arthritis, carpal tunnel 
syndrome, epicondylitis, and cervical 
radiculopathy. Grip weakness plus 
wrist pain are often present in de 
Quervain tenosynovitis. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
664 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Thumb Movement. To test thumb 
function, ask the patient to grasp the 
thumb against the palm and then move 
the wrist toward the midline in ulnar de-
viation (sometimes called the Finkelstein 
test), as shown in Figure 16-42.
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome—Thumb Ab-
duction, Tinel Test, and Phalen Test for Me-
dian Nerve Compression. To test thumb 
abduction, ask the patient to raise the 
thumb straight up as you apply down-
ward resistance (Fig. 16-43).
Test Tinel sign by tapping lightly over the 
course of the median nerve in the carpal 
tunnel as shown in Figure 16-44.
To test Phalen sign, ask the patient to hold 
the wrists in ﬂexion for 60 seconds with the 
elbows fully extended (Fig. 16-45). Alter-
natively, ask the patient to press the backs 
of both hands together to form right angles. 
These maneuvers compress the median 
nerve.
Tendon
F I G U R E  1 6 - 4 2 .  Test 
thumb function.
Pain during this maneuver identifies 
de Quervain tenosynovitis from inflam-
mation of the abductor pollicis longus 
and extensor pollicis brevis tendons 
and tendon sheaths. 
F I G U R E  1 6 - 4 3 .  Test 
thumb abduction.
Weakness on thumb abduction is a 
positive test. The abductor pollicis 
longus is innervated only by the 
median nerve. 
Combined use of a hand symptom 
diagram, median nerve territory 
hypalgesia, and thumb abduction 
weakness are most consistent with 
nerve conduction diagnoses of carpal 
tunnel syndrome.67,69 
F I G U R E  1 6 - 4 4 .  Test Tinel sign.
Aching and numbness in the median 
nerve distribution is a positive test 
(sensitivity 23% to 60%; specificity 
64% to 91%; LR ≤1.5).68 
F I G U R E  1 6 - 4 5 .  Test Phalen sign.
Numbness and tingling in the median 
nerve distribution within 60 seconds 
is a positive test (sensitivity 10% to 
91%; specificity 33% to 86%; LR 
≤1.5).68 
Tinel and Phalen signs do not reliably 
predict positive electrodiagnosis of 
carpal tunnel disease.69 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
665
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Fingers and Thumbs: Range of Motion and Maneuvers
Range of Motion—Fingers. Assess flexion, extension, abduction, and adduc-
tion of the fingers.
■ Flexion and extension (Fig. 16-46). For ﬂexion, 
to test the lumbricals and ﬁnger ﬂexor mus-
cles, ask the patient to “Make a tight ﬁst with 
each hand, thumb across the knuckles.” For ex-
tension, to test the ﬁnger extensor muscles, 
ask the patient to “Extend and spread the ﬁn-
gers.” At the MCPs, the ﬁngers may extend 
beyond the neutral position.
 
Test the ﬂexion and extension of the PIP and 
DIP joints (lumbrical muscles). The ﬁngers 
should open and close easily.
■ Abduction and adduction (Fig. 16-47). Ask the 
patient to spread the ﬁngers apart (abduction 
from dorsal interossei) and back together (ad-
duction from palmar interossei). Check for 
smooth, coordinated movement.
Thumbs. At the thumb, assess flexion, extension, abduction, adduction, and 
opposition (Figs. 16-48 to 16-51). Each of these movements is powered by a 
related muscle of the thumb.
F I G U R E  1 6 - 4 6 .  Test 
ﬁnger ﬂexion.
F I G U R E  1 6 - 4 7 .  Test 
ﬁnger abduction.
Inspect for impaired hand movement 
in arthritis, trigger finger, and Dupuy-
tren contracture. 
F I G U R E  1 6 - 4 8 .  Flexion.
F I G U R E  1 6 - 4 9 .  Extension.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
666 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Ask the patient to move the thumb across the palm and touch the base of the ﬁfth 
ﬁnger to test ﬂexion, and then to move the thumb back across the palm and away 
from the ﬁngers to test extension.
Next, ask the patient to place the ﬁngers and thumb in the neutral position with 
the palm up, then have the patient move the thumb anteriorly away from the 
palm to assess abduction and back down for adduction. To test opposition, or 
movements of the thumb across the palm, ask the patient to touch the thumb to 
each of the other ﬁngertips.
A full examination of the wrist and hand involves detailed testing of muscle 
strength and sensation, found in Chapter 17, The Nervous System, pp. 743–748.
The Spine
Overview. The vertebral column, or spine, is the central supporting structure 
of the trunk and back. The concave curves of the cervical and lumbar spine and 
the convex curves of the thoracic and sacrococcygeal spine help distribute upper 
body weight to the pelvis and lower extremities and cushion the concussive 
impact of walking or running.
The complex mechanics of the back reﬂect the coordinated action of:
■ The vertebrae and intervertebral discs
■ An interconnecting system of ligaments between anterior vertebrae and pos-
terior vertebrae, ligaments between the spinous processes, and ligaments 
between the lamina of two adjacent vertebrae
■ Large superﬁcial muscles, deeper intrinsic muscles, and muscles of the ab-
dominal wall
F I G U R E  1 6 - 5 0 .  Abduction and 
adduction.
F I G U R E  1 6 - 5 1 .  Opposition.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
667
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Bony Structures. The vertebral 
column contains 24 vertebrae stacked 
on the sacrum and coccyx. A typical 
vertebra contains sites for joint 
articulations, weight bearing, and 
muscle attachments, as well as 
foramina for the spinal nerve roots 
and peripheral nerves. Anteriorly, the 
vertebral body supports weight 
bearing. The posterior vertebral arch 
encloses the spinal cord. Review the 
location of the vertebral processes 
and foramina, with particular 
attention to:
■ The spinous process projecting pos-
teriorly in the midline and the two 
transverse processes at the junc-
tion of the pedicle and the lamina. 
Muscles attach at these processes.
■ The articular processes—two on 
each side of the vertebra, one fac-
ing up and one facing down, at 
the junction of the pedicles and 
laminae, often called articular 
facets.
■ The vertebral foramen, which en-
closes the spinal cord, the inter-
vertebral foramen, formed by the 
inferior and superior articulating 
process of adjacent vertebrae, 
creating a channel for the spinal 
nerve roots; and in the cervical 
vertebrae, the transverse foramen 
for the vertebral artery.
Representative Cervical and Lumbar Vertebrae
C4–C5 Coronal and Lateral Views
Spinous
process
Transverse process
Vertebral
body
Transverse
foramen
Vertebral
foramen
Pedicle
Vertebral arch
Lamina
Superior articular facet
Spinous process
Transverse process
Superior articular process
Intervertebral foramen
C4
C5
T12–L1 Coronal and Lateral Views
Vertebral
foramen
Pedicle
Lamina
Superior articular
process
Transverse process
Intervertebral foramen
Superior articular process
Inferior articular process
T12
L1
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
668 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
The proximity of the spinal cord and spinal nerve roots to their bony vertebral 
casing and the intervertebral discs makes them especially vulnerable to disc 
herniation, impingement from degenerative changes in the vertebrae and facets, 
and trauma.
Joints. The spine has slightly movable cartilaginous joints between the 
vertebral bodies and between the articular facets. Between the vertebral bodies 
are the intervertebral discs, each consisting of a soft mucoid central core, the 
nucleus pulposus, rimmed by the tough ﬁbrous tissue of the annulus ﬁbrosis. The 
intervertebral discs cushion movement between vertebrae and allow the vertebral 
column to curve, ﬂex, and bend. The ﬂexibility of the spine is largely determined 
by the angle of the articular facet joints relative to the plane of the vertebral body, 
and varies at different levels of the spine. Note that the vertebral column angles 
sharply posterior at the lumbosacral junction and becomes immovable. The 
mechanical stress at this angulation contributes to the risk for disc herniation 
and subluxation, or slippage (spondylolisthesis), of L5 on S1.
Muscle Groups. The trapezius 
and latissimus dorsi form the large 
outer layer of muscles attaching to 
each side of the spine (Fig. 16-52). 
They overlie two deeper muscle 
layers—a layer attaching to the head, 
neck, and spinous processes (splenius 
capitis, 
splenius 
cervicis, 
and 
sacrospinalis) and a layer of smaller 
intrinsic muscles between vertebrae. 
Muscles attaching to the anterior 
surface of the vertebrae, including the 
psoas muscle and muscles of the 
abdominal wall, assist with ﬂexion.
Muscles moving the neck and lower 
vertebral column are summarized in 
the table on p. 670.
Techniques of Examination
Inspection. Inspect 
the 
patient’s posture when entering the 
room, including the position of both 
the neck and trunk.
Assess the patient for erect position of the head, neck, and back; for smooth, 
coordinated neck movement; and for ease of gait.
Trapezius
(neck extension;
overlies small
intrinsic neck
muscles of neck
extension and
rotation)
Latissimus dorsi
Splenius capitis
(neck extension)
Sternocleidomastoid
(neck flexion, rotation)
Deltoid
Teres minor
Teres major
Spinous process T12
External abdominal
oblique
Iliac crest
Gluteus maximus
F I G U R E  1 6 - 5 2 .  Muscles of the back.
Neck stiffness signals arthritis, muscle 
strain, or other underlying pathology 
that should be pursued; headache may 
be present. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
669
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Drape or gown the patient to expose the entire back for complete inspection. 
If possible, the patient should be upright in the natural standing position, with 
feet together and arms at the sides. The head should be midline in the same plane 
as the sacrum, and the shoulders and pelvis should be level.
Viewing the patient from behind, 
identify the following (Fig. 16-53):
■ Spinous processes, usually more 
prominent at C7 and T1 and 
more evident on forward ﬂexion
■ Paravertebral muscles on either 
side of the midline
■ Iliac crests
■ Posterior superior iliac spines, 
usually marked by skin dimples.
A line drawn above the posterior iliac 
crests crosses the spinous process of 
L4.
Inspect the patient from the side and 
from behind. Evaluate the spinal cur-
vatures and the features in the display 
on the next page.
Palpation. From a sitting or standing position, palpate the spinous pro-
cesses of each vertebra with your thumb.
In the neck, palpate the facet joints that lie between the cervical vertebrae 1 to 
2 cm lateral to the spinous processes of C2 to C7. These joints lie deep to the 
trapezius muscle and may not be palpable unless the neck muscles are relaxed.
In the lower lumbar area, palpate carefully for vertebral “step-offs” to see if one 
spinous process seems unusually prominent (or recessed) in relation to the one 
above it. Identify any tenderness.
Palpate over the sacroiliac joint, often identiﬁed by the dimple overlying the pos-
terior superior iliac spine.
You may wish to percuss the spine for tenderness by thumping, but not too 
roughly, with the ulnar surface of your ﬁst.
Lateral deviation and rotation of the 
head are seen in torticollis, from con-
traction of the sternocleidomastoid 
muscle. 
Paravertebral
muscles
Spinous process
of L4
Iliac crest
Ischial tuberosity 
and site of
ischial bursa
Posterior
superior
iliac spine
Sacroiliac 
joint
Sciatic 
nerve
F I G U R E  1 6 - 5 3 .  Important anatomy of the back.
Vertebral tenderness raises concerns 
for fracture, dislocation, underlying 
infection, or arthritis. 
Tenderness occurs in arthritis, espe-
cially at the facet joints between C5 
and C6. 
Step-offs occur in spondylolisthesis,  
or forward slippage of one vertebra, 
which may compress the spinal cord. 
Tenderness over the sacroiliac joint is 
common in sacroiliitis and ankylosing 
spondylitis.70 
Pain with percussion occurs in verte-
bral osteoporotic fractures, infection, 
and malignancy. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
670 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Inspection of the Spine
View of Patient
From the side
Inspect the cervical, thoracic, and lum-
bar curves.
Cervical
concavity
Lumbar
concavity
Thoracic
convexity
From behind
Inspect the upright spinal column (an 
imaginary line should fall from C7 
through the gluteal cleft).
Inspect the alignment of the shoulders, 
the iliac crests, and the skin creases 
below the buttocks (gluteal folds).
Inspect any skin markings, tags, or 
masses.
Increased thoracic kyphosis occurs 
with aging. 
In scoliosis, lateral and rotatory curva-
ture of the spine brings the head back 
to midline. Scoliosis often becomes 
evident during adolescence, before 
symptoms appear. 
Unequal shoulder heights occur in sco-
liosis, the Sprengel deformity of the 
scapula from the attachment of an 
extra bone or band between the 
upper scapula and C7, “winging” of 
the scapula from loss of long thoracic 
nerve innervation to the serratus 
anterior muscle, and contralateral 
weakness of the trapezius. 
Unequal heights of the iliac crests, or 
pelvic tilt, occur in unequal leg 
lengths, scoliosis, and hip abduction 
or adduction. Check if unequal leg 
lengths disappear when a block is 
placed under the shorter limb. “List-
ing” of the trunk to one side is seen 
with a herniated lumbar disc. 
Birthmarks, port-wine stains, hairy 
patches, and lipomas often overlie 
bony defects such as spina bifida. 
Café-au-lait spots (discolored patches 
of skin), skin tags, and fibrous tumors 
are common in neurofibromatosis. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
671
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Inspect and palpate the paravertebral muscles for tenderness and spasm. Muscles 
in spasm feel ﬁrm and knotted and may be visible.
With the patient’s hip ﬂexed and 
the patient lying on the opposite 
side, palpate the sciatic nerve, the 
largest nerve in the body, consist-
ing of nerve roots from L4, L5, S1, 
S2, and S3 (Fig. 16-54). The sciatic 
nerve lies midway between the 
greater trochanter and the ischial 
tuberosity as it runs through the 
sciatic notch. It is difﬁcult to pal-
pate in most patients.
Palpate for tenderness in any other areas suggested by the patient’s symptoms. 
Check for pain radiation into the buttocks, perineum, or legs.
Assess all low back pain for possible cauda equina compression, the most serious 
cause of pain, due to risk of limb paralysis or bladder/bowel dysfunction.
Spasm occurs in degenerative and 
inflammatory muscle disorders, over-
use, prolonged contraction from 
abnormal posture, and anxiety. 
Sciatic nerve tenderness is seen with a 
herniated disc or nerve root impinge-
ment from a mass lesion. 
Sciatic nerve
Greater trochanter
Ischial tuberosity
F I G U R E  1 6 - 5 4 .  Palpate the sciatic 
nerve.
Herniated intervertebral discs, most 
common at L5–S1 or L4–L5, may 
cause tenderness of the spinous pro-
cesses, intervertebral joints, paraver-
tebral muscles, sacrosciatic notch, and 
sciatic nerve (Fig. 16-55). 
Paravertebral
muscles
Spinous 
process
of L4
Iliac crest
Ischial tuberosity 
and site of
ischial bursa
Posterior
superior
iliac spine
Sacroiliac 
joint
Sciatic 
nerve
L4
F I G U R E  1 6 - 5 5 .  Palpate the bony landmarks and muscles of the back.
See Table 16-3, Low Back Pain, p. 699. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
672 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Range of Motion and Maneuvers
Range of Motion: Neck. The neck is the most mobile portion of the spine, 
remarkable for its seven fragile vertebrae supporting the 10- to 15-pound head. 
Flexion and extension occur primarily between the skull and C1, the atlas; rota-
tion at C1–C2, the axis; and lateral bending at C2–C7.
Review the speciﬁc muscles responsible for each movement and their related 
patient instructions in the inset below.
Limited range of motion is caused by 
stiffness from arthritis, pain from 
trauma, overuse, and muscle spasm 
from torticollis. 
Assess any complaints or findings of 
neck, shoulder, or arm pain, numb-
ness, or weakness for possible cervical 
cord or nerve root compression. See 
Table 16-2, Pains in the Neck, p. 698. 
Neck Range of Motion
Neck 
Movement
Primary Muscles 
Affecting Movement
Patient Instructions
Flexion
Sternocleidomastoid, sca-
lene, prevertebral muscles
“Bring your chin to your 
chest.”
Extension
Splenius capitis and cervicis, 
small intrinsic neck mus-
cles
“Look up at the ceiling.”
Rotation
Sternocleidomastoid, small 
intrinsic neck muscles
“Look over one shoulder, 
and then the other.”
Lateral Bending
Scalenes and small intrinsic 
neck muscles
“Bring your ear to your 
shoulder.”
Tenderness, loss of sensation, or weakness warrant careful neurologic testing of 
the neck and upper extremities.
Range of Motion: Spinal Column. In the inset below, note the muscles re-
sponsible for each movement and instructions to the patient.
Tenderness at C1–C2 in RA is suspicious 
for possible subluxation and high cervi-
cal cord compression and warrants 
prompt additional assessment. 
Spinal Column Range of Motion
Back 
Movement
Primary Muscles 
Affecting Movement
Patient 
Instructions
Flexion
Psoas major, psoas minor, 
quadratus lumborum; 
abdominal muscles 
attaching to the anterior 
vertebrae, such as the 
internal and external 
obliques and rectus 
abdominis
“Bend forward and try to 
touch your toes.”
Note the smoothness and 
symmetry of move-
ment, the range of 
motion, and the curve 
in the lumbar area. As 
ﬂexion proceeds, the 
lumbar concavity 
should ﬂatten out.
(continued )
Deformity of the thorax on forward 
bending, especially when the height 
of the scapulae is unequal, suggests 
scoliosis. 
Persistence of lumbar lordosis sug-
gests muscle spasm or ankylosing 
spondylitis.70 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
673
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Spinal Column Range of Motion (continued )
Back 
Movement
Primary Muscles 
Affecting Movement
Patient 
Instructions
Extension
Deep intrinsic muscles of 
the back, such as the 
erector spinae and trans-
versospinalis groups
“Bend back as far as possi-
ble.”
Support the patient by 
placing your hand on 
the posterior superior 
iliac spine, with your 
ﬁngers pointing 
toward the midline.
Rotation
Abdominal muscles, intrin-
sic muscles of the back
“Rotate from side to side.”
Stabilize the patient’s 
pelvis by placing one 
hand on the patient’s 
hip and the other on 
the opposite shoulder.
Then rotate the trunk by 
pulling the shoulder 
anteriorly and then the 
hip posteriorly. Repeat 
these maneuvers for 
the opposite side.
Lateral Bending
Abdominal muscles, intrin-
sic muscles of the back
“Bend to the side from the 
waist.”
Stabilize the patient’s 
pelvis by placing your 
hand on the patient’s 
hip. Repeat for the 
opposite side.
Decreased spinal mobility is common 
in OA and ankylosing spondylitis. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
674 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
If these maneuvers provoke pain or tenderness, particularly with radiation into 
the leg, proceed to careful neurologic testing of the lower extremities.
Non-organic physical ﬁndings (Waddell signs) include superﬁcial or nonana-
tomic tenderness, pain on axial loading or simulated rotation, nonreproducibil-
ity of pain when the patient is distracted, regional weakness or sensory change, 
and overreaction to stimuli that should not cause back pain.24,31
The Hip
Overview. The hip joint is deeply embedded in the pelvis and is notable for 
its strength, stability, and wide range of motion. The stability of the hip joint, 
essential for weight bearing, arises from the deep ﬁt of the head of the femur into 
the acetabulum, its strong ﬁbrous articular capsule, and the powerful muscles 
crossing the joint and inserting below the femoral head, providing leverage for 
movement of the femur.
Bony Structures and Joints. The hip joint lies below the middle third 
of the inguinal ligament but in a deeper plane. It is a ball-and-socket joint; note 
how the rounded head of the femur articulates with the cup-like cavity of the 
acetabulum. Because of its overlying muscles and depth, the hip joint is not 
readily palpable. Review the bones of the pelvis—the acetabulum, the ilium, and 
the ischium—and the connection inferiorly at the symphysis pubis and posteriorly 
with the sacroiliac bone.
On the anterior surface of the hip, locate the following 
bony structures (Fig. 16-56):
■ The iliac crest at the level of L4
■ The iliac tubercle
■ The anterior superior iliac spine
■ The greater trochanter
■ The pubic tubercle
Consider lumbosacral cord or nerve 
root compression; arthritis, mass 
lesion, or infection in the hip, rectum, 
or pelvis may also cause symptoms. 
See Table 16-3, Low Back Pain, p. 699. 
See Chapter 17, The Nervous System, for 
the Straight Leg Raise Test, pp. 765–766. 
Although helpful, this test is not diag-
nostic of disc herniation.71–73 
Wing of ilium
Iliac tubercle
Greater trochanter
(femur)
Ischial bursa
Pubic tubercle
Ischium
Trochanteric 
bursa
Psoas bursa
Acetabulum
Anterior superior
iliac spine
Iliac crest
F I G U R E  1 6 - 5 6 .  Anterior view of the pelvis.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
675
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
On the posterior surface of the hip, locate the fol-
lowing (Fig. 16-57):
■ The posterior superior iliac spine
■ The greater trochanter
■ The ischial tuberosity
■ The sacroiliac joint
Note that you can locate S2 by envisioning an 
imaginary line across the posterior superior iliac 
spines.
Muscle Groups. Four powerful muscle groups move the hip. Picture these 
groups as you examine patients, and remember that to move the femur or any 
bone in a given direction, the muscle must cross the joint line.
The ﬂexor group lies anteriorly and 
ﬂexes the thigh (Fig. 16-58). The pri-
mary hip ﬂexor is the iliopsoas, extend-
ing from above the iliac crest to the 
lesser trochanter. The extensor group 
lies posteriorly and extends the thigh 
(Fig. 16-59). The gluteus maximus is 
the primary extensor of the hip. It 
forms a band crossing from its origin 
along the medial pelvis to its insertion 
below the trochanter.
Greater trochanter
(femur)
Ischial bursa
Trochanteric 
bursa
Iliac crest
Posterior 
superior
iliac spine
S2
Iliac tubercle
Spinous process
Sacroiliac
joint
Sacrum
Ischial tuberosity
F I G U R E  1 6 - 5 7 .  Posterior view of the pelvis.
Iliopsoas
Flexor Group
F I G U R E  1 6 - 5 8 .  Flexor group.
Gluteus
maximus
Extensor Group
F I G U R E  1 6 - 5 9 .  Extensor group.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
676 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
The adductor group is medial and swings 
the thigh toward the body (Fig. 16-60). 
The muscles in this group arise from the 
rami of the pubis and ischium and insert 
on the posteromedial aspect of the femur. 
The abductor group is lateral, extending 
from the iliac crest to the greater trochanter, 
and moves the thigh away from the body 
(Fig. 16-61). This group includes the glu-
teus medius and minimus. These muscles 
help stabilize the pelvis during the stance 
phase of gait.
Additional Structures. A strong, dense articular capsule, extending 
from the acetabulum to the femoral neck, encases and strengthens the hip 
joint. The capsule is reinforced by three overlying ligaments and lined with 
synovial membrane. There are three principal bursae at the hip. Anterior to the 
joint is the psoas (also termed iliopectineal or iliopsoas) bursa, overlying the 
articular capsule and the psoas muscle. Find the bony prominence lateral to the hip 
joint—the greater trochanter of the femur. The large multilocular trochanteric bursa 
lies on its posterior surface. The ischial (or ischiogluteal) bursa, not always present, 
lies under the ischial tuberosity, and accommodates the weight of the sitting position. 
Note its proximity to the sciatic nerve, as shown on p. 679.
Techniques of Examination
Inspection. Inspection of the hip begins with careful observation of the 
patient’s gait when entering the room. Observe the two phases of gait:
■ Stance—when the foot is on the ground and bears weight (60% of the walk-
ing cycle) (Fig. 16-62)
Adductor Group
F I G U R E  1 6 - 6 0 .  Adductor group.
Abductor Group
F I G U R E  1 6 - 6 1 .  Abductor group.
Heelstrike
Foot flat
Midstance
THE STANCE PHASE OF GAIT
Push-off
F I G U R E  1 6 - 6 2 .  Stance phase of gait.
Most hip problems appear during the 
weight-bearing stance phase. 
■ Swing—when the foot moves forward and does not bear weight (40% of the 
cycle)
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
677
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Inspect the gait for the width of the base, 
the shift of the pelvis, and ﬂexion of the 
knee (Fig. 16-63). The width of the base 
should be 2 to 4 inches from heel to heel. 
Normal gait has a smooth, continuous 
rhythm, achieved in part by contraction of 
the abductors of the weight-bearing limb. 
Abductor contraction stabilizes the pelvis 
and helps maintain balance, raising the 
opposite hip. The knee should be ﬂexed 
throughout the stance phase, except when 
the heel strikes the ground to counteract 
motion at the ankle.
Inspect the lumbar portion of the spine for the degree of lordosis and, with the 
patient supine, assess the length of the legs for symmetry. (To measure leg length, 
see Special Techniques, p. 694.)
Inspect the anterior and posterior surfaces of the hip for any areas of muscle 
atrophy or bruising. The joint is too deeply situated to detect swelling.
Palpation
Bony Landmarks. Palpate the surface landmarks of the hip, identified on 
p. 674. On the anterior aspect of the hips, these can be located as follows.
2–4 inches
F I G U R E  1 6 - 6 3 .  Inspect base 
of gait width.
A wide base suggests cerebellar dis-
ease or foot problems. Pain during 
weight bearing or examiner strike on 
the heel occurs in femoral neck stress 
fractures.74,75 
Hip dislocation, arthritis, unequal leg 
lengths, or abductor weakness can 
cause the pelvis to drop on the oppo-
site side, producing a waddling gait. 
Lack of knee flexion, which makes the 
leg functionally longer, interrupts the 
smooth pattern of gait, causing cir-
cumduction (swinging the leg out to 
the side). 
Loss of lordosis occurs with paraverte-
bral spasm; excess lordosis suggests a 
flexion deformity of the hip. 
Disparities in leg length occur in 
abduction or adduction deformities 
and scoliosis. Leg shortening and 
external rotation are common in  
hip fracture. 
Palpation of Bony Landmarks of the Hip
Anterior Landmarks
● Identify the iliac crest at the upper margin of the pelvis at the level of L4.
● Follow the downward anterior curve and locate the iliac tubercle, marking the 
widest point of the crest, and continue tracking downward to the anterior–
superior iliac spine.
● Place your thumbs on the anterior–superior spines and move your ﬁngers 
downward and laterally from the iliac tubercles to the greater trochanter of 
the femur.
● Then move your thumbs medially and obliquely to the pubic tubercle, which 
lies at the same level as the greater trochanter.
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
678 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Inguinal Structures. With the pa-
tient supine, ask the patient to place the 
heel of the leg being examined on the op-
posite knee. Then palpate along the in-
guinal ligament, which extends from the 
anterior–superior iliac spine to the pubic 
tubercle (Fig. 16-64).
The femoral nerve, artery, and vein bisect the overlying inguinal ligament; lymph 
nodes lie medially. The mnemonic NAVEL may help you remember the lateral-
to-medial sequence of Nerve–Artery–Vein–Empty space–Lymph node.
Anterior or inguinal pain, typically deep within the hip joint and radiating to the 
knee, points to intra-articular pathology; pain radiating to the buttocks or pos-
terior trochanteric region points to extra-articular causes.75
Bursae. If the hip is painful, palpate the (psoas) bursa, below the inguinal 
ligament but on a deeper plane.
Palpation of Bony Landmarks of the Hip (continued )
Posterior Landmarks
● Palpate the posterior–superior iliac spine directly underneath the visible dim-
ples just above the buttocks.
● Placing your left thumb and index ﬁnger over the posterior superior iliac 
spine, next locate the greater trochanter laterally with your ﬁngers at the level 
of the gluteal fold, and place your thumb medially on the ischial tuberosity. The 
sacroiliac joint is not always palpable but may be tender. Note that an imagi-
nary line along the posterior–superior iliac spines crosses the joint at S2.
Sacroiliac joint tenderness suggests 
sacroiliitis. 
Inguinal
ligament
Femoral nerve
Femoral artery
Femoral vein
F I G U R E  1 6 - 6 4 .  The inguinal 
ligament and N-A-V-E-L.
Bulges along the ligament suggest  
an inguinal hernia or, at times, an 
aneurysm. 
Enlarged lymph nodes point to infec-
tion in the pelvis or lower extremity. 
Causes of groin tenderness are synovi-
tis of the hip joint, arthritis; bursitis; or 
possible psoas abscess. 
Intra-articular causes include OA, 
osteonecrosis of the femoral head, 
acetabular labral tears, and femoral 
neck stress fracture. Extra-articular 
causes include trochanteric bursitis, 
muscle strain, sacroiliac disorders, 
and lumbar radiculopathy.74–76 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Focal tenderness over the trochanter 
confirms trochanteric bursitis. Tender-
ness over the posterolateral surface of 
the greater trochanter occurs in local-
ized tendinitis, muscle spasm from 
referred hip pain, and iliotibial band 
tendinitis. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
679
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
With the patient resting on one side and the hip ﬂexed and internally rotated, 
palpate the trochanteric bursa lying over the greater trochanter (Fig. 16-65). Nor-
mally, the ischiogluteal bursa, over the ischial tuberosity, is not palpable unless 
inﬂamed (Fig. 16-66).
Trochanteric bursa
Ischiogluteal bursa
F I G U R E  1 6 - 6 5 .  Palpate the 
trochanteric bursa.
F I G U R E  1 6 - 6 6 .  Palpate the 
ischiogluteal bursa.
Look for tenderness in ischiogluteal 
bursitis or “weaver’s bottom”; because 
of the adjacent sciatic nerve, this may 
mimic sciatica. 
Range of Motion and Maneuvers
Range of Motion. Assess hip range of motion and the specific muscles re-
sponsible for each movement. Review the instructions to the patient. Normal val-
ues for hip flexion, abduction, and adduction are 120°, 45°, and 20° respectively.
Hip Range of Motion
Hip Movement
Primary Muscles 
Affecting Movement
Patient Instructions
Flexion
Iliopsoas
“Bend your knee to your chest 
and pull it against your 
abdomen.”
Extension (actually 
hyperextension)
Gluteus maximus
“Lie face down, then bend your 
knee and lift it up.”
OR “Lying ﬂat, move your 
lower leg away from the 
midline and down over the 
side of the table.”
Abduction
Gluteus medius and 
minimus
“Lying ﬂat, move your lower 
leg away from the midline.”
Adduction
Adductor brevis, adductor 
longus, adductor mag-
nus, pectineus, gracilis
“Lying ﬂat, bend your knee and 
move your lower leg toward 
the midline.”
External Rotation
Internal and external 
obturators, quadratus 
femoris, superior and 
inferior gemelli
“Lying ﬂat, bend your knee and 
turn your lower leg and foot 
across the midline.”
Internal Rotation
Iliopsoas
“Lying ﬂat, bend your knee and 
turn your lower leg and foot 
away from the midline.”
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
680 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Maneuvers. Often, the examiner must assist the patient with movements 
of the hip, so further detail is provided below for flexion, abduction, adduction, 
and external and internal rotation. Meta-analyses suggest that no single test dis-
criminates specific hip pathology.75,77,78
■ Flexion. With the patient supine, place your hand under the patient’s lumbar 
spine. Ask the patient to bend each knee in turn up to the chest and pull it 
ﬁrmly against the abdomen (Fig. 16-67). Note that the hip can ﬂex further 
when the knee is ﬂexed because the hamstrings are relaxed. When the back 
touches your hand, indicating normal ﬂattening of the lumbar lordosis, fur-
ther ﬂexion must arise from the hip joint itself.
F I G U R E  1 6 - 6 7 .  Hip ﬂexion and ﬂattening of lumbar lordosis.
In flexion deformity of the hip, as the 
opposite hip is flexed (with the thigh 
against the chest), the affected hip 
does not allow full hip extension and 
the affected thigh appears flexed  
(Fig. 16-68). 
F I G U R E  1 6 - 6 8 .  Flexion 
deformity of the hip.
As the thigh is held against the abdomen, inspect the degree of ﬂexion at the 
hip and knee. Normally, the anterior portion of the thigh can almost touch 
the chest wall. Note whether the opposite thigh remains fully extended, rest-
ing on the table.
■ Extension. With the patient lying face down, extend the thigh toward you in 
a posterior direction. Alternatively, carefully position the supine patient near 
the edge of the table and extend the leg posteriorly.
■ Abduction. Stabilize the pelvis by pressing down on the opposite anterior– 
superior iliac spine with one hand. With the other hand, grasp the ankle and 
abduct the extended leg until you feel the iliac spine move (Fig. 16-69). This 
movement marks the limit of hip abduction.
Flexion deformity may be masked by 
an increase, rather than flattening, in 
lumbar lordosis and an anterior pelvic 
tilt. 
Restricted abduction and internal and 
external rotation are common in hip 
OA. The LR for resisted external rota-
tion due to pain is as high as 32.6.12,77 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
681
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
■ Adduction. With the patient supine, stabilize the pelvis, hold one ankle, and 
move the leg medially across the body and over the opposite extremity 
(Fig. 16-70).
F I G U R E  1 6 - 6 9 .  Abduct the leg.
F I G U R E  1 6 - 7 0 .  Adduct the leg.
■ External and internal rotation. Flex the 
leg to 90° at hip and knee, stabilize the 
thigh with one hand, grasp the ankle 
with the other, and swing the lower 
leg—medially for external rotation at 
the hip, and laterally for internal rota-
tion (Fig. 16-71). Although confusing 
at ﬁrst, it is the motion of the head of 
the femur in the acetabulum that iden-
tiﬁes these movements.
F I G U R E  1 6 - 7 1 .  Test internal 
and external rotation of the hip.
Pain with maximal flexion and adduc-
tion and internal rotation or with 
abduction and external rotation with 
full extension signals acetabular labral 
tear.74,75 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
682 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
The Knee
Overview. The knee joint is the largest joint in the body. It is a hinge joint 
involving three bones: the femur, the tibia, and the patella (or knee cap), with 
three articular surfaces, two between the femur and the tibia and one between 
the femur and the patella. Note how the two rounded condyles of the femur rest 
on the relatively ﬂat tibial plateau. There is no inherent stability in the knee 
joint itself, making it dependent on four ligaments to hold its articulating 
femur and tibia in place. This feature, in addition to the lever action of the 
femur on the tibia and the lack of padding from overlying fat or muscle, makes 
the knee highly vulnerable to injury.
Bony Structures. Learn the bony landmarks in and around the knee. 
These will guide your examination of this complicated joint (Fig. 16-72).
■ On the medial surface, identify 
the adductor tubercle, the medial 
epicondyle of the femur, and the 
medial condyle of the tibia.
■ On the anterior surface, identify 
the patella, which rests on the an-
terior articulating surface of the 
femur midway between the epi-
condyles, embedded in the ten-
don of the quadriceps muscle. 
This tendon continues below the 
knee joint as the patellar tendon, 
which inserts distally on the tibial 
tuberosity.
■ On the lateral surface, ﬁnd the 
lateral epicondyle of the femur, the 
lateral condyle of the tibia, and 
the head of the ﬁbula.
Joints. Two condylar tibiofemoral joints are formed by the convex curves of 
the medial and lateral condyles of the femur as they articulate with the concave 
condyles of the tibia. The third articular surface is the patellofemoral joint. The 
patella slides on the groove of the anterior aspect of the distal femur, called the 
trochlear groove, during ﬂexion and extension of the knee.
Adductor tubercle
Medial epicondyle
Femur
Lateral epicondyle
Lateral collateral
ligament
Anterior cruciate
ligament
Lateral meniscus
Lateral condyle 
of tibia
Head of fibula
Fibula
Medial meniscus
Medial condyle 
of tibia
Medial collateral
ligament
Tibia
Tibial tuberosity
Posterior cruciate
ligament
F I G U R E  1 6 - 7 2 .  Anterior view of the knee.
Problems with patellar tracking, for 
example, in patients with shallower 
grooves, especially women, can lead 
to arthritis, anterior knee pain, and 
patellar dislocation. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
683
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Muscle Groups. Powerful muscles move and support the knee. The 
quadriceps femoris extends the knee, covering the anterior, medial, and lateral 
aspects of the thigh (Figs. 16-73 and 16-74). The hamstring muscles lie on the 
posterior aspect of the thigh and ﬂex the knee.
Quadriceps femoris
Rectus femoris
Vastus lateralis
Vastus medialis
F I G U R E  1 6 - 7 3 .  Quadriceps 
femoris—anterior view.
Hamstring muscles
Semitendinosus
Gracilis
Sartorius
Semimembranosus
F I G U R E  1 6 - 7 4 .  Hamstring 
muscles—medial view.
Additional Structures
Menisci and Ligaments. The menisci and two important pairs of liga-
ments, the collaterals and the cruciates, are crucial to stability of the knee. 
Learn the location of these structures from the illustrations on p. 682 and below 
(Fig. 16-75).
■ The medial and lateral menisci cush-
ion the action of the femur on the 
tibia. These crescent-shaped ﬁbro-
cartilaginous discs add a cup-like 
surface to the otherwise ﬂat tibial 
plateau.
■ The medial collateral ligament (MCL), 
not easily palpable, is a broad, ﬂat 
ligament connecting the medial fem-
oral epicondyle to the medial con-
dyle of the tibia. The medial portion 
of the MCL also attaches to the me-
dial meniscus.
In women, quadriceps contraction 
often exerts a more lateral pull (Q 
angle) that alters patellar tracking, 
contributing to anterior knee pain. 
Femur
Semimembranosus
bursa (synovial
cavity distended)
Medial 
collateral
ligament
Medial
meniscus
Fibula
Tibia
Tibial
tuberosity
Patellar
tendon
Patella
Prepatella
bursa
Suprapatellar
pouch
Vastus
medialis
Anserine
bursa
F I G U R E  1 6 - 7 5 .  Left knee—medial view.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
684 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
■ The lateral collateral ligament (LCL) connects the lateral femoral epicondyle 
and the head of the ﬁbula. The MCL and LCL provide medial and lateral 
stability to the knee joint.
■ The ACL crosses obliquely from the anterior medial tibia to the lateral femo-
ral condyle, preventing the tibia from sliding forward on the femur.
■ The posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) crosses from the posterior tibia and lat-
eral meniscus to the medial femoral condyle, preventing the tibia from slip-
ping backward on the femur. Although the ACL and PCL lie within the knee 
joint so are not palpable, they are nonetheless crucial to the anteroposterior 
stability of the knee.
Negative Infrapatellar Space and Suprapatellar Pouch. Inspect the 
concavities that are usually evident adjacent and superior to each side of the patella, 
known as the “negative infrapatellar space” (Fig. 16-76). Occupying these areas is 
the synovial cavity of the knee, one of the largest joint cavities in the body. This cav-
ity includes an extension 6 cm above the upper border of the patella, lying upward 
and deep to the quadriceps muscle, called the suprapatellar pouch. The joint cavity 
covers the anterior, medial, and lateral surfaces of the knee, as well as the condyles 
of the femur and tibia posteriorly. Although the synovium is not normally palpable, 
these areas may become swollen and tender when the joint is inﬂamed or injured.
Bursae. Several bursae lie near the knee. The prepatellar bursa lies between 
the patella and the overlying skin. The anserine bursa lies 1 to 2 cm below the knee 
joint on the medial surface, proximal and medial to the attachments of the medial 
hamstring muscles on the proximal tibia. It cannot be palpated due to these over-
lying tendons. Now identify the large semimembranosus bursa that communicates 
with the joint cavity, also on the posterior and medial surfaces of the knee.
Techniques of Examination. Learn to examine “the seven structures 
of the knee”: the medial and lateral menisci, the LCL and MCL, the ACL and 
PCL, and the patellar tendon. The ACL and PCL are not palpable but are tested 
by speciﬁc maneuvers. Palpation and maneuvers of these structures are especially 
helpful in primary care diagnosis.
Inspection. Inspect the gait for a smooth rhythmic ﬂow as the patient enters 
the room. The knee should be extended at heel strike and ﬂexed at all other phases 
of swing and stance.
Check the alignment and contours of the knees. Observe any atrophy of the 
quadriceps muscles.
Inspect for any loss of the normal hollows around the patella, a sign of swelling 
in the knee joint and suprapatellar pouch; note any other swelling in or around 
the knee.
F I G U R E  1 6 - 7 6 .  Normal negative 
infrapatellar spaces.
Stumbling or “giving way” of the knee 
during heel strike suggests quadriceps 
weakness or abnormal patellar tracking. 
Bow-legs (genu varum) and knock-
knees (genu valgum) are common. 
Quadriceps atrophy signals hip girdle 
weakness in older adults. 
Swelling over the patella occurs in 
prepatellar bursitis (housemaid’s 
knee). Swelling over the tibial tuber-
cle suggests infrapatellar or, if more 
medial, anserine bursitis. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
685
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Palpation. Ask the patient to sit on the edge of the examining table with 
the knees in ﬂexion. In this position, bony landmarks are more visible, and the 
muscles, tendons, and ligaments are more relaxed, making them easier to palpate. 
Pay special attention to any areas of tenderness. Pain is a common complaint in 
knee problems, and localizing the structure causing pain is important for accurate 
evaluation.
The Tibiofemoral Joint. Palpate the tibiofemoral joint. Facing the knee, place 
your thumbs in the soft tissue depressions on either side of the patellar tendon. 
Identify the groove of the tibiofemoral joint. Note that the inferior pole of the 
patella lies at the tibiofemoral joint line. As you press your thumbs downward, 
you can feel the edge of the tibial plateau. Follow it medially, then laterally, until 
you are stopped by the converging femur and tibia. By moving your thumbs up-
ward toward the midline to the top of the patella, you can follow the articulating 
surface of the femur and identify the margins of the joint.
Note any irregular bony ridges along the joint margins.
■ Medial and lateral menisci. Palpate the medial meniscus. Press on the medial 
soft tissue depression along the upper edge of the tibial plateau with the tibia 
slightly internally rotated. Place the knee in slight ﬂexion and palpate the 
lateral meniscus along the lateral joint line.
■ Medial and lateral joint compartments: MCL 
and LCL. Palpate the medial and lateral joint 
compartments of the tibiofemoral joint 
with the knee ﬂexed on the examining 
table to approximately 90°. Pay special at-
tention to any areas of pain or tenderness.
■ Medial compartment (Fig. 16-77). Medi-
ally, move your thumbs upward to pal-
pate the medial femoral condyle. The 
adductor tubercle is posterior to the me-
dial femoral condyle. Move your 
thumbs downward to palpate the me-
dial tibial plateau.
 
Also medially, palpate along the joint 
line and identify the MCL, which con-
nects the medial epicondyle of the 
femur to the medial condyle and supe-
rior medial surface of the tibia. Palpate 
along this broad, ﬂat ligament from its 
origin to insertion.
Bony enlargement at the joint margins, 
genu varum deformity, and stiffness 
lasting ≤30 minutes are typical findings 
in OA (LRs 11.8, 3.4, and 3.0, respec-
tively).57 Crepitus is also common. 
A medial meniscus tear with joint line 
point tenderness is common after 
trauma and requires prompt further 
evaluation.79 
Medial femoral
condyle
Medial femoral
epicondyle
Patellar tendon
Medial tibial
plateau
Tibial tuberosity
Adductor
tubercle
Medial
collateral
ligament
Anserine
bursa
F I G U R E  1 6 - 7 7 .  Medial compartment of the knee.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
686 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
■ Lateral compartment. Lateral to the patellar tendon, move your thumbs 
upward to palpate the lateral femoral condyle and downward to palpate the 
lateral tibial plateau. When the knee is ﬂexed, the femoral epicondyles are 
lateral to the femoral condyles.
■ Also on the lateral surface, ask the patient to cross one leg so that the ankle 
rests on the opposite knee and ﬁnd the LCL, a ﬁrm cord that runs from 
the lateral femoral epicondyle to the head of the ﬁbula.
■ Patellofemoral compartment: patellar tendon. Palpate the patellofemoral com-
partment. Locate the patella and trace the patellar tendon distally until you 
palpate the tibial tuberosity. Ask the patient to extend the knee to make sure 
the patellar tendon is intact.
With the patient supine and the knee extended, compress the patella against 
the underlying femur, and gently move it medially and laterally, assessing for 
crepitus and pain. Ask the patient to tighten the quadriceps as the patella 
moves distally in the trochlear groove. Check for a smooth sliding motion 
(the patellofemoral grinding test).
The Suprapatellar Pouch, Prepatellar 
Bursa, and Anserine Bursa. Palpate for 
any thickening or swelling in the suprapa-
tellar pouch and along the margins of the 
patella (Fig. 16-78). Start 10 cm above 
the superior border of the patella, well 
above the pouch, and feel the soft tissues 
between your thumb and fingers. Move 
your hand distally in progressive steps, 
trying to identify the pouch. Continue 
your palpation along the sides of the pa-
tella. Note any tenderness or increased 
warmth.
MCL tenderness after injury is suspi-
cious for an MCL tear; LCL injuries are 
less frequent. 
Tenderness over the tendon or inabil-
ity to extend the knee suggests a par-
tial or complete tear of the patellar 
tendon. 
Pain and crepitus arise from the 
roughened undersurface of the 
patella as it articulates with the femur. 
Similar pain may occur when using 
the stairs, or getting up from a chair.
Pain with compression and patellar 
movement during quadriceps con-
traction occurs in chondromalacia. 
Two of three findings are most diag-
nostic of the patellofemoral pain  
syndrome: pain with quadriceps con-
traction; pain with squatting; and 
pain with palpation of the posterome-
dial/or lateral patellar border.80,81 
F I G U R E  1 6 - 7 8 .  Palpate the 
suprapatellar pouch.
Swelling around the patella points to 
synovial thickening or effusion of the 
knee joint (Fig. 16-79). 
F I G U R E  1 6 - 7 9 .  Effusion of the 
knee joint.
Thickening, bogginess, or warmth 
occurs with synovitis and nontender 
effusions from OA. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
687
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Check three other bursae for bogginess or swelling. Palpate the prepatellar bursa. 
Palpate over the anserine bursa on the posteromedial side of the knee between 
the MCL and the tendons inserting on the medial tibial and plateau. On the 
posterior surface, with the leg extended, check the medial aspect of the popliteal 
fossa.
Palpation Tests for Knee Joint Effusions. Learn to apply three tests for de-
tecting fluid in the knee joint: the bulge sign, the balloon sign, and balloting 
the patella.
■ The bulge sign (for minor effusions). With the knee extended, place the left hand 
above the knee and apply pressure on the suprapatellar pouch, displacing or “milk-
ing” ﬂuid downward (Fig. 16-80). Stroke downward on the medial aspect of the 
knee and apply pressure to force ﬂuid into the lateral area (Fig. 16-81). Tap the 
knee just behind the lateral margin of the patella with the right hand (Fig. 16-82).
Prepatellar bursitis is triggered by 
excessive kneeling; anserine bursitis 
from running, valgus knee deformity, 
or OA;  and a popliteal or “Baker” cyst 
from distention of the gastrocnemius 
semimembranosus bursa from under-
lying arthritis or trauma. 
F I G U R E  1 6 - 8 0 .  Milk 
downward.
F I G U R E  1 6 - 8 1 .  Apply 
medial pressure.
F I G U R E  1 6 - 8 2 .  Tap and watch 
for ﬂuid wave.
A fluid wave or bulge on the medial 
side between the patella and the 
femur is a positive test for effusion. 
■ The balloon sign (for major 
effusions). Place the thumb 
and index ﬁnger of your 
right hand on each side of 
the patella; with the left 
hand, compress the supra-
patellar pouch against the 
femur (Fig. 16-83). Palpate 
for ﬂuid ejected or “balloon-
ing” into the spaces next to 
the patella under your right 
thumb and index ﬁnger.
F I G U R E  1 6 - 8 3 .  Test for the balloon sign.
A palpable fluid wave is a positive test 
or “balloon sign.” A palpable returning 
fluid wave into the suprapatellar pouch 
further confirms a major effusion, 
present in knee fractures (LR 2.5).57 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
688 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
■ Balloting the patella (for major effusions). 
To assess large effusions, you can also 
compress the suprapatellar pouch and 
“ballotte” or push the patella sharply 
against the femur (Fig. 16-84). Watch for 
ﬂuid returning to the suprapatellar 
pouch.
Gastrocnemius and Soleus Muscles, Achilles Tendon. Palpate the gastroc-
nemius and soleus muscles on the posterior lower leg. Their common tendon, 
the Achilles, is palpable from about the lower third of the calf to its insertion on 
the calcaneus.
To test the integrity of the Achilles tendon, place the patient prone with the knee 
and ankle ﬂexed at 90°, or alternatively, ask the patient to kneel on a chair. 
Squeeze the calf and watch for plantar ﬂexion at the ankle.
Range of Motion and Maneuvers
Range of Motion. Now assess knee range of motion, referring to the box 
below for specific muscles responsible for each movement and for instructions 
to the patient.
F I G U R E  1 6 - 8 4 .  Ballotte the 
patella.
A palpable fluid wave returning into 
the pouch is also a positive test for a 
major effusion. 
A palpable patellar click with com-
pression may also occur, but yields 
more false positives. 
A defect in the muscles, tenderness, 
and swelling signal a ruptured Achilles 
tendon; tenderness and thickening of 
the tendon, at times with a protuber-
ant posterolateral bony process of the 
calcaneus, suggests Achilles tendinitis. 
Absent plantar flexion is a positive test 
for Achilles tendon rupture. Sudden 
severe pain “like a gunshot,” an ecchy-
mosis from the calf into the heel, and 
a flat-footed gait with absent “toe-off” 
may also be present. 
Knee Range of Motion
Knee 
Movement
Primary Muscles 
Affecting Movement
Patient Instructions
Flexion
Hamstring group: biceps 
femoris, semitendinosus, 
and semimembranosus
“Bend or ﬂex your knee.” OR 
“Squat down to the ﬂoor.”
Extension
Quadriceps: rectus femoris, 
vastus medialis, lateralis, 
and intermedius
“Straighten your leg.” OR “After 
you squat down to the ﬂoor, 
stand up.”
Internal 
Rotation
Sartorius, gracilis, semitendi-
nosus, semimembranosus
“While sitting, swing your lower 
leg toward the midline.”
External 
Rotation
Biceps femoris
“While sitting, swing your lower 
leg away from the midline.”
Crepitus with flexion and extension 
signals patellofemoral OA, a probable 
precursor of knee OA.82 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
689
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Maneuvers. You will often need to test ligamentous stability and integrity 
of the medial and lateral menisci, the MCL and LCL, the patellar tendon, and 
the ACL and PCL (not palpable), particularly when there is a history of trau-
ma or knee pain.57,80,83–85 Always examine both knees and compare ﬁndings.
ACL tears are notably more frequent 
in women, attributed to ligamentous 
laxity related to estrogen cycling and 
to differences in anatomy and neuro-
muscular control. ACL injury preven-
tion programs are now common. 
Maneuvers for Examining the Knee
Structure
Maneuver
Medial Meniscus and Lateral 
Meniscus
McMurray Test. With the patient supine, 
grasp the heel and ﬂex the knee. Cup 
your other hand over the knee joint 
with ﬁngers and thumb along the 
medial joint line. From the heel, exter-
nally rotate the lower leg, then push 
on the lateral side to apply a valgus 
stress on the medial side of the joint. 
At the same time, slowly extend the 
lower leg in external rotation.
The same maneuver with internal rota-
tion of the foot stresses the lateral 
meniscus.
If a click is felt or heard at the joint line 
during ﬂexion and extension of the 
knee, or if tenderness is noted along 
the joint line, further assess the 
meniscus for a posterior tear.
Medial Collateral Ligament (MCL)
Abduction (or Valgus) Stress Test. With 
the patient supine and the knee slightly 
ﬂexed, move the thigh about 30° later-
ally to the side of the table. Place one 
hand against the lateral knee to stabi-
lize the femur and the other hand 
around the medial ankle. Push medially 
against the knee and pull laterally at 
the ankle to open the knee joint on the 
medial side (valgus stress).
Lateral Collateral Ligament (LCL)
Adduction (or Varus) Stress Test. With 
the thigh and knee in the same posi-
tion, change your position so that 
you can place one hand against the 
medial surface of the knee and the 
other around the lateral ankle. Push 
laterally against the knee and pull 
medially at the ankle to open the 
knee joint on the lateral side (varus 
stress).
A palpable click or pop along the 
medial or lateral joint line is a positive 
test for a tear of the posterior portion 
of the medial meniscus (positive LR of 
4.5).57 The tear may displace meniscal 
tissue, causing “locking” on full knee 
extension.
Pain or a gap in the medial joint line is 
a positive test for an MCL injury (sensi-
tivity 79–89%; specificity 49–99%).57
Pain or a gap in the lateral joint line 
points is a positive test for LCL injury 
(less common than MCL injuries).
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
690 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
A few degrees of forward movement 
are normal if equally present on the 
opposite side.
A forward jerk showing the contours 
of the upper tibia is a positive test, or 
anterior drawer sign, with a positive LR 
of 11.5 for an ACL tear.57
ACL injuries result from knee hyperex-
tension, direct blows to the knee, and 
twisting or landing on an extended 
hip or knee.
Significant forward excursion is a pos-
itive test for an ACL tear (positive LR  
of 17.0).57
If the proximal tibia falls back, this is a 
positive test for PCL injury (positive LR 
of 97.8).57
Isolated PCL tears are less common, 
usually resulting from a direct blow to 
the proximal tibia. 
Maneuvers for Examining the Knee (continued )
Structure
Maneuver
Anterior Cruciate Ligament (ACL)
Anterior Drawer Sign. With the patient 
supine, hips ﬂexed and knees ﬂexed 
to 90° and feet ﬂat on the table, cup 
your hands around the knee with the 
thumbs on the medial and lateral 
joint line and the ﬁngers on the 
medial and lateral insertions of the 
hamstrings. Draw the tibia forward 
and observe if it slides forward (like a 
drawer) from under the femur. Com-
pare the degree of forward move-
ment with that of the opposite knee.
Lachman Test. Place the knee in 15° of 
ﬂexion and external rotation. Grasp 
the distal femur on the lateral side 
with one hand and the proximal tibia 
on the medial side with the other. 
With the thumb of the tibial hand on 
the joint line, simultaneously pull 
the tibia forward and the femur back. 
Estimate the degree of forward 
excursion.
Posterior Cruciate Ligament (PCL)
Posterior Drawer Sign. Position the 
patient and place your hands in the 
positions described for the anterior 
drawer test. Push the tibia posteri-
orly and observe the degree of back-
ward movement in the femur.
The Ankle and Foot
Overview. The total weight of the body is transmitted through the ankle to 
the foot. The ankle and foot must balance the body and absorb the impact of the 
heel strike and gait. Despite thick padding along the toes, sole, and heel and 
stabilizing ligaments at the ankles, the ankle and foot are frequent sites of sprain 
and bony injury.
Bony Structures and Joints. The ankle is a hinge joint formed by the 
tibia, the ﬁbula, and the talus. The tibia and ﬁbula act as a mortise, stabilizing the 
joint while bracing the talus like an inverted cup.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
691
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
The principal joints of the ankle are the 
tibiotalar joint, between the tibia and the 
talus, and the subtalar (talocalcaneal) joint 
(Fig. 16-85).
Note the principal landmarks of the 
ankle: the medial malleolus, the bony 
prominence at the distal end of the tibia, 
and the lateral malleolus, at the distal end 
of the ﬁbula. Lodged under the talus and 
jutting posteriorly is the calcaneus, or heel 
bone.
An imaginary line, the longitudinal arch, 
spans the foot, extending from the calca-
neus of the hind foot along the tarsal 
bones of the midfoot (see cuneiform, 
navicular, and cuboid bones in Fig. 16-86) 
to the forefoot metatarsals and toes. The 
heads of the metatarsals are palpable in the 
ball of the foot. In the forefoot, identify 
the metatarsophalangeal joints, proximal to 
the webs of the toes, and the PIP and DIP 
joints of the toes.
Muscle Groups and Additional Structures. Movement at the ankle 
(tibiotalar) joint is limited to dorsiﬂexion and plantar ﬂexion. Plantar ﬂexion is 
powered by the gastrocnemius, the posterior tibial muscle, and the toe ﬂexors. 
Their tendons run behind the malleoli. The dorsiﬂexors include the anterior tibial 
muscle and the toe extensors. They lie prominently on the anterior surface, or 
dorsum, of the ankle, anterior to the malleoli.
Ligaments extend from each malleolus onto the foot.
■ Medially, the triangle-shaped deltoid ligament fans out from the inferior surface 
of the medial malleolus to the talus and proximal tarsal bones, protecting 
against stress from eversion (heel bows outward).
■ Laterally, the three ligaments are less substantial, with higher risk for injury: 
the anterior taloﬁbular ligament, most at risk in injury from inversion (heel 
bows inward) injuries; the calcaneoﬁbular ligament; and the posterior taloﬁbu-
lar ligament (Fig. 16-86). The strong Achilles tendon attaches the gastrocne-
mius and soleus muscles to the posterior calcaneus. The plantar fascia inserts 
on the medial tubercle of the calcaneus.
Achilles
tendon
Subtalar
joint
Calcaneus
Medial malleolus
Tibiotalar joint
Deltoid ligament
Longitudinal
arch
Hindfoot
Midfoot
Forefoot
Tibia
Talus
F I G U R E  1 6 - 8 5 .  Ankle, medial view.
Lateral
malleolus
Posterior
talofibular
ligament
Anterior
talofibular ligament
Calcaneofibular
ligament
Distal
phalanx
Proximal 
phalanx
Transverse tarsal joint
First metatarsal
Metatarsophalangeal 
joint
Cuboid
Navicular bone
Cuneiforms
F I G U R E  1 6 - 8 6 .  Ankle, lateral view.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
692 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Techniques of Examination
Inspection. Observe all surfaces of the ankles and feet, noting any deformi-
ties, nodules, swelling, calluses, or corns.
Palpation. With your thumbs, 
palpate the anterior aspect of each ankle 
joint, noting any bogginess, swelling, or 
tenderness (Fig. 16-87).
Feel along the Achilles tendon for nod-
ules and tenderness.
Palpate the heel, especially the poste-
rior and inferior calcaneus, and the 
plantar fascia for tenderness. Bone 
spurs are common on the calcaneus.
Palpate for tenderness over the medial and lateral ankle ligaments and the medial 
and lateral malleolus, especially in cases of trauma. In trauma, the distal tip of 
the tibia and ﬁbula should also be palpated.
Palpate the metatarsophalangeal (MTP) 
joints for tenderness (Fig. 16-88). 
Compress the forefoot between the 
thumb and ﬁngers. Exert pressure just 
proximal to the heads of the ﬁrst and 
ﬁfth metatarsals.
See Table 16-9, Abnormalities of the 
Feet (p. 706) and Table 16-10, Abnor-
malities of the Toes and Soles (p. 707). 
F I G U R E  1 6 - 8 7 .  Palpate the 
anterior ankle joint.
Localized tenderness is often present 
in arthritis, ligamentous injury, or 
infection. 
Check for rheumatoid nodules and 
tenderness, commonly found in Achil-
les tendinitis, bursitis, or partial tear 
from trauma. 
Focal heel tenderness at the attachment 
site of the plantar fascia is typical of 
plantar fasciitis; risk factors are anatomic 
(overpronation, flat feet), improper foot-
wear, excessive use, and overtraining 
with prolonged heel-strike exercise. 
Presence or absence of a heel spur does 
not change the diagnosis.86 
Most ankle sprains involve foot inver-
sion and injury to the weaker lateral 
ligaments (anterior talofibular and 
calcaneofibular), with overlying ten-
derness, swelling, and ecchymosis. 
After trauma, pain in the malleolar 
zone plus either bone tenderness over 
the posterior aspects of either malleo-
lus (or over the navicular or base of 
the fifth metatarsal) or an inability to 
bear weight for four steps is suspi-
cious for ankle fracture and warrants 
radiography (known as the Ottawa 
ankle and foot rules).87–89 
Tenderness along the posterior 
medial malleolus is seen in posterior 
tibial tendinitis. 
F I G U R E  1 6 - 8 8 .  Palpate the MTP 
joints.
Tenderness on compression is an early 
sign of RA. Acute inflammation of the 
first MTP joint is common in gout. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
693
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Palpate the heads of the ﬁve metatarsals and the 
grooves between them with your thumb and 
index ﬁnger (Fig. 16-89). Place your thumb on 
the dorsum of the foot and your index ﬁnger on 
the plantar surface.
Range of Motion and Maneuvers
Range of Motion. Assess flexion and extension at the tibiotalar (ankle) 
joint. In the foot, assess inversion and eversion at the subtalar and transverse 
tarsal joints.
F I G U R E  1 6 - 8 9 .  Palpate 
the metatarsal heads.
Pain and tenderness, called metatar-
salgia, occurs in trauma, arthritis, and 
vascular compromise. 
Tenderness over the third and fourth 
metatarsal heads on the plantar sur-
face is suspicious for Morton neuroma 
(see p. 706). 
Forefoot abnormalities like hallux val-
gus, metatarsalgia, and Morton neuroma 
are more common with wear of high-
heeled shoes with narrow toe boxes. 
Ankle and Foot Range of Motion
Ankle and Foot 
Movement
Primary Muscles 
Affecting Movement
Patient Instructions
Ankle Flexion 
(Plantar Flexion)
Gastrocnemius, soleus, 
plantaris, tibialis posterior
“Point your foot toward the 
ﬂoor.”
Ankle Extension 
(Dorsiﬂexion)
Tibialis anterior, extensor 
digitorum longus, and 
extensor hallucis longus
“Point your foot toward the 
ceiling.”
Inversion
Tibialis posterior and anterior “Bend your heel inward.”
Eversion
Peroneus longus and brevis
“Bend your heel outward.”
Maneuvers
■ The ankle (tibiotalar) joint. Dorsiﬂex and plantar ﬂex the foot at the ankle.
■ The subtalar (talocalcaneal) joint. Stabilize the ankle with one hand, grasp the 
heel with the other, and invert and evert the foot by turning the heel inward 
then outward (Figs. 16-90 and 16-91).
Pain during movements of the ankle 
and the foot helps to localize possible 
arthritis. 
F I G U R E  1 6 - 9 0 .  Invert the heel.
F I G U R E  1 6 - 9 1 .  Evert the heel.
An arthritic joint frequently causes pain 
when moved in any direction, whereas 
a ligamentous sprain produces pain 
when the ligament is stretched. For 
example, often, ankle sprain inversion 
with plantar flexion of the foot causes 
pain, whereas eversion with plantar 
flexion is relatively pain free. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
694 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
■ The transverse tarsal joint. Stabilize the heel and invert and evert the forefoot 
(Figs. 16-92 and 16-93).
F I G U R E  1 6 - 9 2 .  Invert the 
forefoot.
F I G U R E  1 6 - 9 3 .  Evert the 
forefoot.
■ The metatarsophalangeal joints. Move the proximal phalanx of each toe up and 
down.
Special Techniques
Measuring the Length of Legs. To measure leg length, the patient 
should be relaxed in the supine position and symmetrically aligned with legs 
extended. With a tape, measure the distance between the anterior superior iliac 
spine and the medial malleolus (Fig. 16-94). The tape should cross the knee on 
its medial side.
Pain suggests acute synovitis. Insta-
bility occurs in chronic synovitis and 
claw-toe deformity. 
Measured leg length is the same in 
scoliosis. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
F I G U R E  1 6 - 9 4 .  Measure leg length.
Describing Limited Motion of a Joint. Use a goniometer to 
measure range of motion in degrees. In Figures 16-95 and 16-96, the red 
lines show the range of the patient’s range of motion, and the black lines 
show the normal range.
Observations may be described in several ways. The numbers in parentheses 
show abbreviated descriptions.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
695
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
45°
0°
90°
160°
F I G U R E  1 6 - 9 5 .  Degrees of 
elbow ﬂexion.
Neutral
0°
30°
45°
90°
90°
F I G U R E  1 6 - 9 6 .  Degrees of 
elbow supination and pronation.
A.  The elbow ﬂexes from 45° to 90° 
(45° → 90°),
-or-
The elbow has a ﬂexion deformity 
of 45° and can be ﬂexed farther to 
90° (45° → 90°).
B.  Supination at elbow = 30°  
(0° → 30°)  
Pronation at elbow = 45°  
(0° → 45°)
Recording Your Findings
Use anatomical terms speciﬁc to the structure and function of individual joint 
problems to make your write-up of musculoskeletal ﬁndings more meaningful 
and informative.
Recording the Examination—The 
Musculoskeletal System
“Full range of motion in all joints of the upper and lower extremities. No evidence 
of swelling or deformity.”
OR
“Full range of motion in all joints. Hand with Heberden nodes at the DIP joints, 
Bouchard nodes at PIP joints. Mild pain with ﬂexion, extension, and rotation of 
both hips. Full range of motion in the knees, with moderate crepitus; no eﬀu-
sion but bony enlargement along the tibiofemoral joint line bilaterally. Both feet 
with hallux valgus at the ﬁrst MTP joints.”
OR
“Right knee with moderate eﬀusion and tenderness over medial meniscus 
along the joint line. Moderate laxity of ACL on Lachman test; PCL, MCL, and 
LCL intact—no posterior drawer sign or tenderness with varus or valgus stress. 
Patellar tendon intact—patient able to extend lower extremity. All other joints 
with good range of motion; no other deformity or swelling.”
These findings suggest OA. 
These findings suggest partial tear of 
medial meniscus and ACL, possibly 
from sports injury or trauma and 
require prompt evaluation. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
696 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
696 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 16-1 Patterns of Pain in and Around the Joints
Problem
Process
Common 
Locations
Pattern of 
Spread
Onset
Progression 
and Duration
Rheumatoid 
Arthritis8–10
Chronic inﬂamma-
tion of synovial mem-
branes with second-
ary erosion of adja-
cent cartilage and 
bone, and damage  
to ligaments and  
tendons
Hands—initially 
small joints (PIP 
and MCP joints), 
feet (MTP joints), 
wrists, knees, el-
bows, ankles
Symmetrically addi-
tive: progresses to 
other joints while 
persisting in initial 
joints
Usually insidious; 
human leukocyte 
antigen (HLA) and 
non-HLA genes ac-
count for >50% of 
risk of disease; in-
volves proinﬂam-
matory cytokines
Often chronic (in 
>50%), with remis-
sions and exacerba-
tions
Osteoarthritis 
(Degenerative 
Joint Disease)12
Degeneration and 
progressive loss of 
joint cartilage from 
mechanical stress, 
with damage to un-
derlying bone, and 
formation of new 
bone at the cartilage 
margins
Knees, hips, hands 
(distal, sometimes 
PIP joints), cervical 
and lumbar spine, 
and wrists (ﬁrst car-
pometacarpal joint); 
also joints previ-
ously injured or 
diseased
Additive; however, 
may involve only 
one joint.
Usually insidious; 
genetics may ac-
count for >50% of 
risk of disease; re-
petitive injury and 
obesity increase risk
Slowly progressive, 
with temporary ex-
acerbations after 
periods of overuse
Gouty Arthritis7,91
Acute Gout
An inﬂammatory 
reaction to micro-
crystals of monoso-
dium urate
Base of the big toe 
(the ﬁrst MTP 
joint), the instep or 
dorsa of feet, the 
ankles, knees, and 
elbows
Early attacks usu-
ally conﬁned to one 
joint
Sudden; often at 
night; often after in-
jury, surgery, fast-
ing, or excessive 
food or alcohol  
intake
Occasional isolated at-
tacks lasting days up 
to 2 wks; they may get 
more frequent and se-
vere, with persisting 
symptoms
Chronic Topha-
ceous Gout
Multiple local accu-
mulations of sodium 
urate in the joints 
and other tissues 
(tophi), with or with-
out inﬂammation
Feet, ankles, wrists, 
ﬁngers, and elbows
Additive, not so 
symmetric as RA
Gradual develop-
ment of chronicity 
with repeated at-
tacks
Chronic symptoms 
with acute exacer-
bations
Polymyalgia 
Rheumatica11
A disease of unclear 
etiology in people 
older than age 50 
yrs, especially 
women; overlaps 
with giant cell arte-
ritis
Muscles of the hip, 
shoulder girdle, and 
neck; symmetric
Insidious or abrupt, 
even appearing 
overnight
Chronic but ulti-
mately self-limiting
Fibromyalgia 
Syndrome90
Widespread muscu-
loskeletal pain and 
tender points. Cen-
tral pain sensitivity 
syndrome that may 
involve aberrant 
pain signaling and 
ampliﬁcation
Multiple speciﬁc 
and symmetric “ten-
der points,” often 
unrecognized until 
examined; especially 
in the neck, shoul-
ders, hands, low 
back, and knees
Shifts unpredictably 
or worsens in re-
sponse to immobil-
ity, excessive use, or 
exposure to cold
Variable
Chronic, with “ups 
and downs”
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
697
Associated Symptoms
Swelling
Redness, Warmth, 
and Tenderness
Stiffness
Limitation of 
Motion
Generalized 
Symptoms
Frequent swelling of sy-
novial tissue in joints or 
tendon sheaths; also sub-
cutaneous nodules
Tender, often warm, but 
seldom red
Prominent, often for an 
hour or more in the 
mornings, also after  
inactivity
Often develops; affected 
by associated joint con-
tractures and sublux-
ation, bursitis, and  
tendinopathy
Weakness, fatigue, 
weight loss, and low 
fever are common
Small joint effusions may 
be present, especially in 
the knees; also bony en-
largement
Possibly tender, seldom 
warm, and rarely red. 
Inﬂammation may ac-
company disease ﬂares 
and progression
Frequent but brief (usu-
ally 5–10 min), in the 
morning and after inac-
tivity
Often develops
Usually absent
Present, within and 
around the involved joint, 
usually in men (have 
higher serum urate lev-
els); often polyarticular 
later in course
Exquisitely tender, hot, 
and red
Not evident
Motion is limited pri-
marily by pain
Fever may be present; 
also consider also septic 
arthritis
Present as tophi in joints, 
bursae, and subcutaneous 
tissues; check ears and 
extensor surfaces for 
tophi
Tenderness, warmth, 
and redness may be 
present during exacer-
bations
Present
Present
Possibly fever; patients 
may also develop renal 
failure and renal stones
Swelling and edema may 
be present over dorsum 
of hands, wrists, feet
Muscles often tender, 
but not warm or red
Prominent, especially in 
the morning
Pain restricts move-
ment, especially in 
shoulders
Malaise, depression, an-
orexia, weight loss, and 
fever, but no true weak-
ness
None
Multiple speciﬁc and 
symmetric tender “trig-
ger points,” often not 
recognized until the  
examination
Present, especially in 
the morning—often 
confused with inﬂam-
matory conditions
Absent, though stiffness 
is greater at the ex-
tremes of movement
Sleep disturbance, usu-
ally with fatigue on 
awakening; overlaps 
with depression and 
other pain syndromes
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
698 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
698 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 16-2 Pains in the Neck
Patterns
Possible Causes
Physical Signs
Mechanical Neck Pain
Aching pain in the cervical 
paraspinal muscles and ligaments 
with associated muscle spasm and 
stiffness and tightness in the upper 
back and shoulder, lasting up to 6 
wks. No associated radiation, 
paresthesias, or weakness. 
Headache may be present.
Mechanism poorly understood, possibly 
sustained muscle contraction. Associated 
with poor posture, stress, poor sleep, poor 
head position during activities such as 
computer use, watching television, and 
driving.
Local muscle tenderness, pain on 
movement. No neurologic deﬁcits. Possible 
trigger points in ﬁbromyalgia. Torticollis if 
prolonged abnormal neck posture and 
muscle spasm.
Mechanical Neck Pain—
Whiplash18,19
Mechanical neck pain with aching 
paracervical pain and stiffness, 
often beginning the day after injury. 
Occipital headache, dizziness, 
malaise, and fatigue may be 
present. Chronic whiplash 
syndrome if symptoms last more 
than 6 mo; occurs in 20%–40% of 
injuries.
Musculoligamentous sprain or strain from 
forced hyperﬂexion—hyperextension 
injury to the neck, as in rear-end collisions.
Localized paracervical tenderness, 
decreased neck range of motion, perceived 
weakness of the upper extremities. Causes 
of cervical cord compression such as 
fracture, herniation, head injury, or altered 
consciousness are excluded.
Cervical Radiculopathy—from 
Nerve Root Compression18,19
Sharp burning or tingling pain in 
the neck and one arm, with 
associated paresthesias and 
weakness. Sensory symptoms often 
in myotomal pattern, deep in 
muscle, rather than dermatomal 
pattern.
Dysfunction of cervical spinal nerve,  
nerve roots, or both from foraminal 
encroachment of the spinal nerve (∼75%), 
herniated cervical disc (∼25%). Rarely 
from tumor, syrinx, or multiple sclerosis. 
Mechanisms may involve hypoxia of the 
nerve root and dorsal ganglion and release 
of inﬂammatory mediators.
C7 nerve root affected most often (45–60%), 
with weakness in triceps and ﬁnger ﬂexors 
and extensors. C6 nerve root involvement 
also common, with weakness in biceps, 
brachioradialis, wrist extensors.
Cervical Myelopathy—from 
Cervical Cord Compression18,19
Neck pain with bilateral weakness 
and paresthesias in both upper and 
lower extremities, often with 
urinary frequency. Hand 
clumsiness, palmar paresthesias, 
and gait changes may be subtle. 
Neck ﬂexion often exacerbates 
symptoms.
Usually from cervical spondylosis, deﬁned 
as cervical degenerative disc disease from 
spurs, protrusion of ligamentum ﬂavum, 
and/or disc herniation (∼80%); also from 
cervical stenosis from osteophytes, 
ossiﬁcation of ligamentum ﬂavum, and RA. 
Large central or paracentral disc herniation 
may also compress cord.
Hyperreﬂexia; clonus at the wrist, knee, or 
ankle; extensor plantar reﬂexes (positive 
Babinski signs); and gait disturbances. May 
also see Lhermitte sign: neck ﬂexion with 
resulting sensation of electrical shock 
radiating down the spine. Conﬁrmation of 
cervical myelopathy warrants neck 
immobilization and neurosurgical 
evaluation.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
699
Table 16-3 Low Back Pain
Patterns
Possible Causes
Physical Signs
Mechanical Low Back Pain4,20,21,24,28 
Aching pain in the lumbosacral area; may radiate 
into lower leg, especially in L5 (lateral leg) or S1 
(posterior leg) dermatomes. Signiﬁes anatomic or 
functional abnormality in absence of neoplastic, 
infectious, or inﬂammatory disease. Usually 
acute (<3 mo), idiopathic, benign, and self-
limiting; represents 97% of symptomatic low 
back pain. Commonly work related and 
occurring in patients 30–50 yrs. Risk factors 
include heavy lifting, poor conditioning, obesity.
Often arises from muscle and ligament 
injuries (∼70%) or age-related 
intervertebral disc or facet disease (∼4%). 
Causes also include herniated disc (∼4%), 
spinal stenosis (∼3%), compression 
fractures (∼4%), and spondylolisthesis 
(2%).
Paraspinal muscle or facet tenderness, 
pain with back movement, loss of 
normal lumbar lordosis; motor, 
sensory, and reﬂex ﬁndings are 
normal. In osteoporosis, check for 
thoracic kyphosis, percussion 
tenderness over a spinous process, or 
fractures in the thoracic spine or hip.90
Sciatica (Radicular Low Back Pain)4,21,57
Shooting pain below the knee, commonly into 
the lateral leg (L5) or posterior calf (S1); 
typically accompanies low back pain, often with 
associated paresthesias and weakness. Bending, 
sneezing, coughing, straining during bowel 
movements can worsen the pain.
Sciatic pain is sensitive, ∼95%, and speciﬁc, 
∼88%, for disc herniation. Usually from 
herniated intervertebral disc with 
compression or traction of nerve root(s) in 
people ages 50 yrs or older. L5 and S1 roots 
are involved in ∼95% of disc herniations; root 
or spinal cord compression from neoplastic 
conditions in fewer than 1% of cases. Tumor 
or midline disc herniation may cause bowel 
or bladder dysfunction, leg weakness from 
cauda equina syndrome (S2–S4).
Disc herniation most likely if calf 
wasting, weak ankle dorsiﬂexion, 
absent ankle jerk, positive crossed 
straight-leg raise (pain in affected leg 
when healthy leg tested); negative 
straight-leg raise makes diagnosis 
highly unlikely. Ipsilateral straight-leg 
raise sensitive, about 65–98%, but not 
speciﬁc, about 10–60%.
Lumbar Spinal Stenosis92,93
Neurogenic claudication with gluteal and/or 
lower extremity pain and/or fatigue that may 
occur with or without back pain. Pain is 
provoked by lumbar extension (as in walking 
uphill) due to reduced space in the lumbar spine 
from degenerative changes in the spinal canal. 
Positive LR is >6.0 if pain is absent when seated, 
improved with bending forward, or present in 
both buttocks and legs. Positive LR is <4.0 if gait 
is wide-based and Romberg test is abnormal.
Arises from hypertrophic degenerative 
disease of one or more vertebral facets and 
thickening of the ligamentum ﬂavum, 
causing narrowing of the spinal canal 
centrally or in lateral recesses. More 
common after age 60 yrs.
Posture may be ﬂexed forward to 
reduce symptoms, with lower 
extremity weakness and hyporeﬂexia. 
Thigh pain typically occurs after 30 s 
of lumbar extension. Straight-leg raise 
is usually negative.
Chronic Back Stiffness70,94
Ankylosing spondylitis, an inﬂammatory 
polyarthritis, most common in men 
younger than 40 yrs. Diffuse idiopathic 
hyperostosis (DISH) affects men more than 
women, usually age ≥50 yrs.
Nocturnal Back Pain,  
Unrelieved by Rest4
Consider metastatic malignancy to the 
spine from cancer of the prostate, breast, 
lung, thyroid, and kidney, and multiple 
myeloma.
Loss of the normal lumbar lordosis, 
muscle spasm, limited anterior and 
lateral ﬂexion. Lateral immobility of the 
spine, especially in thoracic area improves 
with exercise. 
Pain Referred from the Abdomen or  
Pelvis
Usually a deep, aching pain; the level varies 
with the source. Accounts for ∼2% of low back 
pain.
Peptic ulcer, pancreatitis, pancreatic 
cancer, chronic prostatitis, endometriosis, 
dissecting aortic aneurysm, retroperitoneal 
tumor, and other causes.
Variable with the source. Local 
vertebral tenderness may be present.
Spinal movements are not painful and 
range of motion is not affected. Look 
for signs of the primary disorder.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
700 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
700 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 16-4 Painful Shoulders
Rotator Cuff Tendinitis (Impingement Syndrome)
Repeated shoulder motion, for example, from throwing or 
swimming, can cause edema and hemorrhage followed by 
inﬂammation, most commonly involving the supraspinatus tendon. 
Acute, recurrent, or chronic pain may result, often aggravated by 
activity. Patients report sharp catches of pain, grating, and weakness 
when lifting the arm overhead. When the supraspinatus tendon is 
involved, tenderness is maximal just below the tip of the acromion. In 
older adults, bone spurs on the undersurface of the acromion may 
contribute to symptoms.
Shoulder-
shrugging effort
Limited abduction
Normal abduction
Rotator Cuff Tears
The rotator cuff muscles and tendons compress the humeral head 
into the concave glenoid fossa and strengthen arm movement—the 
subscapularis in internal rotation, the supraspinatus in elevation, and 
the infraspinatus and teres minor in external rotation. Injury from a 
fall, trauma, or repeated impingement against the acromion and the 
coracoacromial ligament may cause a partial- or full-thickness tear of 
the rotator cuff, the most common clinical problem of the shoulder, 
especially in older patients. Patients complain of chronic shoulder 
pain, night pain, or catching and grating when raising the arm 
overhead. Weakness or tears of the tendons usually start in the 
supraspinatus tendon and progress posteriorly and anteriorly. Look 
for atrophy of the deltoid, supraspinatus, or infraspinatus muscles. 
Palpate anteriorly over the anterior greater tuberosity of the humerus 
to check for a defect in muscle attachment and below the acromion 
for crepitus during arm rotation. In a complete tear, active abduction 
and forward ﬂexion at the glenohumeral joint are severely impaired, 
producing a characteristic shrug of the shoulder and a positive “drop 
arm” test (see p. 655).
Calciﬁc Tendinitis
Calciﬁc tendinitis is a degenerative process in the tendon associated 
with the deposition of calcium salts that usually involves the 
supraspinatus tendon. Acute disabling attacks of shoulder pain may 
occur, usually in patients ages ≥30 yrs, especially in women. The arm 
is held close to the side, and all motions are severely limited by pain. 
Tenderness is maximal below the tip of the acromion. The subacromial 
bursa, which overlies the supraspinatus tendon, may be inﬂamed. 
Chronic less severe pain may also occur.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
701
Bicipital Tendinitis
Inﬂammation of the long head of the biceps tendon and tendon 
sheath causes anterior shoulder pain resembling and often coexisting 
with rotator cuff tendinitis. Both conditions may involve 
impingement injury. Tenderness is maximal in the bicipital groove. 
Externally rotate and abduct the arm to separate this area from the 
subacromial tenderness of supraspinatus tendinitis. With the patient’s 
arm at the side, elbow ﬂexed to 90°, ask the patient to supinate the 
forearm against your resistance. Increased pain in the bicipital groove 
conﬁrms this condition. Pain during resisted forward ﬂexion of the 
shoulder with the elbow extended is also characteristic.
Adhesive Capsulitis (Frozen Shoulder)
Adhesive capsulitis refers to ﬁbrosis of the glenohumeral joint 
capsule, manifested by diffuse, dull, aching pain in the shoulder and 
progressive restriction of active and passive range of motion, especially in 
external rotation, with localized tenderness. The condition is usually 
unilateral and occurs in people ages 40–60 yrs. There is often an 
antecedent disorder of the shoulder or another condition (such as 
myocardial infarction) that has decreased shoulder movements.  
The disorder may take 6 mo to 2 yrs to resolve. Stretching exercises 
may help.
Acromioclavicular Arthritis
Acromioclavicular arthritis is relatively common, usually arising from 
prior direct injury to the shoulder girdle with resulting degenerative 
changes. Tenderness is localized over the acromioclavicular joint. Patients 
report pain with movements of the scapula and arm abduction.
Coracoid process
Acromion
Glenoid
fossa
Humerus
Anterior Dislocation of the Humerus
Shoulder instability from anterior subluxation or dislocation of the 
humerus usually results from a fall or forceful throwing motion, then 
can become common unless treated or the precipitating motion is 
avoided. The shoulder seems to “slip out of the joint” when the arm 
is abducted and externally rotated, causing a positive apprehension sign 
for anterior instability when the examiner places the arm in this 
position. Any shoulder movement may cause pain, and patients hold 
the arm in a neutral position. The rounded lateral aspect of the 
shoulder appears ﬂattened. Dislocations may also be inferior, 
posterior (relatively rare), and multidirectional.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
702 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
702 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 16-5 Swollen or Tender Elbows
Olecranon
bursitis
Olecranon Bursitis
Swelling and inﬂammation of the olecranon bursa may result from trauma, 
gout, or rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The swelling is superﬁcial to the 
olecranon process and may reach 6 cm in diameter. Consider aspiration for 
both diagnosis and symptomatic relief.
Rheumatoid
nodules
Rheumatoid Nodules
Subcutaneous nodules may develop at pressure points along the extensor 
surface of the ulna in patients with RA or acute rheumatic fever. They are 
ﬁrm and nontender. They are not attached to the overlying skin but may be 
attached to the underlying periosteum. They can develop in the area of the 
olecranon bursa, but often occur more distally.
Arthritis
Arthritis of the Elbow
Synovial inﬂammation or ﬂuid is felt best in the grooves between the 
olecranon process and the epicondyles on either side. Palpate for a boggy, 
soft, or ﬂuctuant swelling and for tenderness. Causes include RA, gout and 
pseudogout, osteoarthritis, and trauma. Patients report pain, stiffness, and 
restricted motion.
Epicondylitis
Epicondylitis
Lateral epicondylitis (tennis elbow) follows repetitive extension of the wrist or 
pronation–supination of the forearm. Pain and tenderness develop 1 cm distal to 
the lateral epicondyle and possibly in the extensor muscles close to it. When 
the patient tries to extend the wrist against resistance, pain increases.
Medial epicondylitis (pitcher’s, golfer’s, or Little League elbow) follows 
repetitive wrist ﬂexion such as throwing. Tenderness is maximal just lateral and 
distal to the medial epicondyle. Wrist ﬂexion against resistance increases the 
pain.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
703
Table 16-6 Arthritis in the Hands
Tender,
swollen
Acute Rheumatoid Arthritis
Tender, painful, stiff joints in RA, usually with 
symmetric involvement on both sides of the 
body. The distal interphalangeal (DIP), 
metacarpophalangeal (MCP), and wrist joints are 
the most frequently affected. Note the fusiform 
or spindle-shaped swelling of the PIP joints in 
acute disease.
Swollen,
thickened
Rheumatoid
nodule
Muscular atrophy
Ulnar
      deviation
   
Boutonnière deformity
Swan neck deformity
Chronic Rheumatoid Arthritis
In chronic disease, note the swelling and 
thickening of the MCP and PIP joints. Range of 
motion becomes limited, and ﬁngers may deviate 
toward the ulnar side. The interosseous muscles 
atrophy. The ﬁngers may show “swan neck” 
deformities (hyperextension of the PIP joints with 
ﬁxed ﬂexion of the distal interphalangeal [DIP] 
joints). Less common is a boutonnière deformity 
(persistent ﬂexion of the PIP joint with 
hyperextension of the DIP joint). Rheumatoid 
nodules are seen in the acute or the chronic stage.
Radial deviation of distal phalanx
Heberden 
node
Bouchard
node
Metacarpophalangeal
joints uninvolved
Osteoarthritis (Degenerative Joint  
Disease)
Heberden nodes on the dorsolateral aspects of the 
DIP joints from bony overgrowth of OA. Usually 
hard and painless, they affect middle-ages or 
older adults; they are often associated with 
arthritic changes in other joints. Flexion and 
deviation deformities may develop. Bouchard 
nodes on the PIP joints are less common. The 
MCP joints are spared.
Swollen
Knobby swelling
Draining tophus
Chronic Tophaceous Gout8
Urate crystal deposits, often with surrounding 
inﬂammation, cause deformities in subcutaneous 
tissues, bursae, cartilage, and subchondral bone 
that mimic RA and OA. Joint involvement is 
usually less symmetric than in RA. Acute 
inﬂammation may be present. Knobby swellings 
around the joints ulcerate and discharge white 
chalk-like urates.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
704 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
704 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 16-7 Swellings and Deformities of the Hands
Flexion contraction
Cord
Dupuytren Contracture
The ﬁrst sign of a Dupuytren contracture is a thickened band overlying the ﬂexor tendon  
of the fourth ﬁnger and possibly the little ﬁnger near the distal palmar crease. 
Subsequently, the skin in this area puckers, and a thickened ﬁbrotic cord develops 
between the palm and ﬁnger. Finger extension is limited, but ﬂexion is usually normal. 
Flexion contracture of the ﬁngers may gradually develop.
Trigger Finger
Trigger ﬁnger is caused by a painless nodule in a ﬂexor tendon in the palm, near the 
metacarpal head. The nodule is too big to enter easily into the tendon sheath during 
extension of the ﬁngers from a ﬂexed position. With extra effort or assistance, the ﬁnger 
extends and ﬂexes with a palpable and audible snap as the nodule pops into the tendon 
sheath. Watch, listen, and palpate the nodule as the patient ﬂexes and extends the ﬁngers.
Normal
hypothenar
eminence
Flattened
thenar
eminence
Thenar Atrophy
Thenar atrophy suggests a median nerve disorder such as carpal tunnel syndrome (see  
p. 664). Hypothenar atrophy suggests an ulnar nerve disorder.
Cystic swelling
Ganglion
Ganglia are cystic, round, usually nontender swellings along tendon sheaths or joint 
capsules, frequently at the dorsum of the wrist. The cyst contains synovial ﬂuid arising 
from erosion or tearing of the joint capsule or tendon sheath and trapped in the cystic 
cavity. Flexion of the wrist makes ganglia more prominent; extension tends to obscure 
them. Ganglia may also develop on the hands, wrists, ankles, and feet. They can 
disappear spontaneously.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
705
Table 16-8  Tendon Sheath, Palmar Space, and  
Finger Infections
Pain on extension
Finger held
in slight flexion
Swelling and
tenderness along
tendon sheath
Acute Tenosynovitis
Inﬂammation of the ﬂexor tendon sheaths, acute tenosynovitis, may follow 
local injury, overuse, or infection. Unlike arthritis, tenderness and swelling 
develop not in the joint but along the course of the tendon sheath, from the 
distal phalanx to the level of the metacarpophalangeal joint. The ﬁnger is held 
in slight ﬂexion; ﬁnger extension is very painful. Causative infectious agents 
include Staphylococcus and Streptococcus species, disseminated gonorrhea, and 
Candida albicans.
Puncture wound
Tender, swollen
Acute Tenosynovitis and Thenar Space Involvement
If the infection progresses, it may extend from the tendon sheath into the 
adjacent fascial spaces within the palm. Infections of the index ﬁnger and 
thenar space are illustrated. Early diagnosis and treatment are important.
Puncture wound
Swollen, tender,
dusky red
Felon
Injury to the ﬁngertip may result in infection of the enclosed fascial spaces of 
the distal pulp or phalanx pad of the ﬁngertip, usually from Staphylococcus 
aureus. Severe pain, localized tenderness, swelling, and dusky redness are 
characteristics. Early diagnosis and treatment, usually incision and drainage, 
are important for preventing abscess formation. If vesicles are present, 
consider herpetic whitlow instead, usually seen in health care workers exposed 
to herpes simplex virus in human saliva.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
706 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
706 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 16-9 Abnormalities of the Feet
Hot, red, tender, swollen
Acute Gouty Arthritis
The metatarsophalangeal joint of the great toe is the initial site of attack in 50% of the 
episodes of acute gouty arthritis. It is characterized by a very painful and tender, hot, 
dusky red swelling that extends beyond the margin of the joint. It is easily mistaken for a 
cellulitis. The ankle, tarsal joints, and knee are also commonly involved.
Sole touches floor
Medial border 
becomes convex
Flat Feet
Signs of ﬂat feet may be apparent only when the patient stands, or they may become 
permanent. The longitudinal arch ﬂattens so that the sole approaches or touches the ﬂoor. 
The normal concavity on the medial side of the foot becomes convex. Tenderness may be 
present from the medial malleolus down along the medial plantar surface of the foot. 
Swelling may develop anterior to the malleoli. Flat feet may be a normal variant or arise 
from posterior tibial tendon dysfunction, seen in obesity, diabetes, and prior foot injury. 
Inspect the shoes for excess wear on the inner sides of the soles and heels.
Hallux Valgus
In hallux valgus, there is lateral deviation of the great toe and enlargement of the head of 
the ﬁrst metatarsal on its medial side, forming a bursa or bunion. This bursa may become 
inﬂamed. Women are 10 times more likely to be affected than men.
Morton
neuroma
Morton Neuroma
Look for tenderness over the plantar surface between the third and fourth metatarsal 
heads, from perineural ﬁbrosis of the common digital nerve due to repetitive nerve 
irritation (not a true neuroma). Check for pain radiating to the toes when you press on 
the plantar interspace and squeeze the metatarsals with your other hand. Symptoms 
include hyperesthesia, numbness, aching, and burning from the metatarsal heads into the 
third and fourth toes.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
707
Table 16-10 Abnormalities of the Toes and Soles
Red, tender
Granulation
tissue
Hyperextended
Flexed
Red, thickened
Ingrown Toenail
The sharp edge of a toenail may dig into 
and injure the lateral nail fold, resulting 
in inﬂammation and infection. A tender, 
reddened, overhanging nail fold, 
sometimes with granulation tissue and 
purulent discharge, results. The great toe 
is most often affected.
Hammer Toe
Usually involving the second toe, a 
hammer toe is characterized by hyper-
extension at the metatarsophalangeal 
joint with ﬂexion at the proximal inter-
phalangeal (PIP) joint. A corn fre-
quently develops at the pressure point 
over the PIP joint.
Corn
A corn is a painful conical thickening of 
skin that results from recurrent pressure 
on normally thin skin. The apex of the 
cone points inward and causes pain. 
Corns characteristically occur over bony 
prominences such as the ﬁfth toe. When 
located in moist areas such as pressure 
points between the fourth and ﬁfth toes, 
they are called soft corns.
Callus
Like a corn, a callus is an area of greatly 
thickened skin that develops in a region 
of recurrent pressure. Unlike a corn, a 
callus involves skin that is normally 
thick, such as the sole, and is usually 
painless. If a callus is painful, suspect an 
underlying plantar wart.
Plantar Wart
A plantar wart is a hyperkeratotic lesion 
caused by human papillomavirus, located 
on the sole of the foot. It may look like 
a callus. Look for the characteristic 
small dark spots that give a stippled 
appearance to a wart. Normal skin lines 
stop at the wart’s edge. It is tender if 
pinched side to side, whereas a callus is 
tender to direct pressure.
Neuropathic Ulcer
When pain sensation is diminished or 
absent, as in diabetic neuropathy, 
neuropathic ulcers may develop at 
pressure points on the feet. Although 
often deep, infected, and indolent, they 
are painless. Underlying osteomyelitis 
and amputation may ensue. Early 
detection of loss of sensation using a 
nylon ﬁlament is the standard of care in 
diabetes.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
708 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
References
 1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National ambulatory 
medical care survey: 2012 State and National Summary Tables: 
Table 15, Primary diagnosis at ofﬁce visits, classiﬁed by major dis-
ease category: United States, 2012; Table 16, Twenty leading pri-
mary diagnosis groups for ofﬁce visits: United States, 2012. 
Available at http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/ahcd/namcs_sum-
mary/2012_namcs_web_tables.pdf. Accessed September 7, 2015.
 2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Arthritis-related sta-
tistics. Updated March 17, 2014. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/
arthritis/data_statistics/arthritis_related_stats.htm#1. Accessed 
September 8, 2015.
 3. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Summary Health Sta-
tistics for U.S. Adults: National Health Interview Survey, 2010. 
Table 9. Frequencies of migraines and pain in neck, lower back, face, 
or jaw among persons aged 18 and over… p. 40. http://www.cdc.
gov/nchs/data/series/sr_10/sr10_252.pdf. Accessed September 8, 
2015.
 4. Chou R. In the clinic. Low back pain. Ann Intern Med. 2014; 
160:ITC6–1.
 5. Cush JJ, Lipsky PE. In: Longo DL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al. (eds). 
Chapter 331, Approach to Articular and Musculoskeletal Disorders, 
in Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. 18th ed. New York: 
McGraw-Hill; 2012.
 6. Carpenter CR, Schuur JD, Everett WW, et al. Evidence-based diag-
nostics: adult septic arthritis. Acad Emerg Med. 2011;18:781.
 7. Mead T, Arabindoo K, Smith B. Managing gout: there’s more we 
can do. J Fam Pract. 2014;63:707.
 8. American College of Physicians. Approach to the Patient with 
Rheumatic Disease, in Rheumatology. Collier V (ed), Medical 
Knowledge Self-Assessment Program (MKSAP) 16. Philadelphia, PA: 
American College of Physicians; 2012.
 9. Anderson J, Caplan L, Yazdany J, et al. Rheumatoid arthritis dis-
ease activity measures: American College of Rheumatology recom-
mendations for use in clinical practice. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 
2012;64:640.
 10. Davis JM 3rd, Matteson EL; American College of Rheumatology; 
European League Against Rheumatism. My treatment approach to 
rheumatoid arthritis. Mayo Clin Proc. 2012;87:659.
 11. Dejaco C, Singh YP, Perel P, et al. 2015 Recommendations for the 
management of polymyalgia rheumatica: a European League 
Against Rheumatism/American College of Rheumatology collab-
orative initiative. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015;67:2569.
 12. Gelber AC. In the clinic. Osteoarthritis. Ann Intern Med. 2014; 
161:ITC1–1.
 13. Davatchi F. Behçet’s disease. Int J Rheum Dis. 2014;17:355.
 14. Hatemi G, Yaziel Y, Yazici H. Behçet’s syndrome. Rheum Dis N Am. 
2013:39:245.
 15. Michaleff ZA, Maher CG, Verhagen AP, et al. Accuracy of the Cana-
dian C-spine rule and NEXUS to screen for clinically important 
cervical spine injury in patients following blunt trauma: a system-
atic review. CMAJ. 2012;184:E867.
 16. Hoffman JR, Mower WR, Wolfson AB, et al. Validity of a set of 
clinical criteria to rule out injury to the cervical spine in patients 
with blunt trauma. N Engl J Med. 2000;343:94.
 17. Stiell IG, Wells GA, Vandemheen KL, et al. The Canadian C-spine 
rule for radiography in alert and stable trauma patients. JAMA. 
2001;286:1841.
 18. Bono CM, Ghiselli G, Gilbert TJ, et al; North American Spine Soci-
ety. An evidence-based clinical guideline for the diagnosis and 
treatment of cervical radiculopathy from degenerative disorders. 
Spine J. 2011;11:64.
 19. Onks CA, Billy G. Evaluation and treatment of cervical radicu-
lopathy. Prim Care. 2013;40:837.
 20. Rozenberg S, Foltz V, Fautrel B. Treatment strategy for chronic low 
back pain. Joint Bone Spine. 2012;79:555.
 21. Ropper AH, Zafonte RD. Sciatica. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:1240.
 22. Lurie JD, Gerber PD, Sox HC. Clinical problem-solving. A pain in 
the back. N Engl J Med. 2000;343:723.
 23. Deyo RA. Biopsychosocial care for chronic back pain. Supporting 
evidence looks promising but far from complete. BMJ. 2015;350: 
h538.
 24. Chou R, Shekelle P. Will this patient develop persistent disabling 
low back pain? JAMA. 2010;303:1295.
 25. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Ofﬁce of Disease 
Prevention and Health Promotion. Healthy People 2020. Arthritis, 
osteoporosis, and chronic back conditions. Washington, D.C. Available 
at: http://www.healthypeople.gov/202020202020/topics objec-
tives/topic/Arthritis-Osteoporosis-and-Chronic-Back-Conditions. 
Accessed June 19, 2015.
 26. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Ofﬁce of Disease 
Prevention and Health Promotion. Healthy People 2020. Physical 
activity objectives. Washington, DC. Available at: http://www.
healthypeople.gov/2020202020202020/topics-objectives/topic/
physical-activity/objectives. Accessed June 19, 2015.
 27. Davis MA, Onega T, Weeks WB, et al. Where the United States 
spends its spine dollars: expenditures on different ambulatory ser-
vices for the management of back and neck conditions. Spine. 
2012;37:1693.
 28. Balague F, Mannion AF, Pellise F, et al. Non-speciﬁc low back pain. 
Lancet. 2012;379:482.
 29. National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey. Factsheet. Outpatient 
Department. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National 
Center for Health Statistics. 2011. Available at: http://www.cdc.
gov/nchs/data/ahcd/NHAMCS_2011_opd_factsheet.pdf. Accessed 
June 19, 2015.
 30. Dagenais S, Tricco AC, Haldeman S. Synthesis of recommenda-
tions for the assessment and management of low back pain from 
recent clinical practice guidelines. Spine J. 2010;10:514.
 31. Waddell G, McCulloch JA, Kummel E, et al. Nonorganic physical 
signs in low-back pain. Spine. 1980;5:117.
 32. Chou R. Pharmacological management of low back pain. Drugs. 
2010;70:387.
 33. Looker AC, Borrud LG, Dawson-Hughes B, et al. Osteoporosis or 
low bone mass at the femur neck or lumbar spine in older adults: 
United States, 2005 2008. NCHS Data Brief. 2012;93:1.
 34. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for osteoporosis: 
U.S. preventive services task force recommendation statement. 
Ann Intern Med. 2011;154:356.
 35. Brauer CA, Coca-Perraillon M, Cutler DM, et al. Incidence and 
mortality of hip fractures in the United States. JAMA. 2009;302: 
1573.
 36. Looker AC, Melton LJ 3rd, Harris TB, et al. Prevalence and trends 
in low femur bone density among older US adults: NHANES 2005–
2006 compared with NHANES III. J Bone Miner Res. 2010;25:64.
 37. Qaseem A, Snow V, Shekelle P, et al. Screening for osteoporosis in 
men: a clinical practice guideline from the American College of 
Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2008;148:680.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  16 |
 
The Musculoskeletal System  
709
REFERENCES
 38. National Institutes of Health. Ofﬁce of Dietary Supplements. Cal-
cium. Dietary Supplement Fact Sheet. 2013. Available at: http://
ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Calcium HealthProfessional./ Accessed 
June 19, 2015.
 39. Ross AC, Manson JE, Abrams SA, et al. The 2011 report on dietary 
reference intakes for calcium and vitamin D from the Institute of 
Medicine: what clinicians need to know. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2011;96:53.
 40. LeFevre ML, U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for 
vitamin D deﬁciency in adults: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force 
recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2015;162:133.
 41. Moyer VA, U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Vitamin D and 
calcium supplementation to prevent fractures in adults: U.S. Pre-
ventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern 
Med. 2013;158:691.
 42. Reid IR, Bristow SM, Bolland MJ. Cardiovascular complications of 
calcium supplements. J Cell Biochem. 2015;116:494.
 43. Heaney RP, Kopecky S, Maki KC, et al. A review of calcium supple-
ments and cardiovascular disease risk. Adv Nutr. 2012;3:763.
 44. Islam MR, Ahmed MU, Mitu SA, et al. Comparative analysis of 
serum zinc, copper, manganese, iron, calcium, and magnesium level 
and complexity of interelement relations in generalized anxiety 
disorder patients. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2013;154:21.
 45. Tripkovic L, Lambert H, Hart K, et al. Comparison of vitamin D2 
and vitamin D3 supplementation in raising serum 25-hydroxyvi-
tamin D status: a systematic review and meta analysis. Am J Clin 
Nutr. 2012;95:1357.
 46. Nelson HD, Haney EM, Dana T, et al. Screening for osteoporosis: 
an update for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern 
Med. 2010;153:99.
 47. North American Menopause Society. Management of osteoporosis 
in postmenopausal women: 2010 position statement of Meno-
pause Society. Menopause. 2010;17:25.
 48. Hodsman A, Papaioannou A, Ann C. Clinical practice guidelines 
for the use of parathyroid hormone in the treatment of osteoporosis. 
CMAJ. 2006;175:48.
 49. Michael YL, Lin JS, Whitlock EP, et al. Interventions to prevent falls 
in older adults: An updated systematic review. Rockville, MD; 2010. 
Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21595101. 
21595101.21595101.21595101. Accessed June 19, 2015.
 50. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Hip Fractures Among 
Older Adults. Atlanta, GA; 2015. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/
HomeandRecreationalSafety/Falls/adulthipfx.html. Accessed June 
19, 2015.
 51. Moyer VA. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Prevention of falls 
in community dwelling older adults: U.S. Preventive Services 
Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2012;157: 
197.
 52. Singh JA, Furst DE, Bharat A, et al. 2012 update of the 2008 Amer-
ican College of Rheumatology recommendations for the use of 
disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs and biologic agents in the 
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 
2012;64:625.
 53. Aletaha D, Neogi T, Silman AJ, et al. 2010 Rheumatoid arthritis 
classiﬁcation criteria: an American College of Rheumatology/Euro-
pean League Against Rheumatism collaborative initiative. Arthritis 
Rheum. 2010;62:2569.
 54. Nagy G, van Vollenhoven RF. Sustained biologic-free and drug-free 
remission in rheumatoid arthritis, where are we now? Arthritis Res 
Ther. 2015;17:181.
 55. Durham J, Newton-John TR, Zakrzewska JM. Temporomandibular 
disorders. BMJ. 2015;350:h1154.
 56. Schiffman E, Ohrbach R, Truelove E, et al. Diagnostic Criteria for 
Temporomandibular Disorders (DC/TMD) for clinical and research 
applications: recommendations of the International RDC/TMD 
Consortium Network and Orofacial Pain Special Interest Group. 
J Oral Facial Pain Headache. 2014;28:6.
 57. McGee S. Chapter 55, Examination of the musculoskeletal sys-
tem—the shoulder. In: Evidence-based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. 
St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2012.
 58. Whittle S, Buchbinder R. In the clinic. Rotator cuff disease. Ann 
Intern Med. 2015;162:ITC1–1.
 59. Hermans J, Luime JJ, Meuffels DE, et al. Does this patient with 
shoulder pain have rotator cuff disease?: The Rational Clinical 
Examination systematic review. JAMA. 2013;310:837.
 60. Hanchard NC, Lenza M, Handoll HH, et al. Physical tests for 
shoulder impingements and local lesions of bursa, tendon or 
labrum that may accompany impingement. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2013;4:CD007427.
 61. Murrell GA, Walton. Diagnosis of rotator cuff tears. Lancet. 2001; 
357:769.
 62. Appleboam A, Reuben AD, Benger JR, et al. Elbow extension test 
to rule out elbow fracture: multicentre prospective validation and 
observational study of diagnostic accuracy in adults and children. 
BMJ. 2008;337:2428.
 63. Darracq MA, Vinson DR, Panacek EA. Preservation of active range 
of motion after acute elbow trauma predicts absence of elbow frac-
ture. Am J Emerg Med. 2008;26:779.
 64. Arundel D, Williams P, Townend W. Deriving the East Riding 
Elbow Rule (ER2): a maximally sensitive decision tool for elbow 
injury. Emerg Med J. 2014;31:380.
 65. Kleopa KA. In the clinic. Carpal tunnel syndrome. Ann Intern Med. 
2015;163:ITC1–1.
 66. Kenney RJ, Hammert WC. Physical examination of the hand. J Hand 
Surg Am. 2014;39:2324.
 67. Sauvé PS, Rhee PC, Shin AY, et al. Examination of the wrist: radial-
sided wrist pain. J Hand Surg Am. 2014;39:2089.
 68. McGee S. Chapter 62, Disorders of the nerve roots, plexuses. In: Evi-
dence-based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2012.
 69. D’Arcy CA, McGee S. Does this patient have carpal tunnel syn-
drome? The rational clinical examination. JAMA. 2000;283:3110.
 70. Raychaudhuri SP, Deodhar A. The classiﬁcation and diagnostic cri-
teria of ankylosing spondylitis. J Autoimmun. 2014;48:128.
 71. Al Nezari NH, Schneiders AG, Hendrick PA. Neurological exami-
nation of the peripheral nervous system to diagnose lumbar spinal 
disc herniation with suspected radiculopathy: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Spine J. 2013;13:657.
 72. Scaia V, Baxter D, Cook C. The pain provocation-based straight leg 
raise test for diagnosis of lumbar disc herniation, lumbar radicu-
lopathy, and/or sciatica: a systematic review of clinical utility. J Back 
Musculoskelet Rehabil. 2012;25:215.
 73. Iversen T, Solberg TK, Romner B, et al. Accuracy of physical exam-
ination for chronic lumbar radiculopathy. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 
2013;14:206.
 74. Frank RM, Slabaugh MA, Grumet RC, et al. Hip pain in active 
patients: what you may be missing. J Fam Pract. 2012;61:736.
 75. Suarez JC, Ely EE, Mutnal AB, et al. Comprehensive approach to 
the evaluation of groin pain. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2013;21:558.
 76. Karrasch C, Lynch S. Practical approach to hip pain. Med Clin N 
Am. 2014:98:737.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
710 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
 77. Reiman MP, Goode AP, Hegedus EJ, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of 
clinical tests of the hip: A systematic review with meta-analysis. 
Br J Sports Med. 2012;47:893.
 78. Prather H, Harris-Hayes M, Hunt DM, et al. Reliability and agree-
ment of hip range of motion and provocative physical examination 
tests in asymptomatic volunteers. PM R. 2010;2:888.
 79. Smith BE, Thacker D, Crewesmith A, et al. Special tests for assess-
ing meniscal tears within the knee: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Evid Based Med. 2015;20:88.
 80. Lester JD, Watson JN, Hutchinson MR. Physical examination of the 
patellofemoral joint. Clin Sports Med. 2014;33:403.
 81. Morelli V, Braxton TM Jr. Meniscal, plica, patellar, and patello-
femoral injuries of the knee: updates, controversies and advance-
ments. Prim Care. 2013;40:357.
 82. Schiphof D, van Middelkoop M, de Klerk BM, et al. Crepitus is a 
ﬁrst indication of patellofemoral osteoarthritis (and not of tibio-
femoral osteoarthritis). Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2014;22:631.
 83. Knutson T, Bothwell J, Durbin R. Evaluation and management of 
traumatic knee injuries in the emergency department. Emerg Clin 
North Am. 2015;33:345.
 84. Karrasch C, Gallo RA. The acutely injured knee. Med Clin North 
Am. 2014;98:719.
 85. Young C. In the clinic. Plantar fasciitis. Ann Intern Med. 2012; 
156:ITC1–1.
 86. Papaliodis DN, Vanushkina MA, Richardson NG, et al. The foot 
and ankle examination. Med Clin North Am. 2014;98:181.
 87. Czajka CM, Tran E, Cai AN. Ankle sprains and instability. Med Clin 
North Am. 2014;98:313.
 88. Tiemstra JD. Update on acute ankle sprains. Am Fam Phys. 2012; 
85:1170.
 89. Clauw DJ. Fibromyalgia: a clinical review. JAMA. 2014;311:1547.
 90. Golub AL, Laya MB. Osteoporosis: screening, prevention, and 
management. Med Clin N Am. 2015;99:587.
 91. Neogi T. Gout. New Engl J Med. 2011;364;443.
 92. Kreiner DS, Shaffer WO, Baisden JL, et al. An evidence-based clini-
cal guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of degenerative lum-
bar spinal stenosis (update). Spine J. 2013;13:734.
 93. Suri P, Rainville J, Kalichman L, et al. Does this older adult with 
lower extremity pain have the clinical syndrome of lumbar spinal 
stenosis? JAMA. 2010;304:2628.
 94. Assassi S, Weisman MH, Lee M, et al. New population-based refer-
ence values for spinal mobility measures based on the 2009–2010 
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Arthritis Rheu-
matol. 2014;66:2628.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
711
The focus of this chapter is the evaluation of the cranial nerves (CNs), the motor 
system with all its components, the sensory system, and the reﬂexes. The complex 
anatomy and physiology of the nervous system make examination and assessment 
especially challenging, but attainable with practice and dedication. For many of 
the body systems, the history provides the essential clues to diagnosis. While this 
is true for the nervous system, the neurologic examination allows you to assess all 
levels of nervous system function to a degree that is unique.
Because the nervous system affects all body systems, knowledge of neural func-
tion plays a role in the evaluation of any illness. Begin by reviewing the key 
structures of the brain illustrated in Figure 17-1.
The history and neurologic examination seek to answer four guiding questions.1
These questions are not answered separately, but iteratively as you learn about the 
patient from the patient’s spontaneous responses during the interview and from 
C H A P T E R 
17
The Nervous System
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate 
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vols. 17 and 18: Nervous System)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com
Frontal lobe
Parietal lobe
Pituitary gland
Brainstem
Medulla
Pons
Midbrain
Occipital lobe
Diencephalon
Cerebellum
F I G U R E  1 7 - 1 .  Right half of the brain, medial view.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
712 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE CHALLENGES OF NEUROLOGIC DIAGNOSIS 
your neurologic ﬁndings. As you acquire the skills of nervous system examina-
tion, it is important to test your ﬁndings against those of your teachers and 
neurologists to reﬁne your clinical expertise.
Neurologic diagnosis is considered difﬁcult by many. Lesions at different levels 
of the nervous system can cause the same physical ﬁnding. For example, weak-
ness of foot dorsiﬂexion can be caused by disease of the brain, brainstem, spinal 
cord, spinal nerve root, peripheral nerve, and muscles. In addition, neurologic 
pathophysiology can have positive or negative effects, or both. Loss of sensory 
or motor function may be transient or permanent. Alternatively, some nervous 
system structures have inhibitory effects. When destroyed, there may be increased 
function such as heightened muscle tone or pathologic hyperreﬂexia from upper 
corticospinal tract lesions. There may be irritative phenomena such as the pins-
and-needles sensation of paresthesias, myoclonus, or focal seizures with jerking 
of a limb on one side of the body. In addition, some parts of the nervous system 
are relatively silent—extensive lesions can even be present without causing 
symptoms or abnormal ﬁndings.
In many neurologic conditions the neurologic examination may be normal, as 
when a patient recovers from attacks of epilepsy or a transient ischemic attack 
(TIA). In some neurologic diseases such as migraine, normal ﬁndings are 
expected—abnormal ﬁndings would trigger alarm and further evaluation. In some 
instances, symptoms in the absence of ﬁndings would raise concern, as with a TIA.
When you conduct the neurologic examination, it is wise to adopt a ﬁxed rou-
tine or examination sequence to minimize omission of one of its important 
components. Pursue more detailed testing of areas targeted by symptoms and 
The Challenges of  
Neurologic Diagnosis
Guiding Questions for Examination of the 
Nervous System
● Does the patient have neurologic disease?
● If so, what is the localization of the lesion or lesions? Are your ﬁndings sym-
metric?
● What is the pathophysiology of abnormal ﬁndings?
● What is the preliminary diﬀerential diagnosis?
Assessment of the nervous system begins with the ﬁrst moments of the patient 
encounter and continues throughout the interview. If you suspect that the 
patient’s mental status is abnormal, proceed directly to formal mental status test-
ing, described in Chapter 5. If there is signiﬁcant impairment, for example, dis-
orientation to person or place, the history may be unreliable, so you will need 
other observers to obtain critical information.
See Chapter 5, Behavior and Mental 
Status, pp. 147–171, techniques to 
conduct the formal mental status 
examination. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
713
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
abnormal function. Follow-up examination over time is important for determin-
ing whether the patient’s condition is getting worse, improving spontaneously, 
or responding to treatment. The goal of your assessment is not just diagnosis, but 
treating and restoring the patient to health and the full range of activities of daily 
living.2
Anatomy and Physiology
Central Nervous System
The Brain. The brain has four regions: the cerebrum, the diencephalon, the 
brainstem, and the cerebellum. Each cerebral hemisphere is subdivided into 
frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes.
The central nervous system (CNS) of the brain is a vast network of interconnecting 
nerve cells, or neurons, consisting of cell bodies and their axons—single long 
ﬁbers that conduct impulses to other parts of the nervous system.
Brain tissue may be gray or white. Gray matter consists of aggregations of neuro-
nal cell bodies. It rims the surfaces of the cerebral hemispheres, forming the 
cerebral cortex. White matter consists of neuronal axons that are coated with 
myelin. The myelin sheaths, which create the white color, allow nerve impulses 
to travel more rapidly.
Deep in the brain lie additional clusters of gray matter (Fig. 17-2). These include 
the basal ganglia, which affect movement, and the thalamus and the hypothala-
mus structures in the diencephalon. The thalamus processes sensory impulses 
and relays them to the cerebral cortex. The hypothalamus maintains homeostasis 
Corpus callosum
Internal
capsule
Basal
ganglia
Gray matter
White matter
Optic tracts
Caudate nucleus
Thalamus
F I G U R E  1 7 - 2 .
Brain anatomy—coronal section.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
714 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
and regulates temperature, heart rate, and blood pressure. The hypothalamus 
affects the endocrine system and governs emotional behaviors such as anger and 
sexual drive. Hormones secreted in the hypothalamus act directly on the pitu-
itary gland.
The internal capsule is a white-matter structure where myelinated ﬁbers converge 
from all parts of the cerebral cortex and descend into the brainstem. The brainstem, 
which connects the upper part of the brain with the spinal cord, has three sec-
tions: the midbrain, the pons, and the medulla.
Consciousness relies on the interaction between intact cerebral hemispheres and 
a structure in the diencephalon and upper brainstem, the reticular activating 
(arousal) system.
The cerebellum, which lies at the base of the brain, coordinates all movement and 
helps maintain the body upright in space.
The Spinal Cord. Below the medulla, the CNS extends into 
the elongated spinal cord, encased within the bony vertebral column 
and terminating at the ﬁrst or second lumbar vertebra. The cord 
provides a series of segmental relays with the periphery, serving as a 
conduit for information ﬂow to and from the brain. The motor and 
sensory nerve pathways relay neural signals that enter and exit the 
cord through posterior and anterior nerve roots and the spinal and 
peripheral nerves.
The spinal cord is divided into segments: cervical, from C1 to C8; 
thoracic, from T1 to T12; lumbar, from L1 to L5; sacral, from S1 to 
S5; and coccygeal (Fig. 17-3). The spinal cord is thickest in the 
cervical segment, which contains nerve tracts to and from both the 
upper and lower extremities.
Note that the spinal cord is not as long as the vertebral canal. The 
lumbar and sacral roots travel the longest intraspinal distance and 
fan out like a horse’s tail at L1–L2, giving rise to the term cauda 
equina. To avoid injury to the spinal cord, most lumbar punctures 
are performed at the L3–L4 or L4–L5 vertebral interspaces.3,4
Peripheral Nervous System
The peripheral nervous system (PNS) consists of both CNs and periph-
eral nerves that project to the heart, visceral organs, skin, and limbs. 
It controls the somatic nervous system, which regulates muscle move-
ments and response to the sensations of touch and pain, and the 
autonomic nervous system that connects to internal organs and gener-
ates autonomic reﬂex responses. The autonomic nervous system 
consists of the sympathetic nervous system, which “mobilizes organs 
and their functions during times of stress and arousal, and the para-
sympathetic nervous system, which conserves energy and resources 
during times of rest and relaxation.”5
C2 cord segment
T1 cord segment
C2 nerve root
C8 nerve root
T1 nerve root
L1 cord segment
S1 nerve root
L1 nerve root
Spinous process T1 
Spinous process L1 
Cauda equina
Anterior
Posterior
C1
T1
L1
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
L2
L3
L4
L5
T10
T11
T12
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
F I G U R E  1 7 - 3 .  Spinal cord, lateral view.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
715
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The Cranial Nerves. Twelve pairs of special nerves called cranial nerves 
(CNs) emerge from the cranial vault through skull foramina and canals to 
structures in the head and neck. They are numbered sequentially with Roman 
numerals in rostral to caudal order as they arise from the brain. CNs III through 
XII arise from the diencephalon and the brainstem, as illustrated in Figure 17-4. 
CNs I and II are actually ﬁber tracts emerging from the brain. Some CNs are 
limited to general motor and/or sensory functions, whereas others are specialized, 
serving smell, vision, or hearing (I, II, VIII).
Functions of the CNs most relevant to the physical examination are summarized 
on the next page.
Pituitary gland
CN I olfactory
MIDBRAIN
CN III oculomotor
CN IV trochlear
MEDULLA
CN IX
glossopharyngeal
CN X
vagus
CN XI
spinal
accessory
CN XII
hypoglossal
Cerebellum
CN VIII
acoustic
CN VII facial
CN VI abducens
CN V
trigeminal
PONS
CN II optic tract
CN II optic nerve
DIENCEPHALON
F I G U R E  1 7 - 4 .  Brain anatomy—inferior surface.
The Peripheral Nerves. The PNS includes spinal and peripheral nerves 
that carry impulses to and from the cord. A total of 31 pairs of spinal nerves 
attach to the spinal cord: 8 cervical, 12 thoracic, 5 lumbar, 5 sacral, and 
1 coccygeal. Each nerve has an anterior (ventral) root containing motor ﬁbers, 
and a posterior (dorsal) root containing sensory ﬁbers. The anterior and posterior 
roots merge to form a short spinal nerve, <5 mm long. Spinal nerve ﬁbers 
commingle with similar ﬁbers from other levels in plexuses outside the cord, 
from which peripheral nerves emerge. Most peripheral nerves contain both sensory 
(afferent) and motor (efferent) ﬁbers.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
716 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Cranial Nerves
No.
Name
Function
I
Olfactory
Sense of smell
II
Optic
Vision
III
III
III
III
IV
VI
III
Oculomotor
Pupillary constriction, opening the eye (lid elevation), and most extraocular movements
IV
Trochlear
Downward, internal rotation of the eye
V
Trigeminal
Motor—temporal and masseter muscles (jaw clenching), lateral pterygoids (lateral jaw movement)
Temporal muscle
Masseter muscle
Sensory—facial. The nerve has three divisions: (1) ophthalmic, (2) maxillary, and (3) mandibular.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C2
VI
Abducens
Lateral deviation of the eye
VII
Facial
Motor—facial movements, including those of facial expression, closing the eye, and closing the mouth
Sensory—taste for salty, sweet, sour, and bitter substances on the anterior two thirds of the tongue and 
sensation from the ear
VIII
Acoustic
Hearing (cochlear division) and balance—(vestibular division)
IX
Glossopha-
ryngeal
Motor—pharynx
Sensory—posterior portions of the eardrum and ear canal, the pharynx, and the posterior tongue, including 
taste (salty, sweet, sour, bitter)
X
Vagus
Motor—palate, pharynx, and larynx
Sensory—pharynx and larynx
XI
Spinal acces-
sory
Motor—the sternocleidomastoid and upper portion of the trapezius
Trapezius
muscle
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle
XII
Hypoglossal
Motor—tongue
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
717
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Like the brain, the spinal cord contains both gray matter and white matter 
(Fig. 17-5). The gray matter consists of aggregations of nerve cell nuclei and 
dendrites that are surrounded by white tracts of nerve ﬁbers connecting the brain 
to the PNS. Note the butterﬂy appearance of the gray matter nuclei and their 
anterior and posterior horns.
Muscle
Efferent
motor fiber
Anterior root
Anterior
horn cell
Anterior
horn
Posterior horn
Posterior root
Posterior root
ganglion
Afferent
sensory
fiber
F I G U R E  1 7 - 5 .  Spinal cord, cross section.
Motor Pathways
Motor pathways are complex avenues that extend from upper motor neurons 
through long white matter tracts to synapses with lower motor neurons, and con-
tinue to the periphery through peripheral nerve structures. Upper motor neu-
rons, or nerve cell bodies, lie in the motor strip of the cerebral cortex and in 
several brainstem nuclei; their axons synapse with motor nuclei in the brainstem 
(for CNs) and in the spinal cord (for peripheral nerves). Lower motor neurons 
have cell bodies in the spinal cord, termed anterior horn cells; their axons trans-
mit impulses through the anterior roots and spinal nerves into peripheral nerves, 
terminating at the neuromuscular junction.
Three kinds of motor pathways impinge on the anterior horn cells: the cortico-
spinal tract, the basal ganglia system, and the cerebellar system. Additional path-
ways originating in the brainstem mediate ﬂexor and extensor tone in limb 
movement and posture, most notably in coma (see Table 17-14, p. 793).
The Principal Motor Pathways
● The corticospinal (pyramidal) tract. The corticospinal tracts mediate voluntary 
movement and integrate skilled, complicated, or delicate movements by stim-
ulating selected muscular actions and inhibiting others. They also carry 
impulses that inhibit muscle tone, the slight tension maintained by normal 
muscle even when it is relaxed. The corticospinal tracts originate in the motor 
cortex of the brain (Fig. 17-6). Motor ﬁbers travel down into the lower 
medulla, where they form an anatomical structure resembling a pyramid. 
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
718 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The Principal Motor Pathways (continued )
There, most of these ﬁbers cross to the opposite or contralateral side of the 
medulla, continue downward, and synapse with anterior horn cells or with 
intermediate neurons. Tracts synapsing in the brainstem with motor nuclei  
of the CNs are termed corticobulbar.
● The basal ganglia system. This exceedingly complex system includes motor 
pathways between the cerebral cortex, basal ganglia, brainstem, and spinal 
cord. It helps to maintain muscle tone and to control body movements, espe-
cially gross automatic movements such as walking.
● The cerebellar system. The cerebellum receives both sensory and motor input and 
coordinates motor activity, maintains equilibrium, and helps to control posture.
Knee
Hip
Trunk
Hand
Face
Tongue
Basal
ganglia
Thalamus
Internal
 capsule
MIDBRAIN
LOWER MEDULLA
SPINAL CORD
Corticospinal tracts
Lateral corticospinal
tract
Anterior corticospinal
tract
Corticobulbar tract
Pyramids
F I G U R E  1 7 - 6 .  Motor pathways: corticospinal and corticobulbar tracts.
All of these higher motor pathways affect 
movement only through the lower motor 
neuron systems, sometimes called the 
“ﬁnal common pathway.” Any move-
ment, whether initiated voluntarily in the 
cortex, “automatically” in the basal gan-
glia, or reﬂexly via the sensory receptors, 
must ultimately be translated into action 
by the anterior horn cells. A lesion in any 
of these areas will affect movement or 
reﬂex activity.
When the corticospinal tract is damaged 
or destroyed, its functions are reduced or 
lost below the level of injury. When 
upper motor neuron systems are dam-
aged above their crossover in the 
medulla, motor impairment develops on 
the opposite or contralateral side. In 
damage below the crossover, motor 
impairment occurs on the same or ipsi-
lateral side of the body. The affected limb 
becomes weak or paralyzed, and skilled, 
complicated, or delicate movements are 
performed poorly when compared with 
gross movements.
In upper motor neuron lesions, muscle 
tone is increased and deep tendon 
reﬂexes are exaggerated. Damage to the 
lower motor neuron systems causes ipsi-
lateral weakness and paralysis, but in 
this case, muscle tone and reﬂexes are 
decreased or absent.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
719
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Disease of the basal ganglia system or cerebellar system does not cause paralysis, 
but can be disabling. Damage to the basal ganglia system produces changes in 
muscle tone (most often an increase), disturbances in posture and gait, a slow-
ness or lack of spontaneous and automatic movements termed bradykinesia, and 
various involuntary movements. Cerebellar damage impairs coordination, gait, 
and equilibrium, and decreases muscle tone.
Sensory Pathways
Sensory impulses participate not only in 
reﬂex activity, as previously described, but 
also give rise to conscious sensation, locate 
body position in space, and help regulate 
internal autonomic functions such as blood 
pressure, heart rate, and respiration.
A complex system of sensory receptors relays 
impulses from skin, mucous membranes, 
muscles, tendons, and viscera that travel 
through peripheral projections into the pos-
terior root ganglia, where a second projec-
tion of the ganglia directs impulses centrally 
into the spinal cord (Fig. 17-7). Sensory 
impulses then travel to the sensory cortex of 
the brain via one of two pathways: the spino-
thalamic tract, consisting of smaller sensory 
neurons with unmyelinated or thinly myelin-
ated axons, and the posterior columns, which 
have larger neurons with heavily myelinated 
axons.6
The peripheral component of the small-
ﬁber spinothalamic tract arises in free nerve 
endings in the skin that register pain, tem-
perature, and crude touch. Within one or two 
spinal segments from their entry into the 
cord, these ﬁbers pass into the posterior 
horn and synapse with secondary neurons. 
The secondary neurons then cross to the 
opposite side and pass upward into the 
thalamus.
In the posterior column system, the peripheral large-ﬁber projections of the dorsal root 
ganglia transmit the sensations of vibration, proprioception, kinesthesia, pressure, and 
ﬁne touch from skin and joint position receptors to the dorsal root ganglia, where they 
travel through central projections in the posterior columns to second-order sensory 
neurons in the medulla. Fibers projecting from the secondary neurons cross to the 
opposite side at the medullary level and continue on to the thalamus.
PARIETAL LOBE
Thigh area
Trunk
area
Arm area
Face
area
THALAMUS
Posterior column:
 Position and vibration
 Fine touch
Posterior root
Posterior root
ganglion
Spinothalamic tract:
 Pain and temperature
 Crude touch
SPINAL CORD T5
SPINAL CORD L4
LOWER MEDULLA
F I G U R E  1 7 - 7 .  Sensory pathways: spinothalamic tract and 
posterior columns.
Diabetic patients with small-fiber 
neuropathy report sharp, burning, or 
shooting foot pain, whereas those 
with large-fiber neuropathy experi-
ence numbness and tingling or even 
no sensation at all.7,8 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
720 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
At the thalamic level, the general quality of sensation is perceived (e.g., pain, cold, 
pleasant, unpleasant), but not ﬁne distinctions. For full perception, a third group 
of sensory neurons sends impulses from the thalamus to the sensory cortex of the 
brain. Here, stimuli are localized and higher-order discriminations are made.
Lesions at different points in the sensory pathways produce different kinds of 
sensory loss. Patterns of sensory loss, together with their associated motor ﬁnd-
ings, help you locate the causative lesions. A lesion in the sensory cortex may not 
impair the perception of pain, touch, and position, for example, but does impair 
ﬁner discrimination. A patient with this lesion cannot appreciate the size, shape, 
or texture of an object by feeling it and therefore cannot identify it. Loss of posi-
tion and vibration sense, with preservation of other sensations, points to disease 
of the posterior columns, whereas loss of all sensations from the waist down, 
together with paralysis and hyperactive reﬂexes in the legs, indicates severe 
transverse damage to the spinal cord. Crude and light touch are often preserved 
despite partial damage to the cord because impulses originating on one side of 
the body travel up both sides of the cord.
Dermatomes. A dermatome is the band of skin innervated by the sensory 
root of a single spinal nerve. Knowledge and testing of dermatomes are valuable 
when localizing a lesion to a speciﬁc spinal cord segment.
Spinal Reﬂexes: The Muscle  
Stretch Response
The muscle stretch reﬂexes are relayed over structures of both the CNS and PNS. 
Since the tendons are not the primary structures involved, the term muscle stretch 
reﬂexes is more precise than the commonly used deep tendon reﬂexes. Recall that 
a reﬂex is an involuntary stereotypical response that may involve as few as two 
neurons, one afferent (sensory) and one efferent (motor), across a single synapse. 
The muscle stretch reﬂexes in the arms and legs are such monosynaptic reﬂexes. 
They illustrate the simplest unit of sensory and motor function. Other reﬂexes 
are polysynaptic, involving interneurons interposed between sensory and motor 
neurons.
To elicit a muscle stretch reﬂex, briskly tap the tendon of a partially stretched 
muscle. For the reﬂex to occur, all components of the reﬂex arc must be intact: 
sensory nerve ﬁbers, spinal cord synapse, motor nerve ﬁbers, neuromuscular 
junction, and muscle ﬁbers. Tapping the tendon activates special sensory ﬁbers 
in the partially stretched muscle, triggering a sensory impulse that travels to the 
spinal cord via a peripheral nerve. The stimulated sensory ﬁber synapses directly 
with the anterior horn cell innervating the same muscle. When the impulse 
crosses the neuromuscular junction, the muscle suddenly contracts, completing 
the reﬂex arc.
Because each muscle stretch reﬂex involves speciﬁc spinal segments, together 
with their sensory and motor ﬁbers, an abnormal reﬂex helps you locate a patho-
logic lesion. Learn the segmental levels of the muscle stretch reﬂexes. You can 
remember them easily by their numerical sequence in ascending order from 
ankle to triceps: S1, L2–L4, C5–C6, C6–C7.
See Table 17-1, Disorders of the Cen-
tral and Peripheral Nervous Systems, 
pp. 774–775. 
See the dermatome “maps” on pp. 756 
and 757. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
721
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Reﬂexes may be initiated by stimulating skin as well as muscle. Stroking the skin of 
the abdomen, for example, produces a localized muscular twitch. Superﬁcial (cuta-
neous) reﬂexes and their corresponding spinal segments include the following:
Muscle Stretch Reﬂexes
Ankle reﬂex
Knee reﬂex
Supinator (brachioradialis) reﬂex
Biceps reﬂex
Triceps reﬂex
Sacral 1 primarily
Lumbar 2, 3, 4
Cervical 5, 6
Cervical 5, 6
Cervical 6, 7
Cutaneous Stimulation Reﬂexes
Abdominal reﬂexes —upper 
—lower
Cremasteric reﬂex
Plantar responses
Anal reﬂex
Thoracic 8, 9, 10
Thoracic 10, 11, 12
Lumbar 1, 2
Lumbar 5, sacral 1
Sacral 2, 3, 4
The Health History
Common or Concerning Symptoms
● Headache
● Dizziness or vertigo
● Weakness (generalized, proximal, or distal)
● Numbness, abnormal or absent sensation
● Fainting and blacking out (near-syncope and syncope)
● Seizures
● Tremors or involuntary movements
Two of the most common symptoms in neurologic disorders are headache and 
dizziness. Review the discussions of these symptoms in Chapter 7, Head and 
Neck, pp. 215–302.
Headache. Headaches have many causes, ranging from benign to life 
threatening, and always warrant thorough assessment. Neurologic causes such 
as subarachnoid hemorrhage, meningitis, or mass lesions are especially ominous. 
The careful clinician pays close attention to the history and a detailed neurologic 
examination.
See Table 7-1, Primary Headaches,  
p. 267, and Table 7-2, Secondary  
Headaches, pp. 268–269. 
Primary headaches include migraine, 
tension, cluster, and trigeminal  
autonomic cephalagias; secondary 
headaches arise from underlying 
structural, systemic, or infectious 
causes and may be life threatening.9 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
722 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Always assess the severity of the headache and its location, duration, and any 
associated symptoms such as double vision, visual changes, weakness, or loss of 
sensation. Does the headache get worse with coughing, sneezing, or sudden 
head movements, which can alter intracranial pressure dynamics? Is there fever, 
stiff neck, or a parameningeal focus like ear, sinus, or throat infection that may 
signal meningitis?10
An atypical presentation of the patient’s usual migraine may be suspicious for 
stroke, especially in women using hormonal contraceptives.19–22
Always look for unusual headache warning signs, such as sudden onset “like a 
thunderclap,” onset after age 50 years, and associated symptoms such as fever 
and stiff neck. Examine for papilledema and focal neurologic signs.10
Dizziness or Vertigo. As you learned in Chapter 7, Head and Neck, 
dizziness and light-headedness are common, somewhat vague, complaints that 
prompt a more speciﬁc history and neurologic examination, with emphasis on 
detection of nystagmus and focal neurologic signs. Especially in older patients, 
ask about medications.
Does the patient feel faint or about to fall or pass out (presyncope)? Or unsteady 
and off balance (disequilibrium or ataxia)? Or is there true vertigo, a spinning sen-
sation within the patient or of the surroundings? If there is true vertigo, establish 
the time course of symptoms, which helps distinguish among the different types 
of peripheral vestibular disorders.
If there are localizing symptoms or signs like double vision (diplopia), difﬁculty 
forming words (dysarthria), or problems with gait or balance (ataxia), investigate 
the central causes of vertigo.
Subarachnoid hemorrhage classically 
presents as “the worst headache of my 
life” with instantaneous onset.11–13 
Severe headache and stiff neck accom-
pany meningitis.14–16 Dull headache 
increased by coughing and sneezing, 
especially when recurring in the same 
location, occurs in mass lesions from 
brain tumors or abscess.17,18 
Migraine headache is often preceded by 
an aura or prodrome, and is highly likely 
if three of the five “POUND” features are 
present: Pulsatile or throbbing; One-
day duration, or lasts 4 to 72 hours if 
untreated; Unilateral; Nausea or vomit-
ing; Disabling or intensity causing inter-
ruption of daily activity.22,23 
See box “Headache Warning Signs” on 
p. 216 in Chapter 7. 
Feeling light-headed, weak in the 
legs, or about to faint points to pre-
syncope from vasovagal stimulation, 
orthostatic hypotension, arrhythmia, 
or side effects from blood pressure 
and other medications. See Table 17-3, 
Syncope and Similar Disorders, 
pp. 778–779. 
Vertigo often reflects vestibular dis-
ease, usually from peripheral causes 
in the inner ear such as benign posi-
tional vertigo, labyrinthitis, or Ménière 
disease.24 
See Table 7-4, Dizziness and Vertigo, 
p. 271, for distinguishing symptoms 
and time course.
Ataxia, diplopia, and dysarthria are 
suspicious for vertebrobasilar TIA or 
stroke.25–30 Also consider posterior 
fossa tumor and migraine with 
brainstem aura. 
See Table 17-2, Types of Stroke,  
pp. 776–777.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
723
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Weakness. Weakness is another common symptom with many causes 
which bears careful investigation. It is important to clarify what the patient 
means—fatigue, apathy, drowsiness, or actual loss of strength. True motor 
weakness can arise from the CNS, a peripheral nerve, the neuromuscular 
junction, or a muscle. Time course and location are especially relevant. Is the 
onset sudden, gradual or subacute, or chronic, over a long period of time?
What areas of the body are involved? Is the weakness generalized, or focal to 
the face or a limb? Does it involve one side of the body or both sides? What 
movements are affected? As you listen to the patient’s story, identify the patterns 
below:
■ Proximal—in the shoulder and/or hip girdle, for example
■ Distal—in the hands and/or feet
■ Symmetric—in the same areas on both sides of the body
■ Asymmetric—types of weakness include focal, in a portion of the face or 
extremity; monoparesis, in an extremity; paraparesis, in both lower extrem-
ities; and hemiparesis, in one side of the body
To identify proximal weakness, ask about difﬁculty with movements such as 
combing hair, reaching up to a shelf, getting up out of a chair, or climbing stairs. 
Does the weakness get worse with repetition and improve after rest (suggesting 
myasthenia gravis)? Are there associated sensory or other symptoms?
To identify distal weakness, ask about hand strength when opening a jar or using 
scissors or a screwdriver, or problems tripping when walking.
Numbness, Abnormal or Absent Sensation. In a patient who 
reports numbness, ask the patient to be more precise. Is there tingling like “pins 
and needles,” which are altered sensations called paresthesias, distorted sensations 
(dysesthesias), or is sensation reduced or completely absent?
Abrupt onset of motor and sensory 
deficits occurs in TIA and stroke.25–30 
Progressive subacute onset of lower 
extremity weakness suggests 
Guillain–Barré syndrome.31 Chronic, 
more gradual, onset of lower 
extremity weakness occurs in primary 
and metastatic spinal cord tumors.
Focal or asymmetric weakness has both 
central (ischemic, thrombotic, or mass 
lesions) and peripheral causes ranging 
from nerve injury to the neuromuscular 
junction disorders to myopathies. 
Proximal limb weakness, when sym-
metric with intact sensation, occurs in 
myopathies from alcohol, drugs like 
glucocorticoids, and inflammatory 
muscle disorders like polymyositis and 
dermatomyositis. In the neuromuscular 
junction disorder myasthenia gravis, 
there is proximal typically asymmetric 
weakness that gets worse with effort 
(fatigability), often with associated  
bulbar symptoms such as diplopia, 
 ptosis, dysarthria, and dysphagia.32,33 
Bilateral predominantly distal weak-
ness, often with sensory loss, sug-
gests a polyneuropathy, as in diabetes. 
Sensory changes can arise at several 
levels: local nerve compression or 
“entrapment,” seen in hand numbness 
in distributions specific to the median, 
ulnar, or radial nerve; nerve root 
compression with dermatomal 
sensory loss from vertebral bone 
spurs or herniated discs; or central 
lesions from stroke or multiple 
sclerosis. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
724 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
In dysesthesias, light touch or pinprick, for example, may cause a burning or 
irritating sensation.
Establish the pattern of sensory loss. Is there a stocking-glove distribution? Are 
sensory deﬁcits patchy, nondermatomal, and occurring in more than one limb?
Fainting and Blacking Out (Near-Syncope and Syncope). Patient 
reports of fainting or “passing out” are common and warrant a meticulous history 
to guide management and possible hospital admission.36 Begin by ﬁnding out 
whether the patient has actually lost consciousness. Did the patient hear 
external noise or voices throughout the episode, feel light-headed or weak, but 
fail to actually lose consciousness, consistent with near syncope or presyncope? Or 
did the patient actually experience complete loss of consciousness, a more 
serious symptom representing true syncope, deﬁned as a sudden but temporary 
loss of consciousness and postural tone from transient global hypoperfusion of 
the brain?
Elicit a complete description of the event. What was the patient doing when the 
episode occurred? Was the patient standing, sitting, or lying down? Were there 
any triggers or warning symptoms? How long did the episode last? Could voices 
still be heard? Importantly, were onset and offset slow or fast? Were there any 
palpitations? Is there a history of heart disease, which has a sensitivity for a car-
diac cause of more than 95% (with a speciﬁcity of ∼45%)?36
Try to interview any witnesses. Consider the possibility of a seizure based on 
the features described in the following section, especially if the onset was 
abrupt and without warning.
Seizures. Patients may report “spells” or fainting that raises suspicion of 
seizure, a sudden excessive electrical discharge from cortical neurons. Seizures 
may be symptomatic, with an identiﬁable cause, or idiopathic. A careful history 
is important to rule out other causes of loss of consciousness and acute 
symptomatic seizures that have discernible explanations.
Burning pain occurs in painful sensory 
neuropathies from conditions like 
diabetes.34,35 
A pattern of stocking, then glove, sen-
sory loss occurs in polyneuropathies, 
especially from diabetes; multiple 
patchy areas of sensory loss in differ-
ent limbs suggest mononeuritis multi-
plex, seen in diabetes and rheumatoid 
arthritis. 
See Table 17-3, Syncope and Similar 
Disorders, pp. 778–779. 
Causes include seizures, “neurocardio-
genic” conditions such as vasovagal 
syncope, postural tachycardia syn-
drome, carotid sinus syncope, and 
orthostatic hypotension, and cardiac 
disease causing arrhythmias, espe-
cially ventricular tachycardia and 
bradyarrhythmias.37 Stroke or sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage are unlikely 
causes of syncope unless both hemi-
spheres are affected.
In vasovagal syncope, the most com-
mon cause of syncope, look for the 
prodrome of nausea, diaphoresis,  
and pallor triggered by a fearful or 
unpleasant event, then vagally medi-
ated hypotension, often with slow 
onset and offset. In syncope from 
arrhythmias, onset and offset are 
often sudden, reflecting loss and 
recovery of cerebral perfusion. 
See Table 17-4, Seizure Disorders,  
pp. 780–781. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
725
THE HEALTH HISTORY
If there is more than one seizure, consider epilepsy, deﬁned as two or more sei-
zures that are not provoked by other illnesses or circumstances.38,39 The inci-
dence of epilepsy in the United States is 3%; in more than 60% to 70% of affected 
patients, no cause is identiﬁed.
Epilepsy does not always involve loss of consciousness, depending on the type. 
It is usually classiﬁed as generalized or partial, based on the location in the cortex 
of the initial seizure focus. If available, ask a witness how the patient looked 
before, during, and after the episode. Was there any seizure-like movement of 
the arms or legs? Any incontinence of the bladder or bowel? What about any 
drowsiness or impaired memory after the event suggestive of a postictal state?
Ask about age at onset, frequency, change in frequency or symptom pattern, and 
use of medications, alcohol, or illicit drugs. Check for any history of head injury.
Tremors or Invountary Movements. Tremor, “a rhythmic oscillatory 
movement of a body part resulting from the contraction of opposing muscle 
groups,” is the most common movement disorder.41,42 It may be an isolated ﬁnding 
or part of a neurologic disorder. Ask about any tremor, shaking, or body movements 
that the patient seems unable to control. Does the tremor occur at rest? Does it get 
worse with voluntary intentional movement or with sustained postures?
Distinct from these symptoms is restless legs syndrome, present in 6% to 12% of 
the U.S. population, described as an unpleasant sensation in the legs, especially 
at night, that gets worse with rest and improves with movement of the symptom-
atic limb(s).45,46
Common causes of acute symptomatic 
seizures include: head trauma; alcohol, 
cocaine, and other drugs; withdrawal 
from alcohol, benzodiazepines, and 
barbiturates; metabolic insults from 
low or high glucose or low calcium or 
sodium; acute stroke; and meningitis 
or encephalitis.40 
Tonic–clonic motor activity, bladder 
or bowel incontinence, and postictal 
state characterize generalized sei-
zures. Unlike syncope, tongue biting 
or bruising of limbs may occur. 
Epilepsy is more common in infants and 
older adults. The baseline neurologic 
examination is frequently normal.
Generalized epilepsy syndromes usu-
ally begin in childhood or adoles-
cence; adult-onset seizures are 
usually partial. 
See Table 17-5, Tremors and Involun-
tary Movements, pp. 782–783. 
Low-frequency unilateral resting 
tremor, rigidity, and bradykinesia typ-
ify Parkinson disease.43,44 Essential 
tremors are high-frequency, bilateral, 
upper extremity tremors that occur 
with both limb movement and sus-
tained posture and subside when the 
limb is relaxed; head, voice, and leg 
tremor may also be present.42
Reversible causes of restless legs 
syndrome include pregnancy, renal 
disease, and iron deficiency. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
726 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Preventing Stroke and Transient Ischemic Attack. Stroke is a 
sudden neurologic deﬁcit caused by cerebrovascular ischemia (87%) or 
hemorrhage (13%). Hemorrhagic strokes may be intracerebral (10% of all strokes) 
or subarachnoid (3% of all strokes). Stroke is the fourth leading cause of death 
in the United States and a leading cause of long-term disability.47
The American Heart Association (AHA) and the American Stroke Association 
(ASA) have established tissue-based deﬁnitions for ischemic stroke and transient 
ischemic attack (TIA) that have important implications for assessing and pre-
venting strokes.48 These deﬁnitions encourage early neurodiagnostic imaging 
following a TIA and risk stratiﬁcation for subsequent stroke.
■ Ischemic stroke is “an infarction of CNS tissue” that may be symptomatic or 
silent. “Symptomatic ischemic strokes are manifest by clinical signs of focal 
or global cerebral, spinal, or retinal dysfunction caused by CNS infarction. 
A silent stroke is a documented CNS infarction that was asymptomatic.”
■ TIA is now deﬁned as “a transient episode of neurological dysfunction caused 
by focal brain, spinal cord, or retinal ischemia, without acute infarction.” The 
AHA/ASA guidelines recommend neurodiagnostic imaging within 24 hours 
of symptom onset and routine noninvasive imaging of the carotid and intra-
cranial vessels.
TIAs are a major risk factor for stroke, which occurs in 3% to 10% of patients 
within 2 days and in 9% to 17% within 90 days.47 Short-term stroke risk is high-
est in those with age 60 years and older, diabetes, focal symptoms of weakness 
or impaired speech, and a TIA lasting more than 10 minutes. One population-based 
study found a combined risk for recurrent TIA/stroke/and death of 25% within 
the 3 months following a TIA.50
Health Promotion and 
Counseling: Evidence and 
Recommendations
Important Topics for Health Promotion  
and Counseling
● Preventing stroke and transient ischemic attack
● Carotid artery screening
● Reducing risk of peripheral neuropathy
● Herpes zoster vaccination
● Detecting the “three D’s”: delirium, dementia, and depression
See Table 17-2, Types of Stroke,  
pp. 776–777. 
The AHA/ASA report cites the well-
validated ABCD2 scoring system for 
predicting ischemic stroke within 2, 7, 
and 90 days after TIA: Age ≥60 years, 
initial Blood pressure ≥140/90 mm Hg, 
Clinical features of focal weakness or 
impaired speech without focal weak-
ness, Duration 10 to 59 minutes or 
≥60 minutes, and Diabetes.48 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
727
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Stroke at a Glance
Key Facts for Prevention and Patient Education
● Stroke aﬀects nearly 800,000 Americans each year, including more than 
600,000 suﬀering a ﬁrst stroke, and accounts for about 1 in every 20 deaths.
● The total annual costs associated with stroke are estimated to be about $34 
billion.
● Stroke prevalence and mortality are disproportionately higher in African 
Americans compared to whites:
● Prevalence, black versus white men: 4.2% versus 2.2%; black versus white 
women: 4.7% versus 2.5%
● Mortality per 100,000, black versus white men: 55 versus 36; black versus 
white women: 47 versus 36
● Although younger and middle-aged women have lower age-speciﬁc stroke 
incidence rates than men, rates increase with age so that women, who on 
average live longer than men, have an overall higher lifetime risk for stroke. 
Risk factors for women include autoimmune collagen vascular disease and 
history of preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, and pregnancy-induced hyper-
tension.
● The prevalence of silent stroke, estimated to range from 6% to 28%, increases 
with age.
● Individuals with TIA have a 1-year mortality of ∼12%; 10-year risks for stroke 
and death from cardiovascular disease are 19% and 43%, respectively.
● Only 51% of the United States population is aware of the ﬁve stroke warning 
signs (see below) and would call 911 if they thought someone was having a 
stroke.
● Stroke outcomes improve signiﬁcantly when thrombolytic therapy is given 
within 3 to 4.5 hours of symptom onset; however, only a minority of those  
suﬀering a stroke reaches an emergency room within this time window.
Sources: Mozaﬀarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, et al. Heart disease and stroke statistics—2015 update: 
a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2015;131:e29; Bushnell C, McCullough LD, 
Awad IA, et al. Guidelines for the prevention of stroke in women: a statement for healthcare profes-
sionals from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2014;45:1545; 
Jauch EC, Saver JL, Adams HP, Jr., et al. Guidelines for the early management of patients with acute 
ischemic stroke: a guideline for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/
American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2013;44:870.
Symptoms and signs of stroke depend on the vascular territory affected in the 
brain. The most common cause of ischemic symptoms is occlusion of the mid-
dle cerebral artery, which causes visual ﬁeld cuts and contralateral hemiparesis 
and sensory deﬁcits. Occlusion of the left middle cerebral artery often pro-
duces aphasia; and occlusion of the right middle cerebral artery, neglect or 
inattention to the opposite side of the body.
Cardiovascular causes of death, 
including stroke, are the greatest con-
tributors to the 5-year disparity in life 
expectancy for African American men 
compared to white men and the 
4-year racial disparity for women.49 
However, the racial gap in life expec-
tancy has recently been declining.
See Chapter 9, Cardiovascular System, 
for discussion of the AHA 2011 guide-
lines for preventing cardiovascular 
disease in women that address the 
increased risk of mid-life stroke and 
death from coronary heart disease, 
pp. 362–363.52
See Table 17-2, Types of Stroke,  
pp. 776–777. 
See Chapter 5, p. 160, and Table 17-6, 
Disorders of Speech, p. 784, for dis-
cussion of aphasia. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
728 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Stroke Warning Signs. The AHA and the ASA urge patients to seek 
immediate care for any of the warning signs below. It is important to teach these 
to your patients.
AHA/ASA Stroke Warning Signs and Symptoms
F Face Drooping—Does one side of the face droop or is it numb?53 Ask the per-
son to smile. Is the person’s smile uneven?
A Arm Weakness—Is one arm weak or numb? Ask the person to raise both arms. 
Does one arm drift downward?
S Speech Diﬃculty—Is speech slurred? Is the person unable to speak or hard to 
understand? Ask the person to repeat a simple sentence, like “The sky is blue.” 
Is the sentence repeated correctly?
T Time to call 9-1-1—If someone shows any of these symptoms, even if the 
symptoms go away, call 9-1-1 and get the person to the hospital immediately. 
Check the time so you’ll know when the ﬁrst symptoms appeared
Beyond FAST: Other important symptoms
● Sudden numbness or weakness of the leg, arm, or face
● Sudden confusion or trouble understanding
● Sudden trouble seeing in one or both eyes
● Sudden trouble walking, dizziness, loss of balance or coordination
● Sudden severe headache with no known cause
Stroke Risk Factors—Primary Prevention. Recognizing that stroke 
and coronary heart disease share common cardiovascular risk factors and 
threats to health, in 2010, Healthy People 2020 and the AHA presented a new 
concept of “cardiovascular health” that encompasses seven health behaviors 
and health factors, and a new set of combined impact goals for the coming 
decade:
By 2020, to improve the cardiovascular health of all Americans by 20%, while 
reducing deaths from cardiovascular disease and stroke by 20%.54
For primary prevention, target documented modiﬁable risk factors, detailed in 
the box below. Learn the indications for using aspirin in healthy and diabetic 
individuals.55,56
Optimal blood pressure control is essential for preventing hemorrhagic stroke. 
Additional risk factors for the most common cause of hemorrhagic stroke—
ruptured aneurysms in the circle of Willis—include smoking, alcohol use, oral 
contraceptives, and family history in a ﬁrst-degree relative.
See Chapter 9, Cardiovascular System, 
for discussion of the new more 
aggressive guidelines for cardiovascu-
lar screening and the table on cardio-
vascular health behaviors and health 
factors, pp. 363–364.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
729
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Stroke Risk Factors—Primary Prevention  
of Ischemic Stroke
Documented and Modiﬁable Risk Factors
Hypertension
Hypertension is the leading risk factor for both ischemic and 
hemorrhagic stroke. Pharmacologic reduction of blood pres-
sure signiﬁcantly reduces stroke risk, particularly among Afri-
can Americans and older adults.
Smoking
Smoking is associated with doubling the risk of ischemic stroke 
and a 2- to 4-fold increased risk of subarachnoid hemorrhage. 
Smoking cessation rapidly reduces the risk of stroke, but 
never to the level of never-smokers.
Dyslipidemia
Statin treatment reduces the risk of all strokes by about 20% 
for patients with or at risk for atherosclerotic cardiovascular 
disease.
Diabetes
Stroke risk is doubled with diabetes and 20% of diabetic patients 
will die of stroke. Good blood pressure control and statin ther-
apy reduce stroke risk in diabetic patients.
Weight
Obesity increases the risk of ischemic stroke by 64%.
Diet and 
nutrition
Dietary factors aﬀect stroke risk primarily by elevating blood 
pressure. Decreasing salt and saturated fat intake and diets 
emphasizing fruits, vegetables, nuts, and low-fat dairy prod-
ucts may reduce stroke risk.
Physical 
inactivity
Moderate exercise, like brisk walking for 150 minutes a week 
or 30 minutes on most days, improves cardiovascular 
health.
Alcohol use
Alcohol use has a direct dose-dependent eﬀect on the risk of 
hemorrhagic stroke. Heavy alcohol use increases the risk for 
all types of stroke due to eﬀects on hypertension, hyperco-
agulable states, cardiac arrhythmias, and reduced cerebral 
blood ﬂow.
Disease-Speciﬁc Risk Factors
Atrial 
ﬁbrillation
Valvular (rheumatic) and nonvalvular atrial ﬁbrillation 
increases risk of stroke between 2- to 7-fold and 17-fold, 
respectively, compared to the general population.
Antiplatelet agents and anticoagulants can reduce the risk for 
ischemic stroke. When considering antithrombotic therapy, 
experts recommend individual risk stratiﬁcation into high-, 
moderate-, and low-risk groups to balance risk of stroke 
against risk of bleeding. CHADS2 is a commonly used scor-
ing system based on Congestive heart failure, Hyperten-
sion, Age ≥75 years, Diabetes, and prior Stroke/TIA. The 
CHA2DS2-VASc, which adds an age category of 65 to 
74 years, female sex, and vascular disease to the scoring 
system, improves risk stratiﬁcation for individuals esti-
mated as low or moderate risk with CHADS2.
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
730 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Stroke Risk Factors—Primary Prevention  
of Ischemic Stroke (continued )
Carotid artery 
disease
The estimated prevalence of clinically important carotid artery 
stenosis in the United States population over age 65 years is 
1%. Medical therapy, including statins, antiplatelet agents, 
treatment of diabetes and hypertension, and smoking cessa-
tion, has reduced the risk of stroke in individuals with asymp-
tomatic carotid artery stenosis to less than 2% annually. 
Experts recommend carotid endarterectomy for selected 
asymptomatic patients with carotid artery stenosis >60%—
provided that the surgeon and center have very low perioper-
ative risks for stroke and mortality.
Obstructive 
sleep apnea
Sleep apnea is an independent risk factor for stroke, particularly 
in men. Stroke risk increases with increasing sleep apnea 
severity as measured by the number of respiratory events 
(cessation or air ﬂow reduction) per hour. Sleep apnea is usu-
ally treated with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), 
though its eﬀectiveness for reducing stroke risk is unknown.
Sources: Meschia JF, Bushnell C, Boden-Albala B, et al. Guidelines for the primary prevention of 
stroke: a statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/American 
Stroke Association. Stroke. 2014;45:3754; Mozaﬀarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, et al. Heart disease  
and stroke statistics—2015 update: a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2015;131:e29; Bushnell C, McCullough LD, Awad IA, et al. Guidelines for the prevention of stroke in 
women: a statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/American 
Stroke Association. Stroke. 2014;45:1545; Fuster V, Ryden LE, Cannom DS, et al. 2011 ACCF/AHA/HRS 
focused updates incorporated into the ACC/AHA/ESC 2006 Guidelines for the management of 
patients with atrial ﬁbrillation: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/Ameri-
can Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines developed in partnership with the Euro-
pean Society of Cardiology and in collaboration with the European Heart Rhythm Association and 
the Heart Rhythm Society. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;57:e101.
Screening for Asymptomatic Carotid Artery Stenosis. Carotid 
duplex ultrasound accurately and safely detects signiﬁcant carotid artery stenosis 
and is widely used for evaluating symptomatic patients. Although asymptomatic 
carotid artery stenosis is a stroke risk, it accounts for only a small proportion of 
ischemic strokes. Based on a systematic review, the U.S. Preventive Services Task 
Force (USPSTF) recommended against screening for asymptomatic carotid artery 
stenosis in the general adult population (grade D).57 The USPSTF found no evi-
dence that ultrasound screening reduced the risk for ipsilateral stroke.58 Given that 
the population prevalence of asymptomatic carotid artery stenosis is only 1%, 
screening would lead to many false-positive results. Furthermore, treating asymp-
tomatic patients incurs risks for strokes, death, and other harms.
TIA and Stroke—Secondary Prevention. For the patient who has 
already suffered TIA or stroke, focus on: identifying the underlying cause 
including noncardiac emboli, cardiac emboli, and carotid artery stenosis; 
reducing cardiovascular risk factors, including inactivity, hyperlipidemia, poorly 
controlled diabetes or hypertension, smoking, and heavy alcohol consumption; 
and identifying the most appropriate interventions for secondary prevention, 
History and careful neurologic exami-
nation to assess level of conscious-
ness and focal findings are essential 
for diagnosing stroke, followed by 
neuroimaging to distinguish ischemic 
from hemorrhagic stroke. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
731
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
including antiplatelet agents, anticoagulants, and carotid revascularization.59 
Strokes in young adults often have a different set of causes—patent foramen 
ovale and less commonly, carotid or vertebral/basilar artery dissection, hyper-
coagulable states, or cocaine and illicit drug use.60
Reducing Risk of Diabetic Peripheral Neuropathy. Diabetes 
causes several types of peripheral neuropathy.62 Maintaining optimal glycemic 
control can prevent or delay the onset of neuropathy, particularly from type I 
diabetes.
■ Distal symmetric sensorimotor polyneuropathy. This is the most common type of 
diabetic neuropathy. It is slowly progressive, often asymptomatic, and a risk 
factor for ulcerations, arthropathy, and amputation. Symptomatic patients 
report burning electrical pain in the lower extremities, usually at night.
■ Autonomic dysfunction, mononeuropathies, and polyradiculopathies, including 
diabetic amyotrophy, which initially causes unilateral thigh pain and proximal 
lower extremity weakness.
Diabetic patients should have their feet examined 
regularly for neuropathy, including testing pin-
prick sensation, ankle reﬂexes, vibration percep-
tion (with a 128-Hz tuning fork) and plantar light 
touch sensation (with a Semmes-Weinstein mono-
ﬁlament), as well as checking for skin breakdown, 
poor circulation, and musculoskeletal abnormali-
ties.63 The monoﬁlament test involves pressing 
the perpendicular monoﬁlament against the skin 
at the great toe and metatarsals until it bends 
(Fig. 17-8), or against the dorsal arch if without 
calluses; the test is positive if the patient cannot 
feel the monoﬁlament.
Herpes Zoster Vaccination. Herpes zoster, which results from reactivation 
of latent varicella (chicken pox) virus infection within the sensory ganglia, usually 
causes painful unilateral vesicular rashes in a dermatomal distribution.64 The 
lifetime risk of herpes zoster infection is about one in three, and is higher for women 
than for men. Up to one in four adults experience complications following infection, 
including postherpetic neuralgia (persistent pain in the area of the rash), bacterial 
skin infections, ophthalmic complications, cranial and peripheral neuropathies, 
encephalitis, pneumonitis, and hepatitis.65 Herpes zoster risk is increased in 
immunocompromised conditions including cancer, HIV, bone marrow or organ 
transplantation, and immunosuppressive therapies. Increasing age is also strongly 
associated with developing both herpes zoster infection and postherpetic neuralgia.
The herpes zoster vaccine effectively reduces the short-term risks for zoster 
and postherpetic neuralgia in adults ≥50 years.66 The Advisory Committee on 
Stroke subtypes include: TIA; ischemic—
cardioembolic, large artery atheroscle-
rotic, lacunar, or cryptogenic; 
hemorrhagic—intracerebral, subarach-
noid; and other—dural sinus venous 
thrombosis, carotid and vertebral artery 
dissection, or asymptomatic aneurysm.61
F I G U R E  1 7 - 8 .  Monoﬁlament test.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
732 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Immunization Practices (ACIP) currently recommends routinely offering one-
time vaccination for adults ≥60 years; the Federal Drug Administration has 
approved the vaccine for adults ≥50 years. Because the long-term efﬁcacy of the 
herpes zoster vaccine is uncertain, the ACIP is re-evaluating the best age to 
administer the vaccine and the need for revaccination.
Detecting the “Three Ds”: Delirium, Dementia, and Depression. 
Delirium and dementia are increasingly common conditions in clinical practice 
and can present with subtle ﬁndings. Keep them in mind as you assess cognition 
and mental status. Differentiating depression, cognitive impairment, and altered 
consciousness can be challenging. Review the discussion of these disorders in 
Chapter 20 and Chapter 5.
Delirium. Delirium, a multifactorial syndrome, is an acute confusional 
state marked by sudden onset, ﬂuctuating course, inattention, and at times 
changing levels of consciousness. Risk for developing delirium depends on both 
predisposing conditions which increase susceptibility and the immediate pre-
cipitating factors. About one third of older adults experience delirium during 
hospitalizations on medical services; rates are even higher following major elec-
tive surgeries. Intensive care unit admissions are associated with a high incidence 
of delirium regardless of age. Even though delirium is associated with poor 
patient outcomes, more than 50% of cases are undetected.
The Confusional Assessment Method (CAM) algorithm, displayed below, is recom-
mended for screening at-risk patients. The CAM instrument can quickly and accurately 
detect delirium at the bedside67; a CAM severity (CAM-S) measure can be used to 
predict risks for death and nursing home placement.68 The National Institutes of Health 
(NIH) have issued guidelines for preventing delirium that emphasize multicomponent 
interventions by interdisciplinary teams targeting key clinical precipitants.69
See Chapter 20, The  Older Adult,  
pp. 955–1008, and Table 20-2,  
Delirium and Dementia, p. 1001. 
See also Chapter 5, Behavior and 
Mental Status, pp. 147–171.
The Confusion Assessment Method (CAM) 
Diagnostic Algorithm
1. Acute change in mental status and ﬂuctuating course
● Is there evidence of an acute change in cognition from baseline?
● Does the abnormal behavior ﬂuctuate during the day?
2. Inattention
● Does the patient have diﬃculty focusing attention?
3. Disorganized thinking
● Does the patient have rambling or irrelevant conversations, unclear or 
illogical ﬂow of ideas, or unpredictable switching from subject to subject?
4. Abnormal level of consciousness
● Is the patient anything besides alert—hyperalert, lethargic, stuporous, or 
comatose?
Diagnosing delirium requires features 1 and 2 and either 3 or 4.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
733
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Dementia. Dementia is characterized by declines in memory and cogni-
tive ability that interfere with activities of daily living.70,71 The most common 
types are Alzheimer disease (affecting 5 million Americans over age 65 years), 
vascular dementia, Lewy body dementia, and frontotemporal dementia.70,72 Diagnos-
ing dementia requires exclusion of delirium and depression. Teasing out age-
related changes in cognition from mild cognitive impairment is also challenging. 
Less than 2% of patients with dementia have potentially reversible causes, such 
as hypothyroidism, medication side effects, normal pressure hydrocephalus, or 
major depression.
A meta-analysis identiﬁed potentially modiﬁable risk factors for developing 
Alzheimer disease, including physical inactivity, depression, smoking, midlife 
hypertension, midlife obesity, cognitive inactivity or low educational attainment, 
and diabetes.73 However, a 2011 NIH review concluded “currently, no evidence 
of even moderate scientiﬁc quality exists to support the association of any mod-
iﬁable factors . . . with reduced risk for Alzheimer disease.”74 The USPSTF did not 
ﬁnd convincing evidence that pharmacologic or nonpharmacologic interven-
tions could beneﬁt patients with mild to moderate cognitive impairment.75 Con-
sequently, the USPSTF issued an I statement (insufﬁcient evidence) regarding 
screening for cognitive impairment.
Depression. Depression is more common in individuals with signiﬁcant 
medical conditions, including several neurologic disorders—dementia, epilepsy, 
multiple sclerosis, and Parkinson disease—and is also underdiagnosed. Two 
screening questions, with an area under the receiver operating curve (ROC) of 
0.93, can accurately identify major depressive disorders: “Have you been feeling 
down, depressed, or hopeless (depressed mood)?” and, “Have you felt little inter-
est or pleasure in doing things (anhedonia)?”76 Be sure to assess suicidality and 
the possibility of bipolar disorder in depressed patients.
The Mini-Mental State Examination, 
which takes 7 to 10 minutes to admin-
ister, is the best studied, and at a score 
cutpoint of 23 to 24, has a median 
likelihood ratio (LR) of 6.3 for a posi-
tive test and 0.19 for a negative test.77 
See also discussion of the Mini-Cog  
on p. 984 and the Mini-Cog screening 
tool in Table 20-5, Screening for 
Dementia: The Mini-Cog, on p. 1002.
Techniques of Examination
Important Areas of Examination
● Mental status—see Chapter 5, Behavior and Mental Status
● CNs I through XII
● Motor system: muscle bulk, tone, and strength; coordination, gait, and stance
● Sensory system: pain and temperature, position and vibration, light touch, 
discriminative sensation
● Deep tendon, abdominal, and plantar reﬂexes
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
734 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Return to the four important questions that govern your neurologic evaluation:
■ Does the patient have neurologic disease?
■ If so, what is the localization of the lesion(s)? Are your findings 
symmetric?
■ What is the pathophysiology of the process?
■ What is the preliminary differential diagnosis?
This section presents the techniques you will need for a practical and reasonably 
comprehensive examination of the nervous system aligned with recommenda-
tions of the American Academy of Neurology.78–80 At ﬁrst, learning the numerous 
techniques for a thorough examination may seem difﬁcult. Be an active learner; 
seek feedback from your teachers and consulting neurologists to make sure 
you are using skilled and proper techniques. Take advantage of the Bates Visual 
Guide videos on the nervous system and teaching videos posted by the American 
Academy of Neurology and Wright State University.81–83 With supervision and 
practice your skills for assessing important neurologic disorders will deepen.
The amount of detail in an appropriate neurologic examination varies widely. In 
healthy patients your examination will be relatively brief, as outlined in the 
Screening Neurologic Examination recommended by the American Academy of 
Neurology provided below. If you detect abnormal ﬁndings, your examination 
should be more comprehensive. Be aware that neurologists use many additional 
techniques in speciﬁc situations. Whether you conduct a comprehensive or 
screening examination, organize your thinking into ﬁve categories: (1) mental 
status, speech, and language; (2) CNs; (3) the motor system; (4) the sensory 
system; and (5) reﬂexes. If your ﬁndings are abnormal, begin to group them into 
patterns of central or peripheral disorders.
For efﬁciency, you should integrate neurologic assessment with other parts of 
your examination. Survey the patient’s mental status and speech during the inter-
view even if you do more detailed testing later during the neurologic examina-
tion. Assess the CNs as you examine the head and neck, and any neurologic 
abnormalities in the arms and legs as you evaluate the peripheral vascular and 
musculoskeletal systems. Chapter 1 provides an outline for this kind of inte-
grated approach. Think about, describe, and record your ﬁndings, however, in 
terms of the nervous system as a whole.
See Chapter 1, Overview Examination 
and History Taking table on “The 
Physical Examination: Suggested 
Sequence,” p. 20.
American Academy of Neurology: Guidelines 
for a Screening Neurologic Examination
Perform a screening neurologic examination in all patients, even those without 
neurologic complaints, that is suﬃcient for detection of signiﬁcant neurologic 
 disease.78 Although the screening examination sequence may vary, it should cover 
the major components of the full examination—mental status, CNs, motor system 
(strength, gait, and coordination), sensation, and reﬂexes. One example of a 
screening examination is given here.
(continued )
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
735
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The Cranial Nerves
Overview. The examination of the CNs can be summarized as follows.
American Academy of Neurology: Guidelines 
for a Screening Neurologic Examination (continued )
Mental Status—level of alertness, appropriateness of responses, orientation 
to date and place
Cranial Nerves
● Vision—visual ﬁelds, funduscopic examination
● Pupillary light reﬂex
● Eye movements
● Hearing
● Facial strength—smile, eye closure
Motor System
● Strength—shoulder abduction, elbow extension, wrist extension, ﬁnger 
abduction, hip ﬂexion, knee ﬂexion, ankle dorsiﬂexion
● Gait—casual, heel walk, toe walk, tandem walk
● Coordination—ﬁne ﬁnger movements, ﬁnger-to-nose, heel-knee-shin
Sensory System—one modality at toes—can be light touch, pain/tempera-
ture, or proprioception
Reﬂexes
● Deep tendon reﬂexes—biceps, patellar, Achilles
● Plantar responses
Note: If there is reason to suspect neurologic disease based on the patient’s his-
tory or the results of any components of the screening examination, a more com-
plete neurologic examination is necessary.
Source: Adapted from the American Academy of Neurology. Available at https://www.aan.com/
uploadedFiles/4CME_and_Training/2Training/3Fellowship_Resources/5Core_Curricula/skilz.pdf. 
Accessed July 23, 2015.
Summary: Cranial Nerves I–XII
I
II
II, III
III, IV, VI
V
VII
VIII
IX, X
V, VII, X, XII
XI
XII
Smell
Visual acuity, visual ﬁelds, and ocular fundi
Pupillary reactions
Extraocular movements
Corneal reﬂexes, facial sensation, and jaw movements
Facial movements
Hearing
Swallowing and rise of the palate, gag reﬂex
Voice and speech
Shoulder and neck movements
Tongue symmetry, position, and movement
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
736 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Cranial Nerve I—Olfactory. Test the sense of smell by presenting the 
patient with familiar nonirritating odors. First, make sure that each nasal passage 
is patent by compressing one side of the nose and asking the patient to sniff 
through the other. Then ask the patient to close both eyes. Occlude one nostril 
and test smell in the other with substances like cloves, coffee, soap, or vanilla. 
Avoid noxious odors like ammonia that might stimulate CN V. Ask the patient to 
identify each odor. Test smell on the other side. Normally the patient perceives 
odors on each side and identiﬁes them correctly.
Cranial Nerve II—Optic. Test visual acuity.
Inspect the optic fundi with your ophthalmoscope, paying special attention to 
the optic discs.
Test the visual ﬁelds by confrontation. Test each eye separately, and both eyes 
together. Occasionally, in stroke patients, for example, patients will complain of 
partial loss of vision, and testing of both eyes reveals a visual ﬁeld defect, an abnor-
mality in peripheral vision such as homonymous hemianopsia. Testing only one eye 
would miss this ﬁnding.
Cranial Nerves II and III—Optic and Oculomotor. Inspect the size and 
shape of the pupils, and compare one side with the other. Anisocoria, or a differ-
ence of >0.4 mm in the diameter of one pupil compared to the other, is seen in 
up to 38% of healthy individuals. Test the pupillary reactions to light.
Also check the near response (p. 230), which tests pupillary constriction (pupil-
lary constrictor muscle), convergence (medial rectus muscles), and accommoda-
tion of the lens (ciliary muscle).
Loss of smell occurs in sinus condi-
tions, head trauma, smoking, aging, 
use of cocaine, and Parkinson disease. 
See Chapter 7, Head and Neck, for 
more detailed discussion of the tech-
niques for examining Visual Acuity 
and Visual Fields, pp. 231–233, Pupils, 
pp. 235–236, and the optic fundi using 
an ophthalmoscope, pp. 238–242. 
Inspect each disc carefully for bulging 
and blurred margins (papilledema); 
pallor (optic atrophy); and cup 
enlargement (glaucoma). 
See Table 7-6, Visual Field Defects,  
p. 273. Look for prechiasmal, or ante-
rior, defects seen in glaucoma, retinal 
emboli, optic neuritis (visual acuity 
poor); bitemporal hemianopsias from 
defects at the optic chiasm, usually 
from pituitary tumor; and homony-
mous hemianopsias or quadran-
tanopsias in postchiasmal lesions, 
usually in the occipital or parietal lobe, 
with associated findings of stroke 
(visual acuity normal).84 
See Table 7-10, Pupillary Abnormali-
ties, p. 277. If the large pupil reacts 
poorly to light or anisocoria worsens 
in light, the large pupil has abnormal 
pupillary constriction, seen in CN III 
palsy. If ptosis and ophthalmoplegia 
are also present, consider intracranial 
aneurysm if the patient is awake, and 
transtentorial herniation if the patient 
is comatose. 
If both pupils react to light and aniso-
coria worsens in darkness, the small 
pupil has abnormal pupillary dilation, 
seen in Horner syndrome and simple 
anisocoria.85 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
737
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Cranial Nerves III, IV, and VI—Oculomotor, Trochlear, and Abdu-
cens. Test the extraocular movements in the six cardinal directions of gaze, and 
look for loss of conjugate movements in any of the six directions, which causes 
diplopia. Ask the patient which direction makes the diplopia worse and inspect 
the eye closely for asymmetric deviation of movement. Determine if the diplo-
pia is monocular or binocular by asking the patient to cover one eye, then the 
other.
Check convergence of the eyes.
Identify any nystagmus, an involuntary jerking movement of the eyes with quick 
and slow components. Note the direction of gaze in which it appears, the plane 
of the nystagmus (horizontal, vertical, rotary, or mixed), and the direction of the 
quick and slow components. Nystagmus is named for the direction of the quick 
component. Ask the patient to ﬁx his or her vision on a distant object and 
observe if the nystagmus increases or decreases.
Look for ptosis (drooping of the upper eyelids). A slight difference in the width 
of the palpebral ﬁssures is a normal variant in approximately one third of patients.
Cranial Nerve V—Trigeminal
Motor. While palpating the temporal and masseter muscles in turn, ask the 
patient to ﬁrmly clench the teeth (Figs. 17-9 and 17-10). Note the strength of 
muscle contraction. Ask the patient to open and move the jaw from side to side.
See Chapter 7, Head and Neck (pp. 237–
238) for a more detailed discussion of 
testing extraocular movements. 
See Table 7-11, Dysconjugate Gaze,  
p. 278. Monocular diplopia is seen in 
local problems with glasses or contact 
lenses, cataracts, astigmatism, or pto-
sis. Binocular diplopia occurs in CN III, IV, 
and VI neuropathy (40% of patients), 
and eye muscle disorders from myas-
thenia gravis, trauma, thyroid ophthal-
mopathy, and internuclear 
ophthalmoplegia.86
See Table 17-7, Nystagmus, pp. 785–786. 
Nystagmus is seen in cerebellar dis-
ease, especially with gait ataxia and 
dysarthria (increases with retinal fixa-
tion), and vestibular disorders 
(decreases with retinal fixation); and 
in internuclear ophthalmoplegia. 
Ptosis is seen in 3rd nerve palsy (CN III), 
Horner syndrome (ptosis, miosis, 
 forehead anhidrosis), or myasthenia 
 gravis. 
F I G U R E  1 7 - 9 .  Palpate the 
temporal muscles.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 1 0 .  Palpate the 
masseter muscles.
Difficulty clenching the jaw or moving 
it to the opposite side suggests mas-
seter and lateral pterygoid weakness, 
respectively. Jaw deviation during 
opening points to weakness on the 
deviating side. 
Look for unilateral weakness in CN V 
pontine lesions; bilateral weakness in 
bilateral hemispheric disease.
CNS patterns from stroke include ipsi-
lateral facial and body sensory loss 
from contralateral cortical or thalamic 
lesions; ipsilateral face, but contralat-
eral body sensory loss in brainstem 
lesions.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
738 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Sensory. After explaining what you 
plan to do, test the forehead, cheeks, and 
chin on each side for pain sensation in the 
circled areas in Figure 17-11. The patient’s 
eyes should be closed. Use a suitable sharp 
object such as a pin or cotton swab. You can 
create a sharp wood splinter by breaking or 
twisting a cotton swab. To avoid transmit-
ting infection, use a new object for each 
patient. While testing, occasionally substi-
tute the blunt end for the point as a con-
trasting stimulus. Ask the patient to report 
whether each stimulus is “sharp” or “dull” 
and to compare sides.
If you detect sensory loss, conﬁrm it by testing temperature sensation. Two test 
tubes, ﬁlled with hot and ice-cold water, are the traditional stimuli. You can also 
use a tuning fork, which usually feels cool, and make it warm or cool with run-
ning water. Dry it, then touch the skin and ask the patient to identify “hot” or 
“cold.”
Then test for light touch, using a ﬁne wisp of cotton. Ask the patient to respond 
whenever you touch the skin.
Corneal Reflex. Test the 
corneal reﬂex. Ask the patient 
to look up and away from 
you and approach from the 
opposite side, out of the pa-
tient’s line of vision. Avoid-
ing the eyelashes, lightly 
touch the cornea (not just 
the conjunctiva) with a ﬁne 
wisp of cotton (Fig. 17-12). 
If the patient is apprehensive 
touching the conjunctiva ﬁrst 
may be helpful.
Inspect for blinking of both eyes, the normal reaction to this stimulus. The sen-
sory limb of this reﬂex is carried in CN V, and the motor response in CN VII on 
both sides. Contact lenses interfere with this testing.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 1 1 .  Test for facial 
sensory loss.
Isolated sensory loss occurs in periph-
eral nerve disorders, including lesions 
of the trigeminal nerve (CN V). 
F I G U R E  1 7 - 1 2 .  Test the corneal reﬂex.
Blinking is absent in both eyes in CN V 
lesions and on the side of weakness in 
lesions of CN VII. Absent blinking and 
sensorineural hearing loss occur in 
acoustic neuroma. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
739
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Cranial Nerve VII—Facial. Inspect the face both at rest and during con-
versation with the patient. Note any asymmetry, often visible in the nasolabial 
folds, and observe any tics or other abnormal movements.
Ask the patient to:
1. Raise both eyebrows.
2. Frown.
3. Close both eyes tightly so that you can-
not open them. Test muscular strength 
by trying to open them, as illustrated in 
Figure 17-13.
4. Show both upper and lower teeth.
5. Smile.
6. Puff out both cheeks.
Cranial Nerve VIII—Acoustic and Vestibular. Assess hearing with the 
whispered voice test. Ask the patient to repeat numbers whispered into one ear 
while blocking or rubbing your ﬁngers next to the contralateral ear.
If hearing loss is present, determine if the loss is conductive, from impaired “air 
through ear” transmission, or sensorineural, from damage to the cochlear branch 
of CN VIII. Test for air and bone conduction, using the Rinne test, and lateraliza-
tion, using the Weber test.
Speciﬁc tests of the vestibular function of CN VIII are rarely included in the 
typical neurologic examination. Consult textbooks of neurology or otolaryngol-
ogy as the need arises.
Cranial Nerves IX and X—Glossopharyngeal and Vagus. Listen to the 
patient’s voice. Is it hoarse, or does it have a nasal quality?
Is there difﬁculty in swallowing?
Flattening of the nasolabial fold and 
drooping of the lower eyelid suggest 
facial weakness.
A peripheral injury to CN VII, as seen 
in Bell palsy, affects both the upper 
and lower face; a central lesion affects 
mainly the lower face. Loss of taste, 
hyperacusis, and increased or 
decreased tearing also occur in Bell 
palsy.87 See Table 17-8, Types of Facial 
Paralysis, p. 787. 
F I G U R E  1 7 - 1 3 .  Test the eye 
muscles.
In unilateral facial paralysis, the 
mouth droops on the paralyzed side 
when the patient smiles or grimaces.
The whispered voice test is both sen-
sitive (>90%) and specific (>80%) 
when assessing presence or absence 
of hearing loss.88 
See techniques for Weber and Rinne 
tests on pp. 247–248 and Table 7-21, 
Patterns of Hearing Loss, p. 289.
Excess cerumen, otosclerosis, and oti-
tis media cause conductive hearing 
loss; presbyacusis from aging is usu-
ally from sensorineural hearing loss.
Vertigo with hearing loss and nystag-
mus typifies Ménière disease. See  
Table 7-4, Dizziness and Vertigo, p. 271, 
and Table 17-7, Nystagmus, pp. 785–786. 
For caloric stimulation testing of coma-
tose patients, see p. 270. 
Hoarseness occurs in vocal cord 
paralysis; nasal voice in paralysis of 
the palate. 
Difficulty swallowing suggests pha-
ryngeal or palatal weakness. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
740 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Ask the patient to say “ah” or to yawn as you watch the movements of the soft pal-
ate and the pharynx. The soft palate normally rises symmetrically, the uvula 
remains in the midline, and each side of the posterior pharynx moves medially, 
like a curtain. The slightly curved uvula seen occasionally as a normal variation 
should not be mistaken for a uvula deviated by a lesion of CN IX or X.
Warn the patient that you are going to test the gag reﬂex, which some patients 
may refuse. This reﬂex consists of elevation of the tongue and soft palate and 
constriction of the pharyngeal muscles. Stimulate the back of the throat lightly 
on each side in turn and observe the gag reﬂex. This reﬂex is diminished in many 
normally healthy people.
Cranial Nerve XI—Spinal Accessory. Standing behind the patient, look 
for atrophy or fasciculations in the trapezius muscles, and compare one side with 
the other. Fasciculations are ﬁne ﬂickering irregular movements in small groups 
of muscle ﬁbers. Ask the patient to shrug both shoulders upward against your 
hands (Fig. 17-14). Note the strength and contraction of the trapezii.
The palate fails to rise with a bilateral 
lesion of CN X. In unilateral paralysis, 
one side of the palate fails to rise and, 
together with the uvula, is pulled 
toward the normal side (see Chapter 7, 
p. 257). 
Unilateral absence of this reflex sug-
gests a lesion of CN IX, and perhaps 
CN X. 
F I G U R E  1 7 - 1 4 .  Test trapezius strength.
Ask the patient to turn his or her head to each 
side against your hand (Fig. 17-15). Observe 
the contraction of the opposite sternocleido-
mastoid (SCM) muscle and note the force of 
the movement against your hand.
Cranial Nerve XII—Hypoglossal. Listen 
to the articulation of the patient’s words. This 
depends on CNs V, VII, IX, and X, as well as XII. 
Inspect the patient’s tongue as it lies on the ﬂoor 
of the mouth. Look for any atrophy or fascicula-
tions. Some coarser restless movements are 
normal. Then, with the patient’s tongue pro-
truded, look for asymmetry, atrophy, or devia-
tion from the midline. Ask the patient to move 
Trapezius weakness with atrophy and 
fasciculations points to a peripheral 
nerve disorder. In trapezius muscle 
paralysis, the shoulder droops, and 
the scapula is displaced downward 
and laterally. 
F I G U R E  1 7 - 1 5 .  Test 
sternocleidomastoid strength.
A supine patient with bilateral weak-
ness of the SCM muscles has difficulty 
raising the head off the pillow. 
For poor articulation, or dysarthria, 
see Table 17-6, Disorders of Speech,  
p. 784. Tongue atrophy and fascicula-
tions are present in amyotrophic  
lateral sclerosis and past polio.
In a unilateral cortical lesion, the pro-
truded tongue deviates away from 
the side of the cortical lesion. In CN XII 
lesions, the tongue deviates to the 
weak side. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
741
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
the tongue from side to side, and note the symmetry of the movement. In ambig-
uous cases, ask the patient to push the tongue against the inside of each cheek 
in turn as you palpate externally for strength.
The Motor System
As you assess the motor system, focus on body position, involuntary movements, 
characteristics of the muscles (bulk, tone, and strength), and coordination. You 
can use this sequence for assessing overall motor function, or check each com-
ponent in the arms, legs, and trunk in turn. If you detect an abnormality, identify 
the muscle(s) involved and if it is central or peripheral in origin. Learn which 
nerves innervate the major muscle groups.
Body Position. Observe the patient’s body position during movement and 
at rest.
Involuntary Movements. Watch for involuntary movements such as 
tremors, tics, chorea, or fasciculations. Note their location, quality, rate, rhythm, 
and amplitude, and their relation to posture, activity, fatigue, emotion, and other 
factors.
Muscle Bulk. Inspect the size and contours of muscles. Do the muscles look 
ﬂat or concave, suggesting loss of muscle bulk from atrophy or wasting? If so, is 
the process unilateral or bilateral? . . . proximal or distal?
When inspecting for atrophy, pay particular attention to the hands, shoulders, 
thighs, and legs. The spaces between the metacarpals, where the dorsal interosse-
ous muscles lie, should be full or only slightly depressed (Fig. 17-16). The thenar 
Abnormal positions alert you to con-
ditions such as mono- or hemiparesis 
from stroke. 
See Table 17-5, Tremors and Involun-
tary Movements, pp. 782–783. 
Atrophy results from PNS disorders 
such as diabetic neuropathy and dis-
eases of the muscles themselves. 
Hypertrophy is an increase in bulk 
with normal or increased strength; 
increased bulk with diminished 
strength is called pseudohypertrophy, 
seen in the Duchenne form of muscular 
dystrophy. Corticospinal tract injury 
can cause mild atrophy due to 
decreased muscle use. 
F I G U R E  1 7 - 1 6 .  No atrophy—
44-year-old woman.
Interosseous
atrophy
F I G U R E  1 7 - 1 7 .  Atrophy—84-year-old 
woman.
Furrowing between the metacarpals, 
and flattening of the thenar and 
hypothenar eminences (also seen in 
median and ulnar nerve damage 
respectively), suggest atrophy. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
742 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
and hypothenar eminences of the hands should be full and convex (Fig. 17-17). 
Atrophy of the hand muscles occurs in normal aging (Figs. 17-18 and 17-19).
Other causes of muscular atrophy 
include motor neuron diseases, dis-
eases affecting the peripheral motor 
system projecting from the spinal cord, 
and protein–calorie malnutrition. 
F I G U R E  1 7 - 1 8 .  No atrophy— 
44-year-old woman.
Thenar flattening 
from atrophy
Hypothenar atrophy
F I G U R E  1 7 - 1 9 .  Atrophy—84-year-
old woman.
Inspect for fasciculations in atrophic muscles. If absent, tap on the muscles with 
a reﬂex hammer, which stimulates them.
Muscle Tone. When a normal muscle with an intact nerve supply is relaxed 
voluntarily, it maintains a slight residual tension known as muscle tone. This is 
best assessed by feeling the muscle’s resistance to passive stretch. Persuade the 
patient to relax. Hold one hand with yours and, while supporting the elbow, ﬂex 
and extend the patient’s ﬁngers, wrist, and elbow, and put the shoulder through 
a moderate range of motion. With practice, you can combine these actions into 
a single smooth movement. On each side, note muscle tone—the resistance 
offered to your movements. Tense patients may show increased resistance. With 
repeated practice, you will learn the feel of normal resistance.
If you suspect decreased resistance, hold the forearm and shake the hand loosely 
back and forth. Normally the hand moves back and forth freely but is not com-
pletely ﬂoppy.
If resistance is increased, determine if it varies as you move the limb or persists 
throughout the range of movement and in both directions, for example, during 
both ﬂexion and extension. Feel for any jerkiness in the resistance.
To assess muscle tone in the legs, support the patient’s thigh with one hand, 
grasp the foot with the other, and ﬂex and extend the patient’s knee and ankle 
on each side. Note the resistance to moving the limb.
Fasciculations with atrophy and muscle 
weakness suggest peripheral motor 
neuron disease. 
Decreased resistance suggests dis-
ease of the PNS or cerebellum, or the 
acute stages of spinal cord injury. See 
Table 17-9, Disorders of Muscle Tone, 
p. 788. 
Marked floppiness indicates muscle 
hypotonia or flaccidity, usually from a 
peripheral motor system disorder. 
Spasticity is velocity-dependent 
increased tone that worsens at the 
extremes of range. Spasticity, seen in 
central corticospinal tract diseases, is 
rate-dependent, increasing with rapid 
movement. Rigidity is increased resis-
tance throughout the range of move-
ment and in both directions; it is not 
rate-dependent. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
743
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Muscle Strength. Normal strength varies widely, so your standard of 
normal should allow for factors like age, sex, and muscular training. The patient’s 
dominant side is usually slightly stronger than the nondominant side, though 
differences can be hard to detect. Keep this difference in mind as you compare 
sides.
Test muscle strength by asking the patient to actively resist your movement. 
Remember that a muscle is strongest when shortest, and weakest when lon-
gest. Give the patient the advantage as you try to overcome the resistance and 
judge true the muscle’s true strength. Some patients give way during tests of 
muscle strength due to pain, misunderstanding of the test, an effort to help the 
examiner, conversion disorder, or malingering.
If the muscles are too weak to overcome resistance, test them against gravity 
alone or with gravity eliminated. When the forearm rests in a pronated position, 
for example, dorsiﬂexion at the wrist can be tested against gravity alone. When 
the forearm is midway between pronation and supination, extension at the wrist 
can be tested with gravity eliminated. Finally, if the patient fails to move the body 
part, observe or palpate for weak muscular contraction.
Impaired strength or weakness is 
called paresis. Absent strength is 
paralysis, or plegia. Hemiparesis refers 
to weakness of one half of the body; 
hemiplegia refers to paralysis of one 
half of the body. Paraplegia means 
paralysis of the legs; quadriplegia 
means paralysis of all four limbs. 
See Table 17-1, Disorders of the Cen-
tral and Peripheral Nervous Systems, 
pp. 774–775. 
Scale for Grading Muscle Strength
Muscle strength is graded on a 0 to 5 scale:
 0 —No muscular contraction detected
 1 —A barely detectable flicker or trace of contraction
 2 —Active movement of the body part with gravity eliminated
 3 —Active movement against gravity
 4 —Active movement against gravity and some resistance
 5 — Active movement against full resistance without evident fatigue. This is  
normal muscle strength.
Source: Medical Research Council. Aids to the examination of the peripheral nervous system. 
 London: Bailliere Tindall, 1986.
Many clinicians make further distinctions by adding plus or minus signs toward 
the stronger end of this scale. Thus, 4+ indicates good but not full strength, while 
5− means a trace of weakness.
Methods for testing individual major muscle groups are described in the text that 
follows. The spinal root innervations and the muscles affected are shown in 
parentheses. To localize lesions in the spinal cord or the PNS more precisely, 
consult texts of neurology for specialized additional testing.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
744 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Test extension at the wrist 
(C6, C7, C8, radial nerve—
extensor carpi radialis lon-
gus and brevis) by asking 
the patient to make a ﬁst 
and resist as you press 
down (Fig. 17-22). Or ask 
the patient to extend the 
forearms with fingers 
straight and palms up, then 
press the palms down-
ward.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 2 2 .  Test wrist extension.
Test ﬂexion (C5, C6—biceps and brachioradialis) and extension (C6, C7, C8—tri-
ceps) at the elbow by having the patient pull and push against your hand (Figs. 17-20 
and 17-21).
F I G U R E  1 7 - 2 0 .  Test elbow ﬂexion.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 2 1 .  Testing elbow extension.
Extensor weakness is seen in periph-
eral radial nerve damage, and in the 
hemiplegia of CNS disease seen in 
stroke or multiple sclerosis. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
745
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Test the grip (C7, C8, T1). Ask the patient to squeeze two of your ﬁngers as hard 
as possible and not let them go (Fig. 17-23). To avoid getting hurt by strong 
grips, place your own middle ﬁnger on top of your index ﬁnger. Normally it 
should be difﬁcult for you to pull your ﬁngers from the patient’s grip. Test both 
grips simultaneously with the patient’s arms extended or in the lap to help com-
pare the right handgrip with the left.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 2 3 .  Test grip strength.
Test ﬁnger abduction (C8, T1, ulnar nerve). Position the patient’s hand with palm 
down and ﬁngers spread. Instruct the patient to prevent you from moving any 
ﬁngers as you try to force them together (Fig. 17-24).
A weak grip is seen in cervical radicu-
lopathy, median or ulnar peripheral 
nerve disease, and pain from de Quer-
vain tenosynovitis, carpal tunnel syn-
drome, arthritis, and epicondylitis. 
F I G U R E  1 7 - 2 4 .  Test ﬁnger abduction.
Weak finger abduction occurs in ulnar 
nerve disorders. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
746 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Test opposition of the thumb (C8, T1, median nerve). Ask the patient to touch the 
tip of the little ﬁnger with the thumb, against your resistance (Fig. 17-25).
F I G U R E  1 7 - 2 5 .  Test opposition of the thumb.
You may already have assessed muscle strength of the trunk during other segments 
of the examination, namely:
■ Flexion, extension, and lateral bending of the spine
■ Thoracic expansion and diaphragmatic excursion during respiration.
Test ﬂexion at the hip (L2, L3, L4—iliopsoas) by 
placing your hand on the patient’s mid-thigh 
and asking the patient to raise the leg against 
your hand (Fig. 17-26).
Test adduction at the hips (L2, L3, L4—adductors). Place your hands ﬁrmly on the 
bed between the patient’s knees. Ask the patient to bring both legs together.
Test abduction at the hips (L4, L5, S1—gluteus medius and minimus). Place your 
hands ﬁrmly outside the patient’s knees. Ask the patient to spread both legs 
against your hands.
Inspect for weak opposition of the 
thumb in median nerve disorders 
such as carpal tunnel syndrome (see 
Chapter 16, p. 664). 
F I G U R E  1 7 - 2 6 .  Test hip ﬂexion.
Symmetric weakness of the proximal 
muscles suggests myopathy; symmet-
ric weakness of distal muscles sug-
gests polyneuropathy, or disorders of 
peripheral nerves. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
747
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Test extension at the hips (S1—gluteus maximus). Have the patient push the mid 
posterior thigh down against your hand.
Test extension at the knee (L2, L3, L4—quadriceps). Support the knee in ﬂexion 
and ask the patient to straighten the leg against your hand (Fig. 17-27). The 
quadriceps is the strongest muscle in the body, so expect a forceful response.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 2 7 .  Test knee extension.
Test ﬂexion at the knee (L4, L5, S1, S2—hamstrings) as shown below. Position the 
patient’s leg so that the knee is ﬂexed with the foot resting on the bed. Tell the 
patient to keep the foot down as you try to straighten the leg (Fig. 17-28).
F I G U R E  1 7 - 2 8 .  Test knee ﬂexion.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
748 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Test foot dorsiﬂexion (mainly L4, L5—tibialis anterior) and plantar ﬂexion (mainly 
S1—gastrocnemius, soleus) at the ankle by asking the patient to pull up and 
push down against your hand (Figs. 17-29 and 17-30). Heel and toe walk also 
assess foot dorsiﬂexion and plantar ﬂexion, respectively.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 2 9 .  Test ankle dorsiﬂexion.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 3 0 .  Testing plantar ﬂexion.
Coordination. Coordination of muscle movement requires four areas of the 
nervous system to function in an integrated way:
■ The motor system, for muscle strength
■ The cerebellar system (also part of the motor system), for normal rhythmic 
movement and steady posture
In cerebellar disease, look for nystagmus, 
dysarthria, hypotonia, and ataxia. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
749
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ The vestibular system, for balance and for coordinating eye, head, and body 
movements
■ The sensory system, for position sense
To assess coordination, observe the patient performing:
■ Rapid alternating movements
■ Point-to-point movements
■ Gait and other related body movements
■ Standing in speciﬁed ways
Rapid Alternating Movements
Arms. Show the patient how to strike 
one hand on the thigh, raise the hand, turn 
it over, and then strike the back of the hand 
down on the same place. Urge the patient to 
repeat these alternating movements as rapidly 
as possible (Fig. 17-31).
Observe the speed, rhythm, and smoothness of 
the movements. Repeat with the other hand. 
The nondominant hand may perform less well.
Show the patient how to tap the distal joint of 
the thumb with the tip of the index ﬁnger, 
again as rapidly as possible (Fig. 17-32). Again, 
observe the speed, rhythm, and smoothness of 
the movements. The nondominant side often 
performs less well.
Legs. Ask the patient to tap the ball of each foot in turn as quickly as pos-
sible on your hand or the ﬂoor. Note any slowness or awkwardness. Normally 
the feet do not perform as well as the hands.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 3 1 .  Test rapid 
alternating arm movement.
In cerebellar disease, instead of alter-
nating quickly, these movements are 
slow, irregular, and clumsy, an abnor-
mality called dysdiadochokinesis. 
Upper motor neuron weakness and 
basal ganglia disease can also impair 
these movements, but not in the same 
manner. 
F I G U R E  1 7 - 3 2 .  Test rapid 
ﬁnger tapping.
Dysdiadochokinesis points to 
 cerebellar disease. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
750 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Point-to-Point Movements
Arms—Finger-to-Nose Test. Ask the patient to touch your index ﬁnger and 
then his or her nose alternately several times. Move your ﬁnger so that the 
patient has to change directions and extend the arm fully to reach your ﬁnger. 
Observe the accuracy and smoothness of movement, and watch for any tremor.
Now hold your ﬁnger in one place so that the patient can touch it with one arm 
and ﬁnger outstretched. Ask the patient to raise the arm overhead and lower it 
again to touch your ﬁnger. After several repeats, ask the patient to close both eyes 
and try several more times. Repeat on the other side. Normally the patient 
touches the examiner’s ﬁnger successfully with eyes open or closed. These 
maneuvers test position sense and the function of both the labyrinth of the inner 
ear and the cerebellum.
Legs—Heel-to-Shin Test. Ask the patient to place one heel on the oppo-
site knee, then run it down the shin to the big toe. Observe this movement for 
smoothness and accuracy. Repetition with the patient’s eyes closed tests for posi-
tion sense. Repeat on the other side.
Gait. Ask the patient to:
■ Walk across the room or down the hall, 
then turn and come back. Observe 
posture, balance, swinging of the 
arms, and movements of the legs. 
Normally balance is intact, the arms 
swing symmetrically at the sides, and 
turns are smooth.
■ Walk heel-to-toe in a straight line—
called tandem walking (Fig. 17-33).
■ Walk on the toes, then on the heels—
this tests plantar ﬂexion and dorsi-
ﬂexion of the ankles as well as 
balance.
In cerebellar disease, movements are 
clumsy, unsteady, and inappropriately 
variable in their speed, force, and 
direction. In dysmetria the patient’s fin-
ger may initially overshoot the mark, 
but then reach it fairly well. An inten-
tion tremor may appear toward the end 
of the movement. See Table 17-5, 
Tremors and Involuntary Movements, 
p. 782. 
In cerebellar disease, incoordination 
modestly worsens with eyes closed, 
indicating loss of position sense. Con-
sistent deviation to one side which 
worsens with the eyes closed, referred 
to as past pointing, suggests cerebellar 
or vestibular disease. 
In cerebellar disease, the heel may 
overshoot the knee, then oscillate 
from side to side down the shin. If 
position sense is absent, the heel lifts 
too high and the patient tries to look. 
With eyes closed, performance is poor. 
F I G U R E  1 7 - 3 3 .  Test walking 
heel-to-toe.
Gait abnormalities increase risk of 
falls. 
A uncoordinated gait with reeling and 
instability is ataxic. Ataxia is seen in cer-
ebellar disease, loss of position sense, 
and intoxication. See Table 17-10, 
Abnormalities of Gait and Posture,  
p. 789.
Tandem walking may reveal ataxia 
that is not otherwise obvious.
Walking on toes and heels may reveal 
distal leg weakness. Inability to heel-
walk is a sensitive test for corticospinal 
tract damage.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
751
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Hop in place on each foot in turn (if 
the patient is not too ill)—this tests 
proximal and distal muscle strength 
in the legs and requires both nor-
mal position sense and cerebellar 
function.
■ Do a shallow knee bend, ﬁrst on one 
leg, then on the other (Fig. 17-34). 
Steady the patient if you think the 
patient might fall.
■ Or alternatively, rise from a sitting 
position without arm support and step 
up on a sturdy stool—if the patient is 
unsteady, neurologically impaired, or 
frail these tests are more suitable than 
hopping or knee bends.
Stance. The following two tests can often be performed concurrently. 
They differ only in the patient’s arm position and in what you are assessing. In 
each case, stand close enough to the patient to prevent a fall.
The Romberg Test. This is mainly a test of position sense. The patient should 
ﬁrst stand with feet together and eyes open and then close both eyes for 30 to 
60 seconds without support. Note the patient’s ability to maintain an upright 
posture. Normally any swaying is minimal.
Test for Pronator Drift. The patient should stand for 20 to 30 seconds with 
eyes closed and both arms held straight forward with palms up (Fig. 17-35). 
Normally patients hold this arm position well. If necessary, patients can be tested 
in the sitting position.
Next, instruct the patient to keep the arms out and eyes shut and tap the arms 
briskly downward. The arms normally return smoothly to the horizontal position. 
This response requires muscular strength, coordination, and good position 
sense.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 3 4 .  Test shallow 
knee bends.
Difficulty hopping points to 
weakness, lack of position sense,  
or cerebellar dysfunction.
Difficulty doing shallow knee bends 
suggests proximal weakness (exten-
sors of the hip), weakness of the quad-
riceps (extensor of the knee), or both.
Proximal muscle weakness in the pel-
vic girdle and legs causes difficulty 
with both of these activities. See 
Chapter 20, “Get up and go test,”  
p. 996.
In ataxia from dorsal column disease 
and loss of position sense, vision 
compensates for the sensory loss. 
The patient stands fairly well with 
eyes open but loses balance when 
they are closed, a positive Romberg 
sign. In cerebellar ataxia, the patient 
has difficulty standing with feet 
together whether the eyes are open 
or closed. 
Pronator drift occurs when one 
forearm and palm turn inward and 
down (Fig. 17-36) and is both sensitive 
and specific for a corticospinal tract 
lesion in the contralateral hemisphere. 
Downward drift of the arm with 
flexion of fingers and elbow is also 
seen.89–92 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
752 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The Sensory System
To evaluate the sensory system, you will test several kinds of sensation:
■ Pain and temperature (spinothalamic tracts)
■ Position and vibration (posterior columns)
■ Light touch (both of these pathways)
■ Discriminative sensations, which depend on some of the above sensations 
but also involve the cortex
Assess the patient carefully as you consider the following questions: Is the under-
lying lesion central or peripheral? Is the sensory loss bilateral or unilateral? Does 
the pattern of sensory loss suggest a dermatomal distribution, a polyneuropathy, 
or a spinal cord syndrome with a loss of pain and temperature sensation but 
intact touch and vibration below a given spinal level?
Learn to perform tests for different kinds of sensation when indicated. Correlate 
any abnormal ﬁndings with motor and reﬂex activity to establish the location of 
the causative lesion. To improve your physical diagnosis of the many conditions 
with impaired sensation, it is important to work closely with specialists and 
reﬁne your skills of examination.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 3 5 .  Test for pronator drift.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 3 6 .  Positive test for 
pronator drift.
See Table 17-1, Disorders of the Cen-
tral and Peripheral Nervous Systems, 
pp. 774–775. 
Refer to specialty textbooks for dis-
cussion of spinal cord syndromes with 
crossed sensory findings, both ipsilat-
eral and contralateral to the spinal 
cord injury.
In loss of position sense the arms drift 
sideward or upward, sometimes with 
writhing movements of the hands; the 
patient may not recognize the dis-
placement and when asked, corrects 
it poorly. In cerebellar incoordination, 
the arm returns to its original position 
but overshoots and bounces. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
753
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Patterns of Testing. Because sensory testing is tiring for many patients 
and can produce unreliable results, conduct the examination as efﬁciently as 
possible. Focus on areas that have numbness or pain, motor or reﬂex abnor-
malities suggesting a lesion of the spinal cord or PNS, and trophic changes 
such as absent or excessive sweating, atrophic skin, or cutaneous ulceration. 
You will often need to retest at another time to conﬁrm abnormalities.
The following patterns of testing help you to identify sensory deﬁcits accurately 
and efﬁciently.
Meticulous sensory mapping helps 
establish the level of a spinal cord 
lesion and whether a more peripheral 
lesion is in a nerve root, a major 
peripheral nerve, or one of its 
branches. 
Tips for Detecting Sensory Deﬁcits
● Compare symmetric areas on the two sides of the body, including the arms, 
legs, and trunk.
● For pain, temperature, and touch sensation, compare distal to proximal areas 
of the extremities. Scatter the stimuli to sample most of the dermatomes 
and major peripheral nerves (see pp. 756–757). One suggested pattern is to 
include:
● both shoulders (C4)
● the inner and outer aspects of the forearms (C6 and T1)
● the thumbs and little ﬁngers (C6 and C8)
● the fronts of both thighs (L2)
● the medial and lateral aspects of both legs (L4 and L5)
● the little toes (S1)
● the medial aspect of each buttock (S3)
● For vibration and position sensation, test the ﬁngers and toes ﬁrst. If these 
are normal, you may safely assume that more proximal areas are also be 
normal.
● Vary the pace of your testing so that the 
patient does not merely respond to your 
repetitive rhythm.
● When you detect an area of sensory loss or 
hypersensitivity, map out its boundaries in 
detail. Stimulate ﬁrst at a point of reduced 
sensation, then in progressive steps until the 
patient reports a change to normal sensation. 
An example is shown here.
A hemisensory loss pattern suggests a 
lesion in the contralateral cerebral 
hemisphere; a sensory level (when one 
or more sensory modalities are reduced 
below a dermatome on one or both 
sides) suggests a spinal cord lesion. 
Symmetric distal sensory loss sug-
gests a diabetic polyneuropathy. You 
may miss this finding unless you com-
pare distal and proximal sensation. 
Here, all sensation in the hand is lost. 
Repetitive testing in a proximal direc-
tion reveals a gradual return to nor-
mal sensation at the wrist. This 
pattern does not fit either peripheral 
nerve damage or dermatomal loss 
(see pp. 756–757). If bilateral, it sug-
gests the “glove” of the “stocking-
glove” sensory loss of polyneuropathy, 
often seen in alcoholism and diabetes. 
Before each of the following tests, show the patient what you plan to do and 
explain how you would like the patient to respond. The patient’s eyes should be 
closed during actual testing.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
754 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Pain. Use a sharp safety pin, the stick portion of a broken cotton swab, or 
other suitable tool. Occasionally, substitute the blunt end for the point. Ask the 
patient, “Is this sharp or dull?” or, when making comparisons, “Does this feel the 
same as this?” Apply the lightest pressure needed for the stimulus to feel sharp; 
avoid heavy pricks that draw blood.
To prevent transmitting a bloodborne infection, discard the pin or other device 
safely. Do not reuse it on another person.
Temperature. Testing skin temperature is often omitted if pain sensation is 
normal. If there are sensory deﬁcits, use two test tubes ﬁlled with hot and cold 
water, or a tuning fork heated or cooled by running water. Touch the skin and 
ask the patient to identify “hot” or “cold.”
Light Touch. With a ﬁne wisp of cotton, touch the skin lightly, avoiding 
pressure. Ask the patient to respond whenever a touch is felt, and to compare 
one area with another. Avoid testing calloused skin, which is normally relatively 
insensitive.
Vibration. Use a relatively low-pitched 
tuning fork of 128 Hz. Tap it on the heel of 
your hand and place it ﬁrmly over a distal 
interphalangeal joint of the patient’s ﬁnger, 
then over the interphalangeal joint of the big 
toe (Fig. 17-37). Ask what the patient feels. 
If you are not sure whether the patient is 
feeling pressure or vibration, ask the patient 
to tell you when the vibration stops. Then 
touch the tuning fork to stop it from vibrating 
and conﬁrm this change with the patient. If 
vibration sense is impaired, proceed to more 
proximal bony prominences (e.g., wrist, 
elbow; medial malleolus, shin, patella, 
anterior superior iliac spine, spinous 
processes, and clavicles).
Proprioception (Joint Position 
Sense). Grasp the patient’s big toe, 
holding it by its sides between your thumb 
and index ﬁnger, then pull it away from 
the other toes (Fig. 17-38). This prevents 
extraneous tactile stimuli from affecting 
testing. Demonstrate “up” and “down” 
as you move the patient’s toe clearly 
upward and downward. Then, with the 
patient’s eyes closed, ask the patient to 
say “up” or “down” when moving the 
large toe in a small arc.
Analgesia refers to absence of pain 
sensation, hypalgesia refers to 
decreased sensitivity to pain, and 
hyperalgesia refers to increased pain 
sensitivity. 
Anesthesia is absence of touch sensa-
tion, hypesthesia is decreased sensi-
tivity to touch, and hyperesthesia is 
increased sensitivity.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 3 7 .  Test vibration 
sense.
Vibration sense is often the first 
sensation lost in a peripheral 
neuropathy and increases the 
likelihood of peripheral neuropathy 
16-fold.8 Causes include diabetes, 
alcoholism, and posterior column 
disease, seen in tertiary syphilis or 
vitamin B12 deficiency.93 
Testing vibration sense in the trunk is 
useful when identifying the level of a 
cord lesion.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 3 8 .  Test proprioception.
Loss of position sense, like loss of 
vibration sense, is seen in tabes dorsa-
lis, multiple sclerosis, or B12 deficiency 
from posterior column disease, and in 
diabetic neuropathy. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
755
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Repeat the test several times on each side. If position sense is impaired, move 
proximally to test the ankle joint. In a similar fashion, test position in the ﬁngers, 
moving proximally, if indicated, to the metacarpophalangeal joints, wrist, and 
elbow.
Discriminative Sensations. Several additional techniques test the 
ability of the sensory cortex to correlate, analyze, and interpret sensations. 
Because discriminative sensations depend on touch and position sense, they are 
useful only when these sensations are either intact or only slightly impaired.
Screen a patient with stereognosis, and proceed to other methods, if indicated. 
The patient’s eyes should be closed during all these tests.
■ Stereognosis. Stereognosis refers to 
the ability to identify an object by 
feeling it. Place a familiar object 
such as a coin, paper clip, key, pen-
cil, or cotton ball, in the patient’s 
hand and ask the patient to tell you 
what it is. Normally a patient will 
manipulate it skillfully and identify 
it correctly within 5 seconds. Asking 
the patient to distinguish “heads” 
from “tails” on a coin is a sensitive 
test of stereognosis.
■ Number identiﬁcation (graphesthesia). 
If arthritis or other conditions pre-
vent the patient from manipulating 
an object well enough to identify it, 
test the ability to identify numbers. 
With the blunt end of a pen or pen-
cil, draw a large number in the pa-
tient’s palm (Fig. 17-39). A normally 
abled person can identify most such 
numbers.
■ Two-point discrimination. Using the 
two ends of an opened paper clip, or 
two pins, touch a ﬁnger pad in two 
places simultaneously (Fig. 17-40). 
Alternate the double stimulus ir-
regularly with a one-point touch. Be 
careful not to cause pain.
 
Find the minimal distance at which the patient can discriminate one from 
two points (normally <5 mm on the ﬁnger pads). This test may be used on 
other parts of the body, but normal distances vary widely from one body 
region to another.
If touch and position sense are nor-
mal, decreased or absent discrimina-
tive sensation indicates a lesion in the 
sensory cortex. Stereognosis, number 
identification, and two-point discrimi-
nation are also impaired in posterior 
column disease. 
Astereognosis refers to the inability to 
recognize objects placed in the hand. 
F I G U R E  1 7 - 3 9 .  Test stereognosis.
The inability to recognize numbers, or 
graphanesthesia, indicates a lesion in 
the sensory cortex. 
F I G U R E  1 7 - 4 0 .  Test two-point 
discrimination.
Lesions of the sensory cortex increase 
the distance between two recognizable 
points. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
756 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Point localization. Brieﬂy touch a point on the patient’s skin. Then ask the 
patient to open both eyes and point to the place touched. Normally a person 
can do so accurately.
■ Extinction. Stimulate one side or simultaneously stimulate corresponding 
areas on both sides of the body. Ask where the patient feels your touch. Nor-
mally both stimuli are felt.
Dermatomes. Knowledge of dermatomes helps you localize neurologic 
lesions to a speciﬁc level of the spinal cord, particularly in spinal cord injury. A 
dermatome is the band of skin innervated by the sensory root of a single spinal nerve. 
Dermatome and peripheral nerve patterns are illustrated in Figures 17-41 to 
17-44, which reﬂect the international standard recommended by the American 
Lesions of the sensory cortex impair 
the ability to localize points accu-
rately. 
With lesions of the sensory cortex, 
only one stimulus may be recognized. 
The stimulus to the side opposite the 
damaged cortex is extinguished. 
Radial 
nerve
Median
nerve
Ulnar 
nerve
Lateral
cutaneous
nerve of 
thigh
Lateral
cutaneous
nerve of 
leg
Superficial
peroneal
nerve
Anterior
femoral
cutaneous
nerve
Cutaneous
branches of
saphenous
nerve
F I G U R E  1 7 - 4 1 .  Areas 
innervated by peripheral nerves.
C3 Front of neck
C4
C5
C5
C6
C6
C7
C7
C8
C8
T1
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
S1
S1
S2,3
L1
L2
L2
L3
L3
L4
L4
L5
L5
C8 Ring and
little fingers
L4 Knee
L1 Inguinal
L5 Anterior
ankle and foot
T4 Nipples
T10 Umbilicus
C2
C3
F I G U R E  1 7 - 4 2 .  Dermatomes innervated 
by posterior roots.
In spinal cord injury, the sensory level 
may be several segments lower than 
the spinal lesion, for reasons that are 
not well understood. Percussing for 
the level of vertebral pain may be 
helpful. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
757
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Spinal Injury Association.94 Dermatome levels are more variable than these 
diagrams suggest. They overlap at their upper and lower margins and also 
slightly across the midline.
Do not try to memorize all the dermatomes. Instead, focus on learning the der-
matomes shaded in green.
Median
nerve
Lateral
cutaneous
nerve of 
thigh
Lateral
cutaneous
nerve of leg
Superficial
peroneal
nerve
Posterior
femoral
cutaneous
nerve
Sural
nerve
Radial
nerve
Ulnar
nerve
F I G U R E  1 7 - 4 3 .  Areas 
innervated by peripheral nerves.
C2
C3
C3 Back of neck
C4
C5
C5
C5
C6
C6
C6
C6
Thumb
C7
C7
C7
C8
C8
C8
T1
T1
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
S1
S1
S1
S2
S2
S2
S3
S4
S5
L1
L2
L3
L4
L4
L4
L4, L5, S1
Posterior ankle
and foot
L5
L5
L5
C8 Ring and
little fingers
S5 Perianal
F I G U R E  1 7 - 4 4 .  Dermatomes innervated 
by posterior roots.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
758 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Muscle Stretch Reﬂexes
Eliciting the muscle stretch reﬂexes 
requires special handling of the reﬂex 
hammer. Select a properly weighted 
reﬂex hammer, and learn the different 
uses of the pointed end and the ﬂat 
end. For example, the pointed end is 
useful for striking small areas, such as 
your ﬁnger as it overlies the biceps ten-
don. Test the reﬂexes as follows:
■ Encourage the patient to relax, 
then position the limbs properly 
and symmetrically.
Hold the reﬂex hammer loosely 
between your thumb and index ﬁn-
ger so that it swings freely in an arc 
within the limits set by your palm 
and other ﬁngers (Fig. 17-45).
■ With your wrist relaxed, strike the tendon briskly using a rapid wrist move-
ment. Your strike should be quick and direct, not glancing.
 
Note the speed, force, and amplitude of the reﬂex response and grade the 
response using the scale below. Always compare the response of one side 
with the other. Reﬂexes are usually graded on a 0 to 4 scale.95
F I G U R E  1 7 - 4 5 .  Strike with a brisk 
relaxed swing.
Hyperactive reflexes (hyperreflexia) are 
seen in CNS lesions of the descending 
corticospinal tract. Look for associ-
ated upper motor neuron findings of 
weakness, spasticity, or a positive 
Babinski sign. 
Hypoactive or absent reflexes (hypore-
flexia) occur in lesions of the spinal 
nerve roots, spinal nerves, plexuses, 
or peripheral nerves. Look for associ-
ated findings of lower motor unit dis-
ease, namely weakness, atrophy, and 
fasciculations.
Scale for Grading Reﬂexes
4
3
2
1
0
Very brisk, hyperactive, with clonus (rhythmic oscillations between ﬂexion 
and extension)
Brisker than average; possibly but not necessarily indicative of disease
Average; normal
Somewhat diminished; low normal
Reﬂex absent
Reﬂex response depends partly on the force of your strike on the tendon. Use 
only enough force to provoke a deﬁnite response. Differences between sides are 
usually easier to detect than symmetric changes on both sides. Symmetrically 
increased, diminished, or even absent reﬂexes can be normal.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
759
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Reinforcement. If the patient’s reﬂexes are symmetrically diminished or 
absent, use reinforcement, a technique involving isometric contraction of 
other muscles for up to 10 seconds that may increase reﬂex activity. To reinforce 
the arm reﬂexes, for example, ask the patient to clench his or her teeth or to 
squeeze both knees together. If leg reﬂexes are diminished or absent, ask the 
patient to lock ﬁngers and pull one hand against the other. Tell the patient to pull 
just before you strike the patellar or Achilles tendon (Fig. 17-46).
F I G U R E  1 7 - 4 6 .  Reinforce the quadriceps (patellar) reﬂex.
The Biceps Reﬂex (C5, C6). The patient’s elbow should be partially 
ﬂexed and the forearm pronated with palm down. Place your thumb or ﬁnger 
ﬁrmly on the biceps tendon. Aim the strike with the reﬂex hammer directly 
through your digit toward the biceps tendon (Figs. 17-47 and 17-48).
F I G U R E  1 7 - 4 7 .  Biceps reﬂex—
patient sitting.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 4 8 .  Biceps reﬂex—
patient lying down.
Observe ﬂexion at the elbow, and watch for and feel the contraction of the 
biceps muscle.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
760 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The Triceps Reﬂex (C6, C7). The patient may be sitting or supine. Flex 
the patient’s arm at the elbow, with palm toward the body, and pull it slightly 
across the chest. Strike the triceps tendon with a direct blow directly behind and 
just above the elbow (Figs. 17-49 and 17-50). Watch for contraction of the 
triceps muscle and extension at the elbow.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 4 9 .  Triceps 
reﬂex—patient sitting.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 5 0 .  Triceps reﬂex—
patient supine.
If you have difﬁculty getting the patient to 
relax, try supporting the upper arm. Ask the 
patient to let the arm go limp, as if it were 
“hung up to dry.” Then strike the triceps ten-
don (Fig. 17-51).
The Brachioradialis Reﬂex (C5, C6). 
The patient’s hand should rest on the abdomen 
or the lap, with the forearm partly pronated. 
Strike the radius with the point or ﬂat edge of 
the reﬂex hammer, about 1 to 2 inches above 
the wrist (Fig. 17-52). Watch for ﬂexion and 
supination of the forearm.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 5 1 .  Triceps 
reﬂex—elbow supported.
FIGURE 17-52. Brachioradialis 
reﬂex.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
761
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The Quadriceps (Patellar) Reﬂex (L2, L3, L4). The patient may be 
either sitting or lying down as long as the knee is ﬂexed. Briskly tap the patellar 
tendon just below the patella (Fig. 17-53). Note contraction of the quadriceps 
with extension at the knee. Placing your hand on the patient’s anterior thigh lets 
you feel this reﬂex.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 5 3 .  Quadricepts (patellar) reﬂex.
There are two options for examining the supine patient. Supporting both knees 
at once allows you to assess small differences between quadriceps reﬂexes by 
repeatedly testing one reﬂex and then the other (Fig. 17-54). If supporting both 
legs is uncomfortable for you or the patient, you can place your supporting arm 
under the patient’s leg (Fig. 17-55). Some patients ﬁnd it easier to relax with this 
method.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 5 4 .  Quadriceps 
reﬂex—both legs supported.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 5 5 .  Quadriceps 
reﬂex—one leg supported.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
762 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The Achilles (Ankle) Reﬂex (Primarily S1). If the patient is sitting, 
partially dorsiﬂex the foot at the ankle. Persuade the patient to relax. Strike the 
Achilles tendon, and watch and feel for plantar ﬂexion at the ankle (Fig. 17-56). 
Also note the speed of relaxation after muscular contraction.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 5 6 .  Achilles reﬂex—patient sitting.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 5 7 .  Achilles reﬂex—patient supine.
The slowed relaxation phase of 
reflexes in hypothyroidism is often 
best detected during the ankle reflex. 
When the patient is lying down, ﬂex one leg at both hip and knee and rotate it 
externally so that the lower leg rests across the opposite shin. Then dorsiﬂex the 
foot at the ankle and strike the Achilles tendon (Fig. 17-57).
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
763
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Other joints may display clonus. A sharp downward displacement of the patella, 
for example, may elicit patellar clonus in the extended knee.
Cutaneous or Superﬁcial Stimulation Reﬂexes
The Abdominal Reﬂexes. Test 
the abdominal reﬂexes by lightly but 
briskly stroking each side of the 
abdomen, above (T8, T9, T10) and 
below (T10, T11, T12) the umbilicus in 
the directions illustrated (Fig. 17-59). 
Use a key, the wooden end of a cotton-
tipped applicator, or a tongue blade 
twisted and split longitudinally. Note 
the contraction of the abdominal 
muscles and movement of the umbilicus 
toward the stimulus. If obesity or 
previous abdominal surgery masks the 
abdominal reﬂexes, retract the patient’s umbilicus away from the side being 
tested with your ﬁnger and feel for the muscular contraction.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 5 8 .  Test for ankle clonus.
Sustained clonus points to CNS dis-
ease. The ankle plantar flexes and dor-
siflexes repetitively and rhythmically. 
Clonus must be present for a reflex to 
be graded 4 (see p. 758). 
F I G U R E  1 7 - 5 9 .  Test the 
abdominal reﬂexes.
Abdominal reflexes may be absent in 
both central and peripheral nerve 
disorders. 
Clonus. If the reﬂexes seem hyperactive, test for ankle clonus. Support the 
knee in a partly ﬂexed position. With your other hand, dorsiﬂex and plantar ﬂex 
the foot a few times while encouraging the patient to relax, then sharply dorsiﬂex 
the foot and maintain it in dorsiﬂexion (Fig. 17-58). Look and feel for rhythmic 
oscillations between dorsiﬂexion and plantar ﬂexion. Normally the ankle does 
not react to this stimulus. There may be a few clonic beats if the patient is tense 
or has exercised.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
764 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Some patients withdraw from this stimulus by ﬂexing the hip and the knee. Hold 
the ankle, if necessary, to complete your observation. At times it is difﬁcult to 
distinguish withdrawal from a Babinski response.
The Anal Reﬂex. Using a broken applicator stick or pinprick, lightly 
scratch the anus on both sides. Watch for reﬂex contraction of the external anal 
sphincter. Detection of the reﬂex contraction is facilitated by placing a gloved 
ﬁnger in the anus during testing.
Special Techniques
Meningeal Signs. Test for these important signs whenever you suspect 
meningeal inﬂammation from meningitis or subarachnoid hemorrhage.
Neck Mobility/Nuchal Rigidity. First, make sure there is no injury or 
fracture to the cervical vertebrae or cervical cord. In trauma settings, this often 
requires radiologic evaluation. Then, with the patient supine, place your hands 
behind the patient’s head and ﬂex the neck forward, if possible until the chin 
F I G U R E  1 7 - 6 0 .  Test the plantar response.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 6 1 .  Babinski 
response (abnormal).
A marked Babinski response is occa-
sionally accompanied by reflex flexion 
at hip and knee. 
Loss of the anal reflex suggests a 
lesion in the S2–3–4 reflex arc, seen  
in cauda equina lesions. 
Inflammation in the subarachnoid 
space causes resistance to movement 
that stretches the spinal nerves (neck 
flexion), the femoral nerve (Brudzinski 
sign), and the sciatic nerve (Kernig 
sign). 
Dorsiflexion of the big toe is a positive 
Babinski response (Fig. 17-61), arising 
from a CNS lesion affecting the corti-
cospinal tract (sensitivity ∼50%; speci-
ficity 99%).96 The Babinski response 
can be transiently positive in uncon-
scious states from drug or alcohol 
intoxication and during the postictal 
period following a seizure. 
The Plantar Response (L5, S1). With a key or the wooden end of an 
applicator stick, stroke the lateral aspect of the sole from the heel to the ball of 
the foot, curving medially across the ball (Fig. 17-60). Use the lightest stimulus 
needed to provoke a response, but increase ﬁrmness if necessary. Closely observe 
movement of the big toe, normally plantar ﬂexion.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
765
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
touches the chest. Normally the neck is supple, and the patient can easily bend 
the head and neck forward.
Brudzinski Sign. As you ﬂex the neck, watch the hips and knees in reac-
tion to your maneuver. Normally they should remain relaxed and motionless.
Kernig Sign. Flex the patient’s leg at both the hip and the knee, and then 
slowly extend the leg and straighten the knee (Fig. 17-62). Discomfort behind 
the knee during full extension is normal but should not produce pain.
Neck stiffness with resistance to flex-
ion is found in ∼84% of patients with 
acute bacterial meningitis and 21% to 
86% of patients with subarachnoid 
hemorrhage.97 It is most reliably pres-
ent in severe meningeal inflammation 
but its overall diagnostic accuracy is 
low.98 
Flexion of both the hips and knees is a 
positive Brudzinski sign. 
F I G U R E  1 7 - 6 2 .  Test for Kernig sign.
Pain and increased resistance to knee 
extension are a positive Kernig sign. 
The mechanism of this sign is similar 
to the positive straight leg raise test. 
Irritation or compression of a lumbar 
or sacral nerve root or the sciatic 
nerve causes radicular or sciatic pain 
radiating into the leg when the nerve 
is stretched by extending the leg. 
The frequency of Brudzinski and 
Kernig signs in patients with meningi-
tis has a reported range of 5% to 
60%.97 Sensitivity and specificity for 
Brudzinski and Kernig signs are 
reported as ∼5% and 95% in limited 
study sets but are used in emerging 
scoring systems and merit more sys-
tematic investigation.98,99
Lumbosacral Radiculopathy: Straight-Leg Raise. If the patient 
has low back pain that radiates down the thigh and leg, commonly called sciatica 
if in the sciatic nerve distribution, test straight-leg raising on each side in turn. 
Place the patient in the supine position. Raise the patient’s relaxed and straight-
ened leg, ﬂexing the thigh at the hip (Fig. 17-63). Some examiners ﬁrst raise the 
patient’s leg with the knee ﬂexed, then extend the leg.
See Table 16-3, Low Back Pain, p. 699.
Compression of the spinal nerve root 
as it passes through the vertebral 
foramen causes a painful radiculopa-
thy with associated muscle weakness 
and dermatomal sensory loss, usually 
from a herniated disc. More than 95% 
of disc herniations occur at L4–L5 or 
L5–S1, where the spine angles sharply 
posterior. Look for confirming ipsilat-
eral leg wasting or weak ankle dorsi-
flexion, which make the diagnosis of 
sciatica five times more likely.100 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
766 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Assess the degree of elevation at which pain occurs, the quality and distribution 
of the pain, and the effects of foot dorsiﬂexion. Tightness or discomfort in the 
buttocks or hamstrings is common during these maneuvers and should not be 
interpreted as “radiating pain” or a positive test.
In addition, be sure to examine motor and sensory function and reﬂexes at the 
lumbosacral levels.
Asterixis. Asterixis suggests metabolic encephalopathy in patients whose 
mental functions are impaired. Asterixis is caused by abnormal function of the 
diencephalic motor centers that regulate agonist and antagonist muscle tone and 
maintain posture.101
Pain radiating into the ipsilateral leg 
is a positive straight leg test for lumbo-
sacral radiculopathy. Foot dorsiflexion 
can further increase leg pain in lum-
bosacral radiculopathy, sciatic neurop-
athy, or both. Increased pain when the 
contralateral healthy leg is raised is a 
positive crossed straight-leg raise sign. 
These maneuvers stretch the affected 
nerve roots and sciatic nerve. 
Sensitivity and specificity of positive 
ipsilateral straight leg raise for lum-
bosacral radiculopathy in patients 
with sciatica are relatively low, with 
an LR of only 1.5. For the crossed 
straight-leg raise the LR is higher, 
3.4.100 
Sudden, brief, nonrhythmic flexion of 
the hands and fingers followed by 
recovery indicates asterixis, seen in 
liver disease, uremia, and hypercapnia. 
F I G U R E  1 7 - 6 3 .  Test the straight-leg raise.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
767
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Ask the patient to “stop trafﬁc” by extending both arms, with hands cocked up 
and ﬁngers spread (Fig. 17-64). Watch for 1 to 2 minutes, coaxing the patient as 
necessary to maintain this position.
Winging of the Scapula. When the shoulder muscles seem weak or 
atrophic, inspect for scapular winging. Ask the patient to extend both arms and 
push against your hand or against a wall (Fig. 17-65). Observe the scapulae. 
Normally they lie close to the thorax.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 6 4 .  Test for asterixis.
In winging, the medial border of the 
scapula juts backward (Fig. 17-66), 
suspicious for weakness of the trape-
zius or serratus anterior muscle (seen 
in muscular dystrophy), or injury to 
the long thoracic nerve. 
F I G U R E  1 7 - 6 5 .  Test for scapular winging.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 6 6 .  Positive 
scapular winging.
In very thin but normal people, the scapulae may appear “winged” even when 
the musculature is intact.
The Stuporous or Comatose Patient. Coma, a state of impaired 
arousal and awareness, signals a potentially life-threatening event affecting the 
two hemispheres, the brainstem, or both. Accurate assessment is critical.102–107 
Although the arousal and awareness functions are interrelated, “a change in one 
is not always associated with a similar change in the other.”102 Arousal occurs in 
the ascending reticular activating system of the brainstem which projects through 
the thalamus to several areas of the cortex, which “processes, integrates, and 
gives context to the information provided to it thus generating awareness. Injury 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Determining prognosis after coma is 
complex and is complicated by use of 
therapeutic hypothermia. Research 
targets include clinical examination, 
EEG patterns, serum biomarkers, and 
imaging. Careful neurologic examina-
tion remains a mainstay of prognosis, 
especially after 72 hours.109,110 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
768 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
to any of these areas or their connections can result in impaired consciousness.” 
The usual sequence of history, physical examination, and laboratory evaluation 
does not apply. Instead, you must:
■ First assess and stabilize the ABCs (airway, breathing, and circulation)
■ Establish the patient’s level of consciousness
■ Perform the neurologic examination. Identify any focal or asymmetric ﬁndings 
and determine if the cause of impaired consciousness is structural or metabolic.
■ Interview relatives, friends, or witnesses to establish the speed of onset and 
duration of unconsciousness, any warning symptoms, precipitating factors, or 
previous episodes, and the premorbid appearance and behavior of the patient. 
Any history of past medical and psychiatric illnesses is also important.
During your examination, remember two cardinal DON’Ts:
“Don’ts” When Assessing the Comatose Patient
● Don’t dilate the pupils, the single most important clue to the underlying cause 
of coma (structural vs. metabolic).
● Don’t ﬂex the neck if there is any question of trauma to the head or neck. 
Immobilize the cervical spine and get an x-ray ﬁrst to rule out fractures of the 
cervical vertebrae that could compress and damage the spinal cord.
Airway, Breathing, and Circulation. Quickly check the patient’s color 
and pattern of breathing. Inspect the posterior pharynx and listen over the tra-
chea for stridor to make sure the airway is clear. If respirations are slowed or 
shallow, or if the airway is obstructed by secretions, consider intubating the 
patient as soon as possible while stabilizing the cervical spine.
Assess the remaining vital signs: pulse, blood pressure, and rectal temperature. 
If hypotension or hemorrhage is present, establish intravenous access and begin 
intravenous ﬂuids. (Further emergency management and laboratory studies are 
beyond the scope of this text.)
Level of Consciousness. Level of consciousness primarily reﬂects the 
patient’s capacity for arousal, or wakefulness. Testing targets the level of activity that 
the patient can be aroused to perform in response to escalating stimulation by the 
examiner.
Five clinical levels of consciousness are listed in the table below, with related 
techniques for examination. Increase your stimuli in a stepwise manner, depend-
ing on the patient’s response. When you examine patients with an altered level 
of consciousness, describe and record exactly what you see and hear. Imprecise 
use of terms such as lethargy, obtundation, stupor, or coma may mislead other 
examiners.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
See Table 17-11, Metabolic and 
Structural Coma, p. 790. 
Be familiar with the Glasgow Coma 
Scale.108 See Table 17-12, Glasgow 
Coma Scale, p. 791.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
769
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Neurologic Evaluation
Respirations. Observe the rate, rhythm, and pattern of respiration. Because 
neural structures that govern breathing in the cortex and brainstem overlap 
with those that govern consciousness, abnormalities of respiration often occur 
in coma.
Pupils. Observe the size and equality of the pupils and test their reaction 
to light. The presence or absence of the light reaction is one of the most impor-
tant signs distinguishing structural from metabolic causes of coma. The light 
reaction often remains intact in metabolic coma.
Ocular Movement. Observe the position of the eyes and eyelids at rest. 
Check for horizontal deviation of the eyes to one side (gaze preference). When 
the oculomotor pathways are intact, the eyes look straight ahead.
Level of Consciousness (Arousal): Techniques 
and Patient Response
Level
Technique
Patient Response
Alertness
Speak to the patient in a 
normal tone of voice.
The alert patient opens the eyes, 
looks at you, and responds fully 
and appropriately to stimuli 
(arousal intact).
Lethargy
Speak to the patient in a 
loud voice. For example, 
call the patient’s name 
or ask “How are you?”
The patient appears drowsy but 
opens the eyes and looks at you, 
responds to questions, and then 
falls asleep.
Obtundation
Shake the patient gently 
as if awakening a 
sleeper.
The obtunded patient opens the 
eyes and looks at you but 
responds slowly and is somewhat 
confused. Alertness and interest 
in the environment are decreased.
Stupor
Apply a painful stimulus. 
For example, pinch a 
tendon, rub the ster-
num, or roll a pencil 
across a nail bed. (No 
stronger stimuli 
needed!)
The stuporous patient arouses from 
sleep only after painful stimuli. Ver-
bal responses are slow or even 
absent. The patient lapses into an 
unresponsive state when the stimu-
lus ceases. There is minimal aware-
ness of self or the environment.
Coma
Apply repeated painful 
stimuli.
A comatose patient remains 
unarousable with eyes closed. 
There is no evident response to 
inner need or external stimuli.
See Table 17-11, Metabolic and Struc-
tural Coma, p. 790, and Table 8-4 
Abnormalities in Rate and Rhythm of 
Breathing, p. 335. 
See Table 17-13, Pupils in Comatose 
Patients, p. 792. 
Structural lesions from stroke, 
abscess, or tumor mass may lead to 
asymmetrical pupils and loss of the 
light reaction.
In structural hemispheric lesions, the 
eyes “look at the lesion” in the affected 
hemisphere.
In irritative lesions from epilepsy or a 
unilateral pontine lesion, the eyes “look 
away” from the affected hemisphere. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
770 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Oculocephalic Reflex (Doll’s Eye Move-
ments). This reﬂex helps assess brainstem 
function in the comatose patient. Holding 
the upper eyelids open so that you can see 
the eyes, turn the head quickly, ﬁrst to one 
side and then to the other (Fig. 17-67). 
Make sure the patient has no neck injury 
before performing this test.
In a comatose patient with an intact brain-
stem, as the head is turned in one direction, 
the eyes move toward the opposite side (the 
doll’s eye movements). In Figure 17-68, for 
example, the patient’s head has been turned 
to the right; her eyes have moved to the left. 
Her eyes still seem to gaze at the camera. 
The doll’s eye movements are intact.
Oculovestibular Reflex (with Caloric Stimulation). If the oculocephalic reﬂex 
is absent and you seek further testing of brainstem function, test the oculoves-
tibular reﬂex. Note that this test is usually not performed in an awake patient.
Make sure the eardrums are intact and the ear canals clear. Elevate the patient’s 
head to 30° to perform the test accurately. Place a kidney basin under the ear to 
catch any water that spills over. With a large syringe, inject ice water through a 
small catheter that is lying in (but not plugging) the ear canal. Watch for devia-
tion of the eyes in the horizontal plane. You may need to use up to 120 mL of ice 
water to elicit a response. In the comatose patient with an intact brainstem, the 
eyes drift toward the irrigated ear. Repeat on the opposite side, waiting 3 to 
5 minutes if necessary for the ﬁrst response to disappear.
Posture and Muscle Tone. Observe the patient’s posture. If there is no 
spontaneous movement, you may need to apply a painful stimulus (see p. 769). 
Classify the resulting pattern of movement as:
■ Normal–avoidant—the patient purposefully pushes the stimulus away or 
withdraws.
■ Stereotypic—the stimulus evokes abnormal postural responses of the trunk 
and extremities.
■ Flaccid paralysis or no response
No response to stimulation indicates 
brainstem injury. 
See Table 17-14, Abnormal Postures in 
Comatose Patients, p. 793. Two stereo-
typic responses predominate: decorti-
cate rigidity and decerebrate rigidity. 
No response on one side suggests a 
corticospinal tract lesion. 
F I G U R E  1 7 - 6 7 .  Test the 
oculocephalic reﬂex.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 6 8 .  Oculocephalic 
reﬂex intact.
In a comatose patient with absent 
doll’s eye movements, the ability to 
move both eyes to one side is lost, 
suspicious for a lesion of the midbrain 
or pons (Fig. 17-69). 
F I G U R E  1 7 - 6 9 .  Oculocephalic 
reﬂex absent.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
771
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Test muscle tone by grasping each fore-
arm near the wrist and raising it to a ver-
tical position. Note the position of the 
hand, which is usually only slightly 
ﬂexed at the wrist (Fig. 17-70).
Then lower the arm to about 12 or 18 inches off the bed and drop it. Watch how 
it falls. A normal arm drops somewhat slowly.
Support the patient’s ﬂexed knees. Then extend one leg at a time at the knee and 
let the leg fall (Fig. 17-72). Compare the speed with which each leg falls.
F I G U R E  1 7 - 7 0 .  Test muscle tone 
in the arm.
The hemiplegia of acute cerebral 
infarction is usually flaccid at first. The 
limp hand drops to form a right angle 
with the wrist (Fig. 17-71). 
F I G U R E  1 7 - 7 1 .  Arm tone 
ﬂaccid.
A flaccid arm drops rapidly, like a rock. 
F I G U R E  1 7 - 7 2 .  Test muscle tone in the leg.
In acute hemiplegia, the flaccid leg 
falls more rapidly. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
772 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
In acute hemiplegia, the weak leg falls 
rapidly into extension, with external 
rotation at the hip. 
Meningeal signs are suspicious for 
meningitis or subarachnoid hemor-
rhage.11,12
Consider alcohol, liver failure, or uremia. 
Note any jaundice, cyanosis, or the 
cherry red color of carbon monoxide 
poisoning. 
Look for bruises, lacerations, or swelling. 
Examine closely for hypertensive retinop-
athy and papilledema, an important sign 
of elevated intracranial pressure. 
Corneal reflex loss occurs in coma and 
lesions affecting CN V or CN VII. 
Blood or cerebrospinal fluid in the nose 
or the ears suggests a skull fracture; otitis 
media suggests a possible brain abscess. 
Tongue injury suggests a seizure. 
Flex both legs so that the heels rest on the bed and then release them. The normal 
leg returns slowly to its original extended position.
Further Examination. As you complete the neurologic examination, check 
for facial asymmetry and asymmetries in motor, sensory, and reﬂex function. Test 
for meningeal signs if indicated.
As you proceed to the general physical examination, include the following assess-
ments.
■ Check for unusual odors.
■ Inspect for abnormalities of the skin, including color, moisture, evidence of 
bleeding disorders, needle marks, and other lesions.
■ Inspect and palpate the scalp and skull for signs of trauma.
■ Examine the fundi carefully.
■ Test the corneal reﬂexes to make sure they are intact. Remember that contact 
lenses may abolish these reﬂexes.
■ Inspect the ears and nose, and examine the mouth and throat.
■ Be sure to evaluate the heart, lungs, and abdomen.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
773
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
Recording Your Findings
Note that initially you may use sentences to describe your ﬁndings; later you 
will use phrases. The style below contains phrases appropriate for most write-
ups. Note the ﬁve components of the examination and write-up of the nervous 
system.
Recording the Examination—The Nervous System
“Mental Status: Alert, relaxed, and cooperative. Thought process coherent. Ori-
ented to person, place, and time. Detailed cognitive testing deferred. Cranial 
Nerves: I—not tested; II through XII intact. Motor: Good muscle bulk and 
tone. Strength 5/5 throughout. Cerebellar—Rapid alternating movements 
(RAMs), ﬁnger-to-nose (F→N), heel-to-shin (H→S) intact. Gait with normal 
base. Romberg—maintains balance with eyes closed. No pronator drift. 
Sensory: Pinprick, light touch, position, and vibration intact. Reﬂexes: 2 and 
symmetric with plantar reﬂexes downgoing.”
OR
“Mental Status: The patient is alert and tries to answer questions but has diﬃculty 
ﬁnding words. Cranial Nerves: I—not tested; II—visual acuity intact; visual ﬁelds 
full; III, IV, VI—extraocular movements intact; V motor—temporal and masseter 
strength intact, corneal reﬂexes present; VII motor—prominent right facial 
droop and ﬂattening of right nasolabial fold, left facial movements intact, sen-
sory—taste not tested; VIII—hearing intact bilaterally to whispered voice; IX, 
X—gag intact; XI—strength of sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles 5/5; 
XII—tongue midline. Motor: strength in right biceps, triceps, iliopsoas, gluteals, 
quadriceps, hamstring, and ankle ﬂexor and extensor muscles 3/5 with good 
bulk but increased tone and spasticity; strength in comparable muscle groups 
on the left 5/5 with good bulk and tone. Gait—unable to test. Cerebellar—
unable to test on right due to right arm and leg weakness; RAMs, F→N, H→S 
intact on left. Romberg—unable to test due to right leg weakness. Right prona-
tor drift present. Sensory: decreased sensation to pinprick over right face, arm, 
and leg; intact on the left. Stereognosis and two-point discrimination not 
tested. Reﬂexes (can record in two ways):
RT 
++++ 
++++ 
++++ 
++++ 
++++
LT 
++ 
++ 
++ 
++ 
+ 
OR
Plantar
Biceps
Triceps
Brach
Knee
Ankle
4+
4+
4+
4+
4+
2+
2+
2+
These findings are suspicious for left 
hemispheric cerebral infarction in the 
distribution of the left middle cerebral 
artery, with right-sided hemiparesis. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
774 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
774 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 17-1  Disorders of the Central and Peripheral 
Nervous Systems 
Central Nervous System Disorders
Knee
Hip
Hand
Face
Tongue
Basal 
ganglia
Trunk
MIDBRAIN
Corticobulbar tract
Corticospinal tracts
(2)
(4)
(1)
Thalamus
Internal
capsule
LOWER MEDULLA
Pyramids
Lateral corticospinal
tract
SPINAL CORD
Anterior corticospinal
tract
(3)
Typical Findings
Location of 
Lesion
Motor
Sensory
Deep Tendon 
Reﬂexes
Examples 
of Cause
Cerebral  
Cortex (1)
Chronic contralateral 
corticospinal-type weakness and 
spasticity; ﬂexion is stronger than 
extension in the arm, plantar 
ﬂexion is stronger than 
dorsiﬂexion in the foot, and the 
leg is externally rotated at the hip
Contralateral sensory loss in 
the face, limbs, and trunk 
on the same side as the 
motor deﬁcits
↑
Cortical stroke
Brainstem (2)
Weakness and spasticity as above, 
plus CN deﬁcits such as diplopia 
(from weakness of the extraocular 
muscles) and dysarthria
Variable; no typical sensory 
ﬁndings
↑
Brainstem 
stroke, acoustic 
neuroma
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
775
 
Typical Findings
Location of 
Lesion
Motor
Sensory
Deep Tendon 
Reﬂexes
Examples 
of Cause
Spinal Cord (3)
Weakness and spasticity as above, 
but often affecting both sides (when 
cord damage is bilateral), causing 
paraparesis or quadriparesis 
depending on the level of injury
Dermatomal sensory deﬁcit on 
the trunk on one or both sides 
at the level of the lesion, and 
sensory loss from tract damage 
below the level of the lesion
↑
Trauma, spinal 
cord tumor
Subcortical Gray 
Matter: Basal 
Ganglia (4)
Slowness of movement 
(bradykinesia), rigidity, and 
tremor
Sensation not affected
Normal or ↓
Parkinsonism
Cerebellar (not 
illustrated)
Hypotonia, ataxia, nystagmus, 
dysdiadochokinesis, and dysmetria
Sensation not affected
Normal or ↓
Cerebellar stroke, 
brain tumor
Peripheral Nervous System Disorders
Posterior horn
Posterior root
Anterior root
Anterior
horn cell
Anterior
horn
Posterior root
ganglion
Afferent
sensory
fiber
Efferent
motor fiber
Muscle
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(1)
(2)
Spinal 
nerve
Anterior Horn  
Cell (1)
Weakness and atrophy in a 
segmental or focal pattern; 
fasciculations
Sensation intact
↓
Polio, 
amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis
Spinal Roots and 
Nerves (2)
Weakness and atrophy in a root-
innervated pattern; sometimes 
with fasciculations
Corresponding dermatomal 
sensory deﬁcits
↓
Herniated cervical 
or lumbar disc
Peripheral Nerve—
Mononeuropathy 
(3)
Weakness and atrophy in a 
peripheral nerve distribution; 
sometimes with fasciculations
Sensory loss in the pattern 
of that nerve
↓
Trauma
Peripheral Nerve—
Polyneuropathy 
(4)
Weakness and atrophy more 
distal than proximal; sometimes 
with fasciculations
Sensory deﬁcits, commonly 
in stocking-glove 
distribution
↓
Peripheral poly-
neuropathy of al-
coholism, diabetes
Neuromuscular 
Junction (5)
Fatigability more than weakness
Sensation intact
Normal
Myasthenia gravis
Muscle (6)
Weakness usually more proximal 
than distal; fasciculations rare
Sensation intact
Normal or ↓
Muscular 
dystrophy
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
776 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
776 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 17-2 Types of Stroke
Assessment of stroke requires careful history taking and a detailed physical examination, and should focus on three funda-
mental questions: What brain area and related vascular territory explain the patient’s ﬁndings? Is the stroke ischemic or 
hemorrhagic? If ischemic, is the mechanism thrombosis or embolus? Stroke is a medical emergency, and timing is of the essence. 
Answers to these questions are critical to patient outcomes and use of antithrombotic therapies.
In acute ischemic stroke, ischemic brain injury begins with a central core of very low perfusion and often irreversible cell death. 
This core is surrounded by an ischemic penumbra of metabolically disturbed cells that are still potentially viable, depending on 
the restoration of blood ﬂow and duration of ischemia. Because most irreversible damage occurs in the ﬁrst 3–6 hrs after onset 
of symptoms, therapies targeted to the 3-hr window achieve the best outcomes, with recovery in up to 50% of patients in some 
studies.
Clinician performance in diagnosing stroke improves with training and experience. Understanding the pathophysiology of 
stroke takes dedication, expert supervision to improve techniques of neurologic examination, and perseverance. This brief 
overview is intended to prompt further study and practice. Accuracy in clinical examination is achievable, and more important than 
ever in determining patient therapy.25,27,28,59 Turn to pp. 728–731 and review the discussion of stroke risk factors—primary and 
secondary prevention.
Clinical Features and Vascular Territories of Stroke
Clinical Finding
Vascular Territory
Additional Comments
Contralateral leg weakness
Anterior circulation—anterior cerebral 
artery (ACA)
Includes stem of circle of Willis 
connecting internal carotid artery to 
ACA, and the segment distal to ACA 
and its anterior choroidal branch
Contralateral face, arm > leg weakness, 
sensory loss, visual ﬁeld loss, apraxia, 
aphasia (left MCA), or neglect (right 
MCA)
Anterior circulation—middle cerebral 
artery (MCA)
Largest vascular bed for stroke
Contralateral motor or sensory deﬁcit 
without cortical signs
Subcortical circulationa—lenticulostriate 
deep penetrating branches of MCA
Small vessel subcortical lacunar infarcts 
in internal capsule, thalamus, or 
brainstem; ﬁve classical syndromes are 
seen: pure motor stroke (hemiplegia/
hemiparesis), pure sensory stroke 
(hemianesthesia), ataxic hemiparesis, 
clumsy-hand/dysarthria syndrome, and 
mixed sensorimotor stroke
Contralateral visual ﬁeld loss
Posterior circulation—posterior cerebral 
artery (PCA)
Includes paired vertebral and basilar 
artery, paired PCAs. Bilateral PCA 
infarction causes cortical blindness but 
preserved pupillary light reaction.
Dysphagia, dysarthria, tongue/palate 
deviation, and/or ataxia with crossed 
sensory/motor deﬁcits ( = ipsilateral face 
with contralateral body)
Posterior circulation—brainstem, 
vertebral, or basilar artery branches
Oculomotor deﬁcits and/or ataxia with 
crossed sensory/motor deﬁcits
Posterior circulation—basilar artery
Complete basilar artery occlusion—
“locked-in syndrome” with intact 
consciousness but with inability to 
speak and quadriplegia
aLearn to differentiate cortical from subcortical involvement. Subcortical or lacunar syndromes do not affect higher cognitive function, language, or visual ﬁelds.
Source: Adapted with permission from Medical Knowledge Self-Assessment Program, 14th edition (MKSAP 14), Neurology. Philadelphia, PA: American College of 
Physicians; 2006. Copyright 2006, American College of Physicians.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
777
Body of
caudate
Internal
capsule
Putamen
Globus
pallidus
Uncus
Thalamus
Anterior cerebral
   artery
Middle cerebral
   artery
Posterior cerebral
   artery
Anterior choroidal
   artery
Lateral
ventrical
Prefrontal area
Premotor area
Primary motor
   cortex
Primary somatic
   sensory cortex
Somatic sensory
   association area
Taste area
Primary
   auditory cortex
Auditory
   association area
Sensory speech
   (Wernicke) area
Reading compre-
   hension area
Visual association
   area
Visual cortex
Motor speech
   (Broca's) area
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
778 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
778 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 17-3 Syncope and Similar Disorders Problem
Mechanism
Precipitating Factors
Vasovagal Syncope (The Common Faint) 
and Vasodepressor Syncope
For vasovagal syncope: reﬂex withdrawal of sympathetic 
tone and increased vagal tone causing drop in blood 
pressure and heart rate
For vasodepressor syncope: same mechanism but no 
vagal surge or drop in heart rate
Baroreﬂexes normal
Strong emotion such as fear or 
pain, prolonged standing, hot 
humid environment
Orthostatic Hypotension (drop in 
systolic blood pressure of ≥20 mm Hg or in 
diastolic blood pressure of ≥10 mm Hg within  
3 min of standing)37,111–113
Gravitationally mediated redistribution and pooling of  
300–800 mL blood in the lower extremities and 
splanchnic venous system, caused by decreased venous 
return and an excessive fall in cardiac output, or by an 
inadequate vasoconstrictor mechanism (with inadequate 
release of norepinephrine)
Standing up
Hypovolemia, a diminished blood volume insufﬁcient to 
maintain cardiac output and blood pressure
Standing up after hemorrhage or 
dehydration
Cough Syncope
Neurally mediated, possibly from reﬂex vasodepressor-
bradycardia response; cerebral hypoperfusion, 
increased CSF pressure also proposed
Severe paroxysm of coughing
Micturition Syncope
Vasovagal response, sudden hypotension proposed
Emptying the bladder after 
getting out of bed to void
Cardiovascular Disorders111,114
Arrhythmias
Decreased cardiac output from cardiac ischemia, ven-
tricular arrhythmias, prolonged QT syndrome, persis-
tent bradycardia, infrafascicular block causing cerebral 
hypoperfusion; often sudden onset, sudden offset
Sudden change in rhythm to 
bradycardia or tachyarrhythmia
Aortic Stenosis and Hypertrophic 
Cardiomyopathy
Vascular resistance falls with exercise, but cardiac 
output does not rise due to outﬂow obstruction.
Exercise
Myocardial Infarction
Sudden arrhythmia or decreased cardiac output
Variable, often exertion
Massive Pulmonary Embolism
Sudden hypoxia or decreased cardiac output
Variable, including prolonged bed 
rest, major surgery, clotting 
disorders, pregnancy
Disorders Resembling Syncope
Hypocapnia due to Hyperventilation
Constriction of cerebral blood vessels from hypocapnia 
induced by hyperventilation
Anxiety, panic disorder
Hypoglycemia
Insufﬁcient glucose to maintain cerebral metabolism; 
epinephrine release contributes to symptoms; true 
syncope is uncommon
Variable, including fasting
Fainting from Conversion Disorder
(Termed “Functional Neurologic Symptom 
Disorder” in DSM-5)
The symbolic expression of an unacceptable idea 
through behavior; skin color, vital signs may be 
normal; sometimes with bizarre purposeful 
movements; usually occurs when other people  
present
Stress or trauma, psychological or 
physical
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
779
Predisposing Factors
Prodromal 
Manifestations
Postural 
Associations
Recovery
Fatigue, hunger, preload reduction from 
dehydration, diuretics, vasodilators
Usually >10 s. Palpitations, 
nausea, blurred vision, warmth, 
pallor, diaphoresis, light-
headedness
Usually occurs when 
standing, at times 
when sitting
Prompt return of consciousness 
after lying down, but pallor, 
weakness, nausea, and slight 
confusion may persist for a 
time
Most common type of syncope
Aging; central and peripheral neuropathies: 
Parkinson disease, multiple system atrophy; 
Lewy body disease diabetes, amyloidosis; 
antihypertensive vasodilator drugs; prolonged 
bed rest
Lightheadedness, dizziness, 
cognitive slowing, fatigue
Often none
Occurs soon after 
standing
Supine hypertension 
is common
Prompt return to normal when 
lying down
Bleeding from the GI tract or trauma, potent 
diuretics, vomiting, diarrhea, polyuria
Light-headedness and 
palpitations (tachycardia) on 
standing up
Occurs soon after 
standing up
Improves with volume repletion
COPD, asthma, pulmonary hypertension. 
Typically occurs in overweight middle-aged 
patients.
Often none except for cough; 
blurred vision, light-headedness 
may occur
May occur in any 
position
Prompt return to normal after a 
few seconds
Nocturia, usually in elderly or adult men
Often none
Commonly just after 
(or during) voiding 
after standing up
Prompt return to normal
Ischemic or valvular heart disease; conduc-
tion abnormalities; pericardial disease;  
cardiomyopathy
Aging decreases tolerance of abnormal 
rhythms.
Palpitations, usually lasting <5 s.
Often none
May occur in any 
position
Prompt return to normal when 
arrhythmia resolves.
Most common cause of cardiac 
syncope. Cardiogenic syncope 
has a 6-mo mortality >10%
Cardiac disorders
Chest pain, often none; onset is 
sudden
Occurs with or after 
exercise
Usually a prompt return to 
normal
Coronary artery disease, coronary ischemia or 
vasospasm
Ischemic chest pain; may be 
silent
May occur in any 
position
Variable; related to time to 
diagnosis and treatment
Deep vein thrombosis, bed rest, hypercoagulable 
states (systemic lupus erythematosus, cancer), 
protein S or C deﬁciency antithrombin III 
deﬁciency. Estrogen therapy
Tachypnea, chest or pleuritic 
pain, dyspnea, anxiety, cough
May occur in any 
position
Related to time to diagnosis and 
treatment
Anxiety
Dyspnea, palpitations, chest 
discomfort, numbness, and 
tingling in hands and around 
the mouth lasting several 
minutes; consciousness is often 
maintained
May occur in any 
position
Slow improvement as 
hyperventilation ceases
Insulin therapy and a variety of metabolic 
disorders
Sweating, tremors, palpitations, 
hunger, headache, confusion, 
abnormal behavior, coma
May occur in any 
position
Variable, depending on severity 
and treatment
History of multiple somatic symptoms
Often dissociative symptoms such as 
depersonalization, derealization, dissociative 
amnesia, or maladaptive personality traits
Associated with past child abuse or neglect
Variable
A slump to the ﬂoor, 
often from a standing 
position, without 
injury
Variable; may be prolonged, 
often with ﬂuctuating 
responsiveness and inconsistent 
neurologic ﬁndings
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
780 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
780 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 17-4 Seizure Disorders
Seizures were reclassiﬁed in 2010 as focal or generalized to better reﬂect current medical science. Underlying causes should be 
identiﬁed as genetic, structural/metabolic, or unknown. The complexities of the reclassiﬁcation scheme are best explored by 
turning to the report of the International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) Commission on Classiﬁcation and Terminology,  
2005–2009 and to more detailed references. This table presents only basic concepts from the ILAE report.
Focal Seizures
Focal seizures “are conceptualized as originating within networks limited to one hemisphere.
■ They may be discretely localized or more widely distributed.
■ Focal seizures may originate in subcortical structures.
■  For each seizure type, ictal onset is consistent from one seizure to another, with preferential propagation patterns that can 
involve the contralateral hemisphere. In some cases, however, there is more than one network, and more than one seizure 
type, but each individual seizure type has a consistent site of onset.
■ Focal seizures do not fall into any recognized set of natural causes.”
The distinction between simple partial and partial complex is eliminated, but clinicians are urged to recognize and describe 
“impairment of consciousness/awareness or other dyscognitive features, localization, and progression of ictal events.”
Type
Clinical Manifestations
Postictal State
Focal Seizures without  
Impairment of  
Consciousness
With observable motor and 
autonomic symptoms
■ Jacksonian
Tonic then clonic movements that start unilaterally in 
the hand, foot, or face and spread to other body parts 
on the same side
Normal consciousness
■ Other motor
Turning of the head and eyes to one side, or tonic and 
clonic movements of an arm or leg without the 
Jacksonian spread
Normal consciousness
■ With autonomic symptoms
A “funny feeling” in the epigastrium, nausea, pallor, 
ﬂushing, lightheadedness
Normal consciousness
With subjective sensory or 
psychic phenomena
Numbness, tingling; simple visual, auditory, or 
olfactory hallucinations such as ﬂashing lights, 
buzzing, or odors
Normal consciousness
Anxiety or fear; feelings of familiarity (déjà vu) or 
unreality; dreamy states; fear or rage; ﬂashback 
experiences; more complex hallucinations
Normal consciousness
Focal Seizures with 
 Impairment of 
 Consciousness
The seizure may or may not start with the autonomic 
or psychic symptoms outlined above; consciousness is 
impaired, and the person appears confused 
Automatisms include automatic motor behaviors such 
as chewing, smacking the lips, walking about, and 
unbuttoning clothes; also more complicated and 
skilled behaviors such as driving a car
The patient may remember initial 
autonomic or psychic symptoms 
(which are then termed an aura), 
but is amnesic for the rest of the 
seizure. Temporary confusion and 
headache may occur
Focal Seizures That 
 Become Generalized
Partial seizures that become generalized resemble 
tonic–clonic seizures (see next page); the patient may 
not recall the focal onset
As in a tonic–clonic seizure, 
described on the next page; two 
attributes indicate a partial seizure 
that has become generalized:  
(1) the recollection of an aura, and 
(2) a unilateral neurologic deﬁcit 
during the postictal period
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
781
Generalized Seizures and Pseudoseizures
Generalized seizures “are conceptualized as originating at some point within, and rapidly engaging, bilaterally distributed 
networks . . . that include cortical and subcortical structures, but do not necessarily include the entire cortex . . .”
■ The location and lateralization are not consistent from one seizure to another.
■ Generalized seizures can be asymmetric.
■ They may begin with body movements, impaired consciousness, or both.
■  If onset of tonic–clonic seizures begins after age 30 yrs, suspect either a partial seizure that has become generalized or a 
generalized seizure caused by a toxic or metabolic disorder.
Toxic and metabolic causes include withdrawal from alcohol or other sedative drugs, uremia, hypoglycemia, hyperglycemia, 
hyponatremia, drug toxicity, and bacterial meningitis.
Problem
Clinical Manifestations
Postictal (Postseizure) 
State
Generalized Seizures
Tonic–Clonic (Grand Mal)a
The patient loses consciousness suddenly, sometimes 
with a cry, and the body stiffens into tonic extensor 
rigidity. Breathing stops, and the patient becomes 
cyanotic. A clonic phase of rhythmic muscular 
contraction follows. Breathing resumes and is often 
noisy, with excessive salivation. Injury, tongue biting, 
and urinary incontinence may occur.
Confusion, drowsiness, fatigue, 
headache, muscular aching, and 
sometimes the temporary 
persistence of bilateral neurologic 
deﬁcits such as hyperactive reﬂexes 
and Babinski responses. The 
patient is amnestic about the 
seizure and aura.
Absence
A sudden brief lapse of consciousness, with 
momentary blinking, staring, or movements of the lips 
and hands but no falling. Two subtypes are: typical 
absence—lasts <10 s and stops abruptly; atypical 
absence—may last >10 s.
No aura recalled. In typical 
absence, a prompt return to 
normal; in atypical absence, some 
postictal confusion
Myoclonic
Sudden, brief, rapid jerks, involving the trunk or 
limbs. Associated with a variety of disorders.
Variable.
Myoclonic Atonic  
(Drop Attack)
Sudden loss of consciousness with falling but no 
movements. Injury may occur.
Either a prompt return to normal 
or a brief period of confusion.
Pseudoseizures
May mimic seizures but are  
due to a conversion disorder 
(termed “Functional Neurologic 
Symptom Disorder” in DSM-5).
The movements may have personally symbolic 
signiﬁcance and often do not follow a neuroanatomic 
pattern. Injury is uncommon.
Variable.
aFebrile convulsions that resemble brief tonic–clonic seizures occur in infants and young children. They are usually benign but may also be the ﬁrst manifestation of 
a seizure disorder.
Source: Commission on Classiﬁcation and Terminology of the International League Against Epilepsy (Berg AT, Berkovic SF, Brodie MJ, et al.). A proposed 
diagnostic scheme for people with epileptic seizures and with epilepsy: report of the ILAE Task Force on Classiﬁcation and Terminology, 2005–2009. Epilepsia. 
2010;51:676. Available at http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1528-1167.2010.02522.x/full. Accessed July 31, 2015.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
782 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
782 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 17-5 Tremors and Involuntary Movements
Tremors
Tremors are rhythmic oscillatory movements, which may be roughly subdivided into three groups: resting (or static) tremors, 
postural tremors, and intention tremors.
Resting (Static) Tremors
These tremors are most prominent at rest 
and may decrease or disappear with 
voluntary movement. Illustrated is the 
common relatively slow, ﬁne pill-rolling 
tremor of parkinsonism, about 5 per 
second.
Postural Tremors
These tremors appear when the affected 
part is actively maintaining a posture. 
Examples include the ﬁne rapid tremor 
of hyperthyroidism, the tremors of anxi-
ety and fatigue, and benign essential 
(and often familial) tremor.
Intention Tremors
Intention tremors, absent at rest, appear 
with movement and often get worse as 
the target gets closer. Causes include 
cerebellar disorders such as multiple 
sclerosis.
Involuntary Movements
Oral–Facial Dyskinesias
Oral–facial dyskinesias are arrhythmic, repetitive, bizarre movements that chieﬂy 
involve the face, mouth, jaw, and tongue: grimacing, pursing of the lips, protrusions 
of the tongue, opening and closing of the mouth, and deviations of the jaw. The limbs 
and trunk are involved less often. These movements may be a late complication of 
psychotropic drugs such as phenothiazines, termed tardive (late) dyskinesias. They 
also occur in long-standing psychoses, in some elderly individuals, and in some 
edentulous persons.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
783
Tics
Tics are brief, repetitive, stereotyped, coordinated movements 
occurring at irregular intervals. Examples include repetitive 
winking, grimacing, and shoulder shrugging. Causes include 
Tourette syndrome and late effects of drugs such as 
phenothiazines.
Dystonia
Dystonic movements are similar to athetoid movements, but 
often involve larger parts of the body, including the trunk. 
Grotesque, twisted postures may result. Causes include drugs 
such as phenothiazines, primary torsion dystonia, and as 
illustrated, spasmodic torticollis.
Athetosis
Athetoid movements are slower and more twisting and 
writhing than choreiform movements, and have a larger 
amplitude. They most commonly involve the face and the 
distal extremities. Athetosis is often associated with spasticity. 
Causes include cerebral palsy.
Chorea
Choreiform movements are brief, rapid, jerky, irregular, and 
unpredictable. They occur at rest or interrupt normal 
coordinated movements. Unlike tics, they seldom repeat 
themselves. The face, head, lower arms, and hands are often 
involved. Causes include Sydenham chorea (with rheumatic 
fever) and Huntington disease.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
784 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
784 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 17-6 Disorders of Speech
Disorders of speech fall into three groups affecting: (1) phonation of the voice, (2) the articulation of words, and (3) the 
production and comprehension of language.
■  Aphonia refers to a loss of voice that accompanies disease affecting the larynx or its nerve supply. Dysphonia refers to less severe 
impairment in the volume, quality, or pitch of the voice. For example, a person may be hoarse or only able to speak in a 
whisper. Causes include laryngitis, laryngeal tumors, and unilateral vocal cord paralysis (CN X).
■  Dysarthria refers to a defect in the muscular control of the speech apparatus (lips, tongue, palate, or pharynx). Words may be 
nasal, slurred, or indistinct, but the central symbolic aspect of language remains intact. Causes include motor lesions of the 
CNS or PNS, parkinsonism, and cerebellar disease.
■  Aphasia refers to a disorder in producing or understanding language. It is often caused by lesions in the dominant cerebral 
hemisphere, usually the left.
Compared below are two common types of aphasia: (1) Wernicke, a ﬂuent (receptive) aphasia, and (2) Broca, a nonﬂuent  
(or expressive) aphasia. There are other less common kinds of aphasia, which are distinguished by differing responses on the 
speciﬁc tests listed. Neurologic consultation is usually indicated.
Wernicke Aphasia
Broca Aphasia
Qualities of Spontaneous 
Speech
Fluent; often rapid, voluble, and effortless. 
Inﬂection and articulation are good, but 
sentences lack meaning and words are 
malformed (paraphasias) or invented 
(neologisms). Speech may be totally 
incomprehensible.
Nonﬂuent; slow, with few words and 
laborious effort. Inﬂection and articulation 
are impaired but words are meaningful, with 
nouns, transitive verbs, and important 
adjectives. Small grammatical words are 
often dropped.
Word Comprehension
Impaired
Fair to good
Repetition
Impaired
Impaired
Naming
Impaired
Impaired, though the patient recognizes 
objects
Reading Comprehension
Impaired
Fair to good
Writing
Impaired
Impaired
Location of Lesion
Posterior superior temporal lobe
Posterior inferior frontal lobe
Although it is important to recognize aphasia early in your encounter with a patient, integrate this information with your 
neurologic examination as you generate your differential diagnosis.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
785
Table 17-7 Nystagmus
Nystagmus is a rhythmic oscillation of the eyes, analogous to a tremor in other parts of the body. It has multiple causes, 
including impairment of vision in early life, disorders of the labyrinth and the cerebellar system, and drug toxicity. Nystagmus 
occurs normally when a person watches a rapidly moving object (e.g., a passing train). Study the three characteristics of 
nystagmus described in this table so that you can correctly identify the type of nystagmus. Then refer to textbooks of neurology 
for differential diagnoses.
Direction of Gaze in Which Nystagmus Appears
Example: Nystagmus on Right Lateral Gaze
Nystagmus Present (Right Lateral Gaze)
Although nystagmus may be present in all 
directions of gaze, it may appear or become 
accentuated only on deviation of the eyes (e.g., 
to the side or upward). On extreme lateral 
gaze, the normal person may show a few beats 
resembling nystagmus. Avoid making 
assessments in such extreme positions, and 
observe for nystagmus only within the ﬁeld of full 
binocular vision.
Nystagmus Not Present (Left Lateral Gaze)
Direction of the Quick and Slow Phases
Example: Left-Beating Nystagmus—a Quick Jerk to the Left in 
Each Eye, then a Slow Drift to the Right
Nystagmus usually has both slow and fast 
movements, but is deﬁned by its fast phase. 
For example, if the eyes jerk quickly to the 
patient’s left and drift back slowly to the right, 
the patient is said to have left-beating 
nystagmus. Occasionally, nystagmus consists 
only of coarse oscillations without quick and 
slow components, described as pendular.
(continued)
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
786 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
786 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 17-7 Nystagmus (Continued )
Plane of the Movements
Horizontal Nystagmus
The movement of nystagmus may occur in one 
or more planes, namely horizontal, vertical, or 
rotary. It is the plane of the movements, not 
the direction of the gaze, that deﬁnes this 
variable.
Vertical Nystagmus
Rotary Nystagmus
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
787
Table 17-8 Types of Facial Paralysis
Facial weakness or paralysis may result from either (1) a peripheral lesion of CN VII, the facial nerve, anywhere from its origin 
in the pons to its periphery in the face, or (2) a central lesion involving the upper motor neuron system between the cortex and 
the pons. A peripheral lesion of CN VII, exempliﬁed here by a Bell palsy, is compared with a central lesion, exempliﬁed by a left 
hemispheric cerebral infarction. These can be distinguished by their different effects on the upper portion of the face.
The lower portion of the face is normally controlled by upper motor neurons located on only one side of the cortex—the 
opposite side. Left hemispheric damage to these pathways, as in stroke, weakens the right lower face. The upper face, however, is 
controlled by pathways from both sides of the cortex. Even though the upper motor neurons on the left are destroyed, others on 
the right remain, and the right upper face continues to function fairly well.
CN VII—Peripheral Lesion
CN VII—Central Lesion
Peripheral nerve damage to CN VII paralyzes the entire right 
side of the face, including the forehead.
Central nerve damage to CN VII paralyzes the lower face but 
cortical innervation to the forehead is preserved.
Motor cortex
Synapses in
the pons
Facial nerve
CN VII
peripheral
lesion
Motor cortex
Synapses in
the pons
Facial nerve
CN VII
central
lesion
Eye does
not close;
eyeball rolls up
Flat nasolabial
fold
Closing Eyes
Eye closes;
perhaps with
slight weakness
Flat nasolabial
fold
Closing Eyes
Forehead
not wrinkled;
eyebrow not raised
Paralysis of
lower face
Raising Eyebrows
Smiling
Forehead wrinkled;
eyebrow raised
Paralysis of
lower face
Raising Eyebrows
Smiling
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
788 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
788 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 17-9 Disorders of Muscle Tone 
Spasticity
Rigidity
Flaccidity (or 
Hypotonia)
Paratonia
Location of Lesion
Upper motor neuron 
or corticospinal tract 
systems.
Basal ganglia system.
Lower motor neuron 
system at any point 
from the anterior horn 
cell to the peripheral 
nerves, and in 
cerebellar disease.
Both hemispheres, 
usually in the frontal 
lobes.
Description
Increased muscle tone 
(hypertonia) is rate 
dependent. Tone 
increases when passive 
movement is rapid, 
and decreases when 
passive movement is 
slow. Tone is also 
greater at the extremes 
of the movement arc.
During rapid passive 
movement, initial 
hypertonia may give 
way suddenly as the 
limb relaxes. This 
spastic “catch” and 
relaxation is known as 
“clasp-knife” 
resistance.
Increased resistance 
that persists 
throughout the 
movement arc, 
independent of rate of 
movement, is called 
lead-pipe rigidity.
During ﬂexion and 
extension of the wrist 
or forearm, a 
superimposed ratchet-
like jerkiness is called 
cogwheel rigidity, and 
can be due to 
underlying tremor.
Loss of muscle tone 
(hypotonia) causes the 
limb to be loose or 
ﬂoppy. The affected 
limbs may be 
hyperextensible or 
even ﬂail-like. Flaccid 
muscles are often 
weak.
Sudden changes in 
tone accompany 
passive range of 
motion. Sudden loss of 
tone that increases the 
ease of motion is called 
mitgehen (moving 
with). Sudden increase 
in tone making motion 
more difﬁcult is called 
gegenhalten (holding 
against).
Common Cause
Stroke, especially late 
or chronic stage.
Parkinsonism.
Guillain–Barré 
syndrome; also initial 
phase of spinal cord 
injury (spinal shock) 
or stroke.
Dementia.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
789
Table 17-10 Abnormalities of Gait and Posture 
Spastic Hemiparesis
Seen in corticospinal tract lesions 
that cause poor control of ﬂexor 
muscles during swing phase (for 
example, from stroke).
■  Affected arm is ﬂexed, immobile, 
and held close to the side, with 
elbow, wrists, and 
interphalangeal joints ﬂexed.
■  Affected leg extensors are 
spastic; ankles are plantar-ﬂexed 
and inverted.
■  Patients may drag toe, circle leg 
stifﬂy outward and forward 
(circumduction), or lean trunk to 
contralateral side to clear 
affected leg during walking.
Scissors Gait
Seen in spinal cord disease, causing 
bilateral lower extremity spasticity, 
including adductor spasm.
■  Gait is stiff. Patients advance 
each leg slowly, and the thighs 
tend to cross forward on each 
other at each step.
■  Steps are short.
■  Patients appear to be walking 
through water, and there may be 
compensating sway of the trunk 
away from the side of the 
advancing leg.
■  Scissoring is seen in all spasticity 
disorders, most commonly 
cerebral palsy.
Steppage Gait
Seen in foot drop, usually 
secondary to peripheral motor unit 
disease.
■  Patients either drag the feet or 
lift them high, with knees ﬂexed, 
and bring them down with a 
slap onto the ﬂoor, appearing to 
be walking up stairs.
■  Patients cannot walk on their 
heels.
■  Gait may involve one or both 
legs.
■  Tibialis anterior and toe 
extensors are weak.
Parkinsonian Gait
Seen in the basal ganglia defects  
of Parkinson disease.
■  Posture is stooped, with ﬂexion 
of head, arms, hips, and knees.
■  Patients are slow getting started.
■  Steps are short and shufﬂing, 
with involuntary hastening 
(festination).
■  Arm swings are decreased, and 
patients turn around stifﬂy—“all 
in one piece.”
■  Postural control is poor 
(anteropulsion or retropulsion).
Cerebellar Ataxia
Seen in disease of the cerebellum 
or associated tracts.
■  Gait is staggering and unsteady, 
with feet wide apart and 
exaggerated difﬁculty on turns.
■  Patients cannot stand steadily 
with feet together, whether eyes 
are open or closed.
■  Other cerebellar signs are 
present such as dysmetria, 
nystagmus, and intention 
tremor.
Sensory Ataxia
Seen in loss of position sense in  
the legs from polyneuropathy or 
posterior column damage.
■  Gait is unsteady and wide based 
(with feet wide apart).
■  Patients throw their feet forward 
and outward and bring them 
down, ﬁrst on the heels and then 
on the toes, with a double 
tapping sound.
■  Patients watch the ground for 
guidance when walking.
■  With eyes closed, patients cannot 
stand steadily with feet together 
(positive Romberg sign), and the 
staggering gait worsens.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
790 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
790 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 17-11 Metabolic and Structural Coma
Although there are many causes of coma, most can be classiﬁed as either structural or metabolic. Findings vary widely in 
individual patients; the features listed are general guidelines rather than strict diagnostic criteria. Remember that psychiatric 
disorders may mimic coma.
Toxic—Metabolic
Structural
Pathophysiology
Arousal centers poisoned or 
critical substrates depleted
Lesion destroys or compresses brainstem arousal 
areas, either directly or secondary to more distant 
expanding mass lesions
Clinical Features
■  Respiratory pattern
If regular, may be normal or 
hyperventilation
If irregular, usually Cheyne–
Stokes
Irregular, especially Cheyne–Stokes or ataxic 
breathing
Also with selected stereotypical patterns like 
“apneustic” respiration (peak inspiratory arrest) or 
central hyperventilation
■  Pupillary size and reaction
Equal, reactive to light. If pinpoint 
from opiates or cholinergics, you 
may need a magnifying glass to 
see the reaction
Unequal or unreactive to light (ﬁxed)
Midposition, ﬁxed—suggests midbrain compression
May be unreactive if ﬁxed and 
dilated from anticholinergics or 
hypothermia
Dilated, ﬁxed—suggests
compression of CN III from herniation
■  Level of consciousness
Changes after pupils change
Changes before pupils change
Examples of Cause
Uremia, hyperglycemia alcohol, 
drugs, liver failure 
hypothyroidism, hypoglycemia, 
anoxia, ischemia meningitis, 
encephalitis hyperthermia, 
hypothermia
Epidural, subdural, or intracerebral hemorrhage; 
large cerebral infarction; tumor, abscess; brainstem 
infarct, tumor, or hemorrhage; cerebellar infarct, 
hemorrhage, tumor, or abscess
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
791
Table 17-12 Glasgow Coma Scale
Activity
Score
Eye Opening
None
1 = Even to supraorbital pressure
To pain
2 = Pain from sternum/limb/supraorbital pressure
To speech
3 = Nonspeciﬁc response, not necessarily to command
Spontaneous
4 = Eyes open, not necessarily aware
___________
Motor Response
None
1 = To any pain; limbs remain ﬂaccid
Extension
2 = Shoulder adducted and shoulder and forearm internally rotated
Flexor response
3 = Withdrawal response or assumption of hemiplegic posture
Withdrawal
4 = Arm withdraws to pain, shoulder abducts
Localizes pain
5 = Arm attempts to remove supraorbital/chest pressure
Obeys commands
6 = Follows simple commands
__________
Verbal Response
None
1 = No verbalization of any type
Incomprehensible
2 = Moans/groans, no speech
Inappropriate
3 = Intelligible, no sustained sentences
Confused
4 = Converses but confused, disoriented
Oriented
5 = Converses and is oriented
__________
TOTAL (3–15)a
aInterpretation: Patients with scores of 3–8 usually are considered to be in a coma.
Source: Teasdale G, Jennett B. Assessment of coma and impaired consciousness. A practical scale. Lancet. 1974;304(7872):81.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
792 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
792 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 17-13 Pupils in Comatose Patients
Pupillary size, equality, and light reactions are important signs in assessing the cause of coma the region of the brain that is 
impaired. Keep in mind that unrelated pupillary abnormalities may precede coma, for example from use of miotic drops for 
glaucoma or mydriatic drops for viewing the ocular fundi (not recommended).
Small or Pinpoint Pupils
Bilaterally small pupils (1–2.5 mm) suggest damage to the 
sympathetic pathways in the hypothalamus, or metabolic 
encephalopathy, a diffuse failure of cerebral function that has 
many causes, including drugs. Light reactions are usually 
normal.
Pinpoint pupils (<1 mm) suggest a hemorrhage in the pons, or 
the effects of morphine, heroin, or other narcotics. The light 
reactions may be seen with a magnifying glass.
Midposition Fixed Pupils
Pupils that are in the midposition or slightly dilated (4–6 mm) 
and are ﬁxed to light suggest structural damage in the 
midbrain.
Large Pupils
Bilaterally ﬁxed and dilated pupils may be due to severe anoxia 
and its sympathomimetic effects, as seen after cardiac arrest. 
They may also result from atropine-like agents, phenothiazines, 
or tricyclic antidepressants.
Bilaterally large reactive pupils may be due to cocaine, 
amphetamine, LSD, or other sympathetic nervous system 
agonists.
One Large Pupil
A pupil that is ﬁxed and dilated warns of herniation of the 
temporal lobe, causing compression of the oculomotor nerve 
and midbrain. A single large pupil is commonly seen in 
diabetic patients with infarction of CN III.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
793
Table 17-14 Abnormal Postures in Comatose Patients
 Flexed
 Flexed
Adducted
Internally rotated
Plantar flexed
Decorticate Rigidity (Abnormal Flexor 
Response)
In decorticate rigidity, the upper arms are ﬂexed 
tight to the sides with elbows, wrists, and 
ﬁngers ﬂexed. The legs are extended and 
internally rotated. The feet are plantar ﬂexed. 
This posture implies a destructive lesion of the 
corticospinal tracts within or very near the 
cerebral hemispheres. When unilateral, this is 
the posture of chronic spastic hemiplegia.
Externally rotated
Flaccid
Hemiplegia (Early)
Sudden unilateral brain damage involving the 
corticospinal tract may produce a hemiplegia 
(one-sided paralysis), which is ﬂaccid early in 
its course. Spasticity will develop later. The 
paralyzed arm and leg are slack. They fall 
loosely and without tone when raised and 
dropped to the bed. Spontaneous movements 
or responses to noxious stimuli are limited to 
the opposite side. The leg may lie externally 
rotated. One side of the lower face may be 
paralyzed, and that cheek puffs out on 
expiration. Both eyes may be turned away 
from the paralyzed side.
Plantar flexed
Flexed
Pronated
Extended
Adducted
Decerebrate Rigidity (Abnormal 
Extensor Response)
In decerebrate rigidity, the jaws are clenched 
and the neck is extended. The arms are 
adducted and stifﬂy extended at the elbows, 
with forearms pronated, wrists and ﬁngers 
ﬂexed. The legs are stifﬂy extended at the knees, 
with the feet plantar ﬂexed. This posture may 
occur spontaneously or only in response to 
external stimuli such as light, noise, or pain. It 
is caused by a lesion in the diencephalon, 
midbrain, or pons, although may also arise 
from severe metabolic disorders such as 
hypoxia or hypoglycemia.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
794 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
References
 1. Wiebers DO, Dale AJD, Kokmen E, et al. (eds). Mayo Clinic Exam-
inations in Neurology. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Mosby; 1998.
 2. Campbell WW. DeJong’s The Neurologic Examination. 7th ed. Phil-
adelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013.
 3. Wright BL, Lai JT, Sinclair AJ. Cerebrospinal ﬂuid and lumbar 
puncture: a practical review. Neurol. 2012;259:1530.
 4. Straus SE, Thorpe KE, Holroyd-Leduc J. How do I perform a lum-
bar puncture and analyze the results to diagnose bacterial menin-
gitis? JAMA. 2006;296:2012.
 5. National Institute of Neurologic Disorders and Stroke, National 
Institutes of Health. Spinal cord injury: hope through research. 
Updated February 23, 2015. Available at http://www.ninds.nih.
gov/disorders/sci/detail_sci.htm. Accessed April 23, 2015.
 6. Chad DA, Stone JH, Gupta R. Case 14-2011: A woman with 
asymmetric sensory loss and paresthesias. N Engl J Med. 
2011;364:1856.
 7. Dyck PJ, Herrmann DN, Staff NP, et al. Assessing decreased sensa-
tion and increased sensory phenomena in diabetic polyneuropa-
thies. Diabetes. 2013;62:3677.
 8. Kanji JN, Anglin RE, Hunt DL, et al. Does this patient with diabe-
tes have large-ﬁber peripheral neuropathy? JAMA. 2010;303:1526.
 
9. International Headache Society. The International Classiﬁcation of 
Headache Disorders. 3rd ed. (beta version). Cephalalgia. 2013;33:629.
 10. De Luca GC, Bartleson JD. When and how to investigate the 
patient with headache. Semin Neurol. 2010;30:131.
 11. D’Souza S. Aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage. J Neurosurg 
Anesthesiol. 2015;27:222.
 12. Mortimer AM, Bradley MD, Stoodley NG, et al. Thunderclap 
headache: diagnostic considerations and neuroimaging features. 
Clin Radiol. 2013;68:e101.
 13. Dill E. Thunderclap headache. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2014; 
14:437.
 14. Bhimraj A. Acute community-acquired bacterial meningitis in 
adults: an evidence-based review. Cleve Clin J Med. 2012;79:393.
 15. Brouwer MC, Tunkel AR, van de Beek D. Epidemiology, diagnosis, 
and antimicrobial treatment of acute bacterial meningitis. Clin 
Microbiol Rev. 2010;23:467.
 16. Logan SA, MacMahon E. Viral meningitis. BMJ. 2008; 
336(7634):36.
 17. Omuro A, DeAngelis LM. Glioblastoma and other malignant glio-
mas. JAMA. 2013; 310:1842.
 18. Brouwer MC, Tunkel AR, McKhann GM, et al. Brain abscess. 
N Engl J Med. 2014;371:447.
 19. Bushnell C, McCullough L. Stroke prevention in women: synop-
sis of the 2014 American Heart Association/American Stroke 
Association guideline. Ann Intern Med. 2012;160:853.
 20. Sacco S, Ornello R, Ripa P, et al. Migraine and hemorrhagic stroke: 
a meta-analysis. Stroke. 2012;44:3032.
 21. Sacco S, Ricci S, Degan D, et al. Migraine in women: the role of 
hormones and their impact on vascular diseases. J Headache Pain. 
2012;13:177.
 22. McGregor EA. In the clinic: migraine. Ann Intern Med. 2013;159: 
ITC5-1.
 23. Detsky ME, McDonald DR, Baerlocher MO, et al. Does this patient 
with headache have a migraine or need neuroimaging? JAMA. 
2006;296:1274.
 24. Wipperman J. Dizziness and vertigo. Prim Care. 2014;41:115.
 25. Siket MS, Edlow JA. Transient ischemic attack: reviewing the evolu-
tion of the deﬁnition, diagnosis, risk stratiﬁcation, and management 
for the emergency physician. Emerg Med Clin North Am. 2012;30:745.
 26. Cucchiara B, Kasner SE. In the clinic. Transient ischemic attack. 
Ann Intern Med. 2011;154:ITC-1.
 27. Karras C, Aitchison R, Aitchison P, et al. Adult stroke summary. 
Dis Mon. 2013;59:210.
 28. Nouh A, Remke J, Ruland S. Ischemic posterior circulation stroke: 
a review of anatomy, clinical presentations, diagnosis, and current 
management. Front Neurol. 2014;5:30.
 29. Ishiyama G, Ishiyama A. Vertebrobasilar infarcts and ischemia. 
Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2011;44:415.
 30. Runchey S, McGee S. Does this patient have a hemorrhagic 
stroke? Clinical ﬁndings distinguishing hemorrhagic stroke from 
ischemic stroke. JAMA. 2010;303:2280.
 31. Yuki N, Hartung H-P. Guillain-Barré Syndrome. N Engl J Med. 
2012;366:2294.
 32. Baggi F, Andreetta F, Maggi L, et al. Complete stable remission and 
autoantibody speciﬁcity in myasthenia gravis. Neurology. 2013;80:188.
 33. Spillane J, Higham E, Kullmann DM. Myasthenia gravis. BMJ. 
2012;345:e8497.
 34. Yoo M, Sharma N, Pasnoor M, et al. Painful diabetic peripheral 
neuropathy: presentations, mechanisms, and exercise therapy. 
J Diabetes Metab. 2013;Suppl 10:005.
 35. Gilron I, Baron R, Jensen T. Neuropathic pain: principles of diag-
nosis and treatment. Mayo Clin Proc. 2015;90:532.
 36. Benditt DG, Adkisson WO. Approach to the patient with syn-
cope: venues, presentations, diagnoses. Cardiol Clin. 2013;31:9.
 37. Low PA, Tomalia VA. Orthostatic hypotension: mechanisms, 
causes, management. J Clin Neurol. 2015;11:220.
 38. Commission on Classiﬁcation and Terminology of the International 
League Against Epilepsy (Berg AT, Berkovic SF, Brodie MJ, et al). A 
proposed diagnostic scheme for people with epileptic seizures and 
with epilepsy: report of the ILAE Task Force on Classiﬁcation and 
Terminology, 2005–2009. Epilepsia. 2010;51:676. Available at http://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1528-1167.2010.02522.x/
full. Accessed July 31, 2015.
 39. French JA, Pedley TA. Initial management of epilepsy. New Engl J 
Med. 2008;359:166.
 40. American College of Physicians. Epilepsy syndromes and their diagno-
sis. In: Neurology, Medical Knowledge Self-Assessment Program (MKSAP) 
15. Philadelphia, PA: American College of Physicians; 2006:74.
 41. Elias WJ, Shah BB. Tremor. JAMA. 2014;311:948.
 42. Benito-Leon J. Essential tremor: a neurodegenerative disease? 
Tremor Other Hyperkinet Mov (NY). 2014;4:252.
 43. Connolly BS, Lang AE. Pharmocological treatment of Parkinson 
disease, a review. JAMA. 2014; 311:1670.
 44. Jankovic J. Parkinson’s disease: clinical features and diagnosis. J 
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2008;79:368.
 45. Wijemanne S, Jankovic J. Restless legs syndrome: clinical presen-
tation diagnosis and treatment. Sleep Med. 2015;16:678.
 46. Silber MH, Becker PM, Earley C, et al. Willis-Ekbom Disease 
Foundation revised consensus statement on the management of 
restless legs syndrome. Mayo Clin Proc. 2013;88:977.
 47. Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, et al. Heart disease and stroke 
statistics—2015 update: a report from the American Heart Asso-
ciation. Circulation. 2015;131:e29.
 48. Easton JD, Saver JL, Albers GW, et al. Deﬁnition and evaluation 
of transient ischemic attack: a scientiﬁc statement for healthcare 
professionals from the American Heart Association/American 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  17 |
 
The Nervous System 
795
REFERENCES
Stroke Association Stroke Council; Council on Cardiovascular 
Surgery and Anesthesia; Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and 
Anesthesia; Council on Cardiovascular Radiology and Interven-
tion; Council on Cardiovascular Nursing; and the Interdisci-
plinary Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease. The American 
Academy of Neurology afﬁrms the value of this statement as an 
educational tool for neurologists. Stroke. 2009;40(6):2276.
 49. Kleindorfer DO, Lindsell C, Broderick JP, et al. Impact of socio-
economic status on stroke incidence: A population-based study. 
Ann Neurol. 2006;60:480.
 50. Kleindorfer D, Panagos P, Pancioli A, et al. Incidence and short-
term prognosis of transient ischemic attack in a population-based 
study. Stroke. 2005;36:720.
 51. Harper S, Rushani D, Kaufman JS. Trends in the black-white life 
expectancy gap, 2003–2008. JAMA. 2012;307:2257.
 52. Mosca L, Benjamin EJ, Berra K, et al. Effectiveness-based guide-
lines for the prevention of cardiovascular disease in women—
2011 update: a guideline from the American Heart Association. 
Circulation. 2011;123:1243.
 53. American Heart Association, American Stroke Association. Stroke 
warning signs and symptoms. Available at http://www.strokeas-
sociation.org/STROKEORG/WarningSigns/Stroke-Warning-
Signs-and-Symptoms_UCM_308528_SubHomePage.jsp. 
Accessed July 22, 2015.
 54. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Ofﬁce of Disease 
Prevention and Health Promotion. Healthy People 2020—Heart 
disease and stroke, objectives. Available at http://www.healthy-
people.gov/2020/topics-objectives/topic/heart-disease-and-
stroke/objectives. Accessed July 22, 2015.
 55. Wolff T, Miller T, Ko S. Aspirin for the primary prevention of 
cardiovascular events: an update of the evidence for the U.S. Pre-
ventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2009;150:405.
 56. Pignone M, Alberts MJ, Colwell JA, et al. Aspirin for primary pre-
vention of cardiovascular events in people with diabetes: a posi-
tion statement of the American Diabetes Association, a scientiﬁc 
statement of the American Heart Association, and an expert con-
sensus document of the American College of Cardiology Founda-
tion. Diabetes Care. 2010;33:1395.
 57. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Final Recommendation State-
ment. Carotid artery stenosis: screening, July 2014. U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services; 2014. Available at http://www.
uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Document/UpdateSum-
maryFinal/carotid-artery-stenosis-screening?ds=1&s=carotid 
artery. Accessed August 3, 2015.
 58. Jonas DE, Feltner C, Amick HR, et al. Screening for asymptomatic 
carotid artery stenosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis for the 
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161:336.
 59. Kernan WN, Ovbiagele B, Black HR, et al. Guidelines for the preven-
tion of stroke in patients with stroke and transient ischemic attack: 
a guideline for healthcare professionals from the American Heart 
Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2014;45:2160.
 60. Ji R, Schwamm LH, Pervez MA, et al. Ischemic stroke and tran-
sient ischemic attack in young adults: risk factors, diagnostic 
yield, neuroimaging, and thrombolysis. JAMA Neurol. 2013;70:51.
 61. American College of Physicians. Stroke, in Neurology. Medical 
Knowledge Self-Assessment Program (MKSAP) 16. Philadelphia, PA: 
American College of Physicians; 2012:24.
 62. Tesfaye S, Boulton AJ, Dyck PJ, et al. Diabetic neuropathies: 
update on deﬁnitions, diagnostic criteria, estimation of severity, 
and treatments. Diabetes Care. 2010;33:2285.
 63. American Diabetes Association. Microvascular complications and 
foot care. Diabetes Care. 2015;38(Suppl):S58.
 64. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prevalence of 
stroke—United States, 2006–2010. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep. 2012;61:379.
 65. Yawn BP, Saddier P, Wollan PC, et al. A population-based study of 
the incidence and complication rates of herpes zoster before zos-
ter vaccine introduction. Mayo Clin Proc. 2007;82:1341.
 66. Hales CM, Harpaz R, Ortega-Sanchez I, et al.; Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention. Update on recommendations for use of 
herpes zoster vaccine. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2014;63:729.
 67. Wong CL, Holroyd-Leduc J, Simel DL, et al. Does this patient have 
delirium?: value of bedside instruments. JAMA. 2010;304:779.
 68. Inouye SK, Kosar CM, Tommet D, et al. The CAM-S: development 
and validation of a new scoring system for delirium severity in 2 
cohorts. Ann Intern Med. 2014;160:526.
 69. O’Mahony R, Murthy L, Akunne A, et al.; Guideline Development 
Group. Synopsis of the National Institute for Health and Clinical 
Excellence guideline for prevention of delirium. Ann Intern Med. 
2011;154:746.
 70. Rabins PV, Blass DM. In the clinic. Dementia. Ann Intern Med. 
2014;161:ITC1; quiz ITC16.
 71. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders. 5th ed. (DSM-5). Washington, DC: 
America Psychiatric Association; 2013.
 72. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Dementia/Alzheim-
er’s disease. Updated October 4, 2013. Available at http://www.
cdc.gov/mentalhealth/basics/mental-illness/dementia.htm. 
Accessed July 22, 2015.
 73. Barnes DE, Yaffe K. The projected effect of risk factor reduction 
on Alzheimer’s disease prevalence. Lancet Neurol. 2011;10:819.
 74. Daviglus ML, Bell CC, Berrettini W, et al. National Institutes of Health 
State-of-the-Science Conference statement: preventing Alzheimer 
disease and cognitive decline. Ann Intern Med. 2010;153:176.
 75. Moyer VA. Screening for cognitive impairment in older adults: 
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. 
Ann Intern Med. 2014;160:791.
 76. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The Patient Health Question-
naire-2: validity of a two-item depression screener. Med Care. 
2003;41:1284.
 77. Holsinger T, Deveau J, Boustani M, et al. Does this patient have 
dementia? JAMA. 2007;297:2391.
 78. American Academy of Neurology. Neurology clerkship core cur-
riculum guidelines. See also Appendix 2: Guidelines for a Screen-
ing Neurologic Examination, p. 7. Available at https://www.aan.
com/uploadedFiles/4CME_and_Training/2Training/3Fellowship_
Resources/5Core_Curricula/skilz.pdf. Accessed July 23, 2015.
 79. Gelb D, Gunderson C, Henry K, Kirshner H, Józefowicz R, for the Con-
sortium of Neurology Clerkship Directors and the Undergraduate Edu-
cation Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology. The 
neurology clerkship core curriculum.  Neurology. 2002;58(6):849–852.
 80. Moore FG, Chalk C. The essential neurologic examination. Neu-
rology. 2009;72:2020.
 81. Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination. Videos 17, 18—The 
Nervous System. Available at https://batesvisualguide.com/. 
Accessed July 23, 2015.
 82. American Academy of Neurology. Educational resources. Available at 
https://www.aan.com/residents-and-fellows/clerkship-and-course-
director-resources/educational-resources/ and http://www.aan.com/
go/education/curricula/internal/toc. Accessed July 23, 2015.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
796 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
 83. Wright State University (Pearson JC, Nieder GL, Mathews T, et al.). 
Neurological teaching videos—a database-driven website for dis-
tribution of quicktime streaming videos to neuroscience educa-
tors. Available at http://corescholar.libraries.wright.edu/
ncbp/383/. Accessed July 23, 2015.
 84. McGee S. Ch 56, Visual ﬁeld testing, in Evidence-Based Physical Diag-
nosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:513–520.
 85. McGee S. Ch 20, The pupils, in Evidence-Based Physical Diagnosis. 
3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:176–178.
 86. McGee S. Ch 57, Nerves of the eye muscles, in Evidence-Based Physi-
cal Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:521–531.
 87. Zandian A, Osiro S, Hudson R, et al. The neurologist’s dilemma: 
a comprehensive clinical review of Bell’s palsy, with emphasis on 
current management trends. Med Sci Monit. 2014;20:83.
 88. McGee S. Ch 22, Hearing, in Evidence-Based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:190.
 89. Darcy P, Moughty AM. Pronator drift. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:320.
 90. Daum C, Aybek S. Validity of the “drift without pronation” sign in 
conversion disorder. BMC Neurol. 2013;13:31.
 91. Stone J, Carson A, Duncan R, et al. Which neurological diseases 
are most likely to be associated with “symptoms unexplained by 
organic disease.” J Neurol. 2012;259:33.
 92. Stone J, Carson A, Sharpe M. Functional symptoms and signs in 
neurology: assessment and diagnosis. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychia-
try. 2005;76(Suppl 1):i2.
 93. Stabler SP. Clinical practice. Vitamin B12 deﬁciency. N Engl J Med. 
2013; 368:149.
 94. Kirshblum SC, Burns SP, Biering-Sorensen F, et al. International 
Standards for Neurological Classiﬁcation of Spinal Cord Injury 
(Revised 2011). J Spinal Cord Med. 2011;34:535.
 95. Hallett M. NINDS myotatic reﬂex scale. Neurology. 1993;43:2723.
 96. Isaza Jaramillo SP, Uribe Uribe CS, García Jimenez FA, et al. Accu-
racy of the Babinski sign in the identiﬁcation of pyramidal tract 
dysfunction. J Neurol Sci. 2014;343:66.
 97. McGee S. Ch 24, Meninges, in Evidence-Based Physical Diagnosis. 
3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:210–214.
 98. Thomas KE, Hasbun R, Jekel J, et al. The diagnostic accuracy of 
Kernig’s sign, Brudzinski’s sign, and nuchal rigidity in adults with 
suspected meningitis. Clin Infect Dis. 2002;35:46.
 99. Ward MA, Greenwood TM, Kumar DR, et al. Josef Brudzinski and 
Vladimir Mikhailovich Kernig: signs for diagnosing meningitis. 
Clin Med Res. 2010;8:13.
 100. McGee S. Ch 62, Disorders of nerve roots, plexuses, in Evidence-Based 
Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 
2012:607–609.
 101. Mendizabal M, Silva MO. Asterixis. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:e14.
 102. Edlow JA, Rabinstein A, Traub SJ, et al. Diagnosis of reversible 
causes of coma. Lancet. 2014;384(9959):2064.
 103. Moore SA, Wijdicks EF. The acutely comatose patient: clinical 
approach and diagnosis. Semin Neurol. 2013;33:110.
 104. Wijdicks EF. The Comatose Patient. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Oxford 
University Press; 2014.
 105. Henry TR, Ezzeddine MA. Approach to the patient with transient 
alteration of consciousness. Neurol Clin Pract. 2012;2:179.
 106. Pope JV, Edlow JA. Avoiding misdiagnosis in patients with neuro-
logical emergencies. Emerg Med Int. 2012;2012:949275.
 107. Brown EN, Lydic R, Schiff ND. General anesthesia, sleep, and 
coma. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:2638.
 108. Teasdale G, Jennett B. Assessment of coma and impaired con-
sciousness. A practical scale. Lancet. 1974;304(7872):81.
 109. Sandroni C, Geocadin RG. Neurological prognostication after car-
diac arrest. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2015;21:209.
 110. Sandroni C, Cariou A, Cavallaro F, et al. Prognostication in coma-
tose survivors of cardiac arrest: an advisory statement from the 
European Resuscitation Council and the European Society of 
Intensive Care Medicine. Resuscitation. 2014;85:1779.
 111. American College of Physicians. Syncope. In: General Internal 
Medicine, Medical Knowledge Self-Assessment Program (MKSAP) 16. 
Philadelphia, PA: American College of Physicians; 2012:45.
 112. Freeman R, Wieling W, Axelrod FB, et al. Consensus statement on 
the deﬁnition of orthostatic hypotension, neutrally mediated syn-
cope and the postural tachycardia syndrome. Clin Auton Res. 
2011;21:69.
 113. Vijayan J, Sharma VK. Neurogenic orthostatic hypotension—
management update and role of droxidopa. Ther Clin Risk Manag. 
2015;8:915.
 114. Chen LY, Benditt DG, Shen WK. Management of syncope in 
adults: an update. Mayo Clin Proc. 2008;83:1280.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
C h a p t e r  1 8
Assessing Children: Infancy 
through Adolescence 799
C h a p t e r  1 9
The Pregnant Woman 927
C h a p t e r  2 0
The Older Adult 955
Special Populations 3
UNIT 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
799
This chapter highlights clinical assessment for each pediatric age group, begin-
ning with general principles of development and key components of health pro-
motion. Newborns, infants, young and school-aged children, and adolescents 
are covered in separate sections, with relevant discussions of development, his-
tory taking, health promotion and counseling, and techniques of examination 
for each (Figs. 18-1 to 18-3).
C H A P T E R 
18
Assessing Children: Infancy 
through Adolescence
Peter G. Szilagyi, MD, MPH
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate 
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 2: Head-to-Toe Assessment: Infant;  
Vol. 3: Head-to-Toe Assessment: Child)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com
F I G U R E  1 8 - 1 .  Infants have 
surprising abilities.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 2 .  A drive for 
independence appears in school-aged 
children. 
F I G U R E  1 8 - 3 .  Social interactions 
become important in adolescence.
Guide to Chapter Organization
General Principles of Child Development
Health Promotion and Counseling: Key Components
Assessing the Newborn
Assessing the Infant
Assessing Young and School-Aged Children
Assessing Adolescents
Recording Your Findings
Inexperienced examiners are often intimidated when approaching a tiny baby or 
an upset child, especially under the critical eyes of anxious parents. Although it 
is initially challenging, you will come to enjoy almost all pediatric encounters.
Review Chapter 1, Overview: Physical Examination and History Taking, for the 
methods and sequence of examining adults. When examining infants and chil-
dren, the sequence should vary according to the child’s age and comfort level. 
Perform less invasive maneuvers early and potentially distressing maneuvers near the 
end of the examination. For example, palpate the head and neck and auscultate 
the heart and lungs early, and examine the ears and mouth and palpate the abdo-
men near the end. If the child reports pain in one area examine that area last.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
800 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF CHILD DEVELOPMENT 
The format of the clinical record is the same for both children and adults. 
Although the sequence of the physical examination may vary, convert your clin-
ical ﬁndings into the traditional written or electronic format.
General Principles of  
Child Development
Childhood is a period of remarkable physical, cognitive, and social growth—
by far the greatest in a person’s lifetime. Within a few short years, children’s size 
increases 20-fold, they acquire sophisticated language and reasoning, they 
develop complex social interactions, and they progress toward mature adults.
Understanding the normal physical, cognitive, and social development of chil-
dren facilitates effective interviews and physical examinations and is the basis for 
distinguishing normal from abnormal ﬁndings.
Four Principles of Child Development
1. Child development proceeds along a predictable pathway.
2. The range of normal development is wide.
3. Various physical, social, and environmental factors, as well as diseases, can 
aﬀect child development and health.
4. The child’s developmental level aﬀects how you conduct the history and 
physical examination.1,2
■ Principle #1: Child development proceeds along a predictable pathway governed 
by the maturing brain. You can measure age-speciﬁc milestones and use 
them to characterize development as normal or abnormal. Because your 
health care visit and physical examination take place at one point in time, 
you need to determine where the child ﬁts along a developmental trajectory. 
Milestones are achieved in an order than can be anticipated. Loss of milestones 
is always concerning.
■ Principle #2: The range of normal development is wide. Children mature at dif-
ferent rates. Each child’s physical, cognitive, and social development should 
fall within a broad developmental range.
■ Principle #3: Various physical, social, and environmental factors, as well as diseases, 
can affect child development and health. For example, chronic illnesses, child abuse, 
and poverty can all cause detectable physical abnormalities and alter the rate and 
course of development. Additionally, children with physical or cognitive disabilities 
may not follow the expected age-speciﬁc developmental trajectory (Fig. 18-4).
■ Principle #4: The child’s developmental level affects how you conduct the clinical 
history and physical examination. For example, interviewing a 5-year-old is 
F I G U R E  1 8 - 4 .
Child development
is affected by many factors.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
801
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
fundamentally different than interviewing an adolescent. Both order and 
style differ from the adult examination. Before performing a physical exami-
nation, attempt to ascertain the child’s approximate developmental level and 
adapt your physical examination to that level. An understanding of normal 
child development helps you achieve these tasks.
Health Promotion and 
Counseling: Key Components
Benjamin Franklin noted that “an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.” 
This adage is particularly true for children and adolescents because prevention 
and health promotion at a young age can result in improved health outcomes for 
decades. Pediatric clinicians dedicate substantial time to health supervision visits 
and health promotion activities.
Several national and international organizations have developed guidelines for 
health promotion in children.3–5 Current concepts of health promotion include 
the detection and prevention of disease as well as active promotion of the well-
being of children and their families spanning physical, cognitive, emotional, and 
social health.
Every interaction with a child and family is an opportunity for health promo-
tion. From the interview to the physical examination, think of your interactions 
as an opportunity for two important tasks: the detection of clinical problems and 
the promotion of health. Capitalize on the examination to offer age-appropriate 
guidance about the child’s development. Provide suggestions about reading, con-
versing, playing music, and optimizing opportunities for gross and ﬁne motor 
development. Advise parents about upcoming developmental stages and strate-
gies to encourage their child’s development. Parents are the major agents of health 
promotion for children and your advice is implemented through them.
The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) publishes guidelines for health supervi-
sion visits and the key age-appropriate components of these visits (see www.healthy-
children.org). Remember that children and adolescents who have a chronic illness 
or high-risk family or environmental circumstances will probably require more 
frequent visits and more intensive health promotion. Key health promotion issues 
and strategies, tailored for speciﬁc age groups, are found throughout this chapter.
Integrate explanations of your physical ﬁndings with health promotion. Pro-
vide advice about expected maturational changes or how health behaviors can 
affect physical ﬁndings (e.g., exercise may reduce blood pressure and prevent 
obesity). Be sure to demonstrate the relationship between healthy lifestyles and 
physical health. For example, give parents a copy of their child’s body mass index 
(BMI) result along with a “prescription” for healthy living.
Childhood immunizations are a mainstay for health promotion and have been 
heralded as the most signiﬁcant clinical achievement in public health worldwide. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
802 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
The childhood immunization schedule changes yearly. Updates are published 
widely and disseminated on websites of the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) (see www.cdc.gov) and the AAP.6,7
Age-speciﬁc screening procedures are performed at speciﬁc ages. These include 
growth parameters and developmental screening at all ages, blood pressure 
screening after age 3 years, BMI screening after age 2 years, vision and hearing 
screening at key ages, and behavioral and mental health screening. Increasingly, 
standardized screening instruments are being used to assist clinicians in identify-
ing abnormalities. In addition, screening procedures recommended for all chil-
dren at certain ages or for speciﬁc high-risk patients (depending on the test) 
include tests for lead poisoning, anemia, tuberculosis exposure, dyslipidemia, 
urinary tract infections, and sexually transmitted infections. There is variation 
worldwide in recommendations for screening tests; the AAP recommendations 
are provided at www.aap.org.
Anticipatory guidance is a major component of the pediatric visit.4 Key areas 
cover a broad range of topics, from clinical to developmental, social, and emo-
tional health.
Key Components of Pediatric  
Health Promotion
1. Age-appropriate developmental achievement of the child
● Physical (maturation, growth, puberty)
● Motor (gross and ﬁne motor skills)
● Cognitive (developmental milestones, language, school performance)
● Emotional (self-regulation, mood, temperament, self-eﬃcacy, self-esteem, 
independence)
● Social (social competence, self-responsibility, integration with family and 
community, peer interactions)
2. Health supervision visits
● Periodic assessment of clinical and oral health
● More frequent health supervision visits for children with special health 
care needs
3. Integration of physical examination ﬁndings with health promotion
4. Immunizations
5. Screening procedures
6. Anticipatory guidance4,8
● Healthy habits
● Nutrition and healthy eating
● Safety and prevention of injury
● Physical activity
● Sexual development and sexuality
● Self-responsibility, eﬃcacy, and healthy self-esteem
● Family relationships (interactions, strengths, supports)
● Positive parenting strategies
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
803
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
ASSESSING THE NEWBORN
The ﬁrst year of life, or infancy, is divided into the neonatal period (the ﬁrst 
28 days) and the postneonatal period (29 days to 1 year).
Key Components of Pediatric  
Health Promotion (continued )
● Emotional and mental health
● Oral health
● Recognition of illness
● Sleep
● Screen time
● Prevention of risky behaviors (e.g., tobacco, alcohol and drug use, unpro-
tected sex)
● School and vocation
● Peer relationships
● Community interactions
7. Partnership among health care provider, child/adolescent, and family
Tips for Examining Newborns
● Examine the newborn in the presence of the parents.
● Swaddle and then undress the newborn as the examination proceeds.
● Dim the lights and rock the newborn to encourage the eyes to open.
● Observe feeding, if possible, particularly breast-feeding.
● Demonstrate calming maneuvers to parents (e.g., swaddling).
● Observe and teach parents about transitions as the newborn arouses.
● A typical sequence for the examination of the newborn:
● Careful observation before (and during) the examination
● Heart
● Lungs
● Head, neck, and clavicles
● Ears and mouth
● Hips
● Abdomen and genitourinary system
● Lower extremities, back
● Eyes, whenever they are spontaneously open or at end of examination
● Skin, as you go along
● Neurologic system
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
804 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
The ﬁrst pediatric examination is per-
formed immediately after delivery by 
obstetrical or pediatric clinicians. A 
comprehensive pediatric examination 
is then generally performed within 
24 hours of birth (Fig. 18-5). Subse-
quent physical examinations occur at 
regular intervals or when the infant is 
ill. Assessment techniques for these 
examinations are described in detail in 
the following sections.
If possible, do the physical examination in front of the parents so that they can 
interact with you and ask questions. Parents may question their baby’s physical 
appearance, so stating normal ﬁndings as you go can be reassuring. Observe par-
ent interaction with their newborn and reinforce positive parenting behaviors. If 
a mother has concerns about breast-feeding technique, you can watch how well 
the breast-feeding baby latches on and sucks. Breast-feeding is physiologically 
and psychologically optimal, but many mothers will need help and support at 
ﬁrst. Early detection of difﬁculties and anticipatory guidance can promote and 
sustain breast-feeding. This is an excellent opportunity to educate parents about 
their baby and what their baby can do.
Newborns are most responsive 1 to 2 hours after a feeding, when they are 
neither too satiated (and less responsive) nor too hungry (and more agitated). 
Start with the newborn swaddled and comfortable. Then, for gradual stimula-
tion and arousal, undress the newborn as the examination proceeds. If the 
newborn becomes agitated, use a paciﬁer or a bottle of formula (if not breast-
feeding) or allow the baby to suck on your gloved ﬁnger. Reswaddle the baby 
long enough to complete the parts of the examination that require a quiet 
baby.
Immediate Assessment at Birth
Examining newborns immediately after birth is important for determining gen-
eral condition, developmental status, abnormalities in gestational development, 
and any congenital abnormalities. This examination may reveal diseases of car-
diac, respiratory, or neurologic origin. Listen to the anterior thorax with your 
stethoscope, palpate the abdomen, and inspect the head, face, oral cavity, 
extremities, genitalia, and perineum. Refer to the section “Assessing the Infant” for 
a complete physical examination.
Apgar Score. The Apgar score is an assessment of the newborn 
immediately after birth. Its ﬁve components classify the newborn’s neurologic 
recovery from the stress of birth and immediate adaptation to extrauterine life. 
Score each newborn at 1 and 5 minutes after birth according to the following 
table. Scoring is based on a 3-point scale (0, 1, or 2) for each component. Total 
scores range from 0 to 10. Scoring may continue at 5-minute intervals until 
the score is >7. If the 5-minute Apgar score is 8 or more, proceed to a more 
complete examination.9
F I G U R E  1 8 - 5 .  Physical examination 
starts soon after birth.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
805
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Gestational Age and Birth Weight. Classify newborns according to 
their gestational age of maturity and birth weight. These classiﬁcations help 
predict clinical problems and morbidity. Some clinical practice guidelines 
address the potential challenges of infants born before a certain gestational age 
or below a speciﬁc birth weight.
Gestational age is based on speciﬁc neuromuscular signs and physical character-
istics that change with gestational maturity. The Ballard Scoring System10 esti-
mates gestational age to within 2 weeks, even in extremely premature infants. A 
complete Ballard Scoring System, with instructions for assessing neuromuscular 
and physical maturity, is included in Figure 18-6.
The Apgar Scoring System
Assigned Score
Clinical Sign
0
1
2
Heart rate
Absent
<100
>100
Respiratory eﬀort Absent
Slow and irregular
Good; strong
Muscle tone
Flaccid
Some ﬂexion of the 
arms and legs
Active movement
Reﬂex irritabilitya No responses
Grimace
Vigorous cry, 
sneeze, or cough
Color
Blue, pale
Pink body, blue 
extremities
Pink all over
1-Min Apgar Score
5-Min Apgar Score
8–10
Normal
8—10
Normal
5–7
0–4
Some nervous sys-
tem depression
Severe depression, 
requiring immedi-
ate resuscitation
0—7
High risk for subse-
quent central ner-
vous system and 
other organ sys-
tem dysfunction
aReaction to suction of nares with bulb syringe.
Example of Apgar score calculation 
for a newborn with hypoxia:
Heart rate = 110 [2]
Respiratory effort = slow, irregular 
[1]
Muscle tone = some flexion of arms/
legs [1]
Reflex irritability = grimace [1]
Color = blue, pale [0]
Apgar score = 5
Classiﬁcation by Gestational Age and Birth Weight
Gestational Age Classiﬁcation
Gestational Age
● Preterm
● <34 wks
● Late preterm
● 34–36 wks
● Term
● 37–42 wks
● Postterm
● >42 wks
Birth Weight Classiﬁcation
Weight
● Extremely low birth weight
● <1,000 g
● Very low birth weight
● <1,500 g
● Low birth weight
● <2,500 g
● Normal birth weight
● ≥2,500 g
Preterm infants are at risk for both 
short-term complications (mainly 
respiratory and cardiovascular) as 
well as long-term sequelae (e.g., 
neurodevelopmental).
Late preterm infants are at 
considerable risk for prematurity-
related complications.
Postterm infants are at increased risk 
of perinatal mortality or morbidity 
such as asphyxia and meconium 
aspiration.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
806 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Popliteal
angle
−1
Physical Maturity
Skin
None
Full areola
5–10-mm
bud
Testes
descending,
few rugae
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
Score
Weeks
Maturity Rating
Majora
cover 
clitoris
and minora
Majora
large,
minora
small
Majora and
minora 
equally
prominent
Prominent
clitoris,
enlarging
 minora
Prominent
clitoris, small
labia minora
Clitoris
prominent,
labia flat
Testes
pendulous,
deep rugae
Testes
down, 
good
rugae
Testes in
upper canal,
rare rugae
Scrotum
empty,
faint rugae
Scrotum
flat, smooth
Thick
cartilage,
ear stiff
Formed and
firm instant
recoil
Well-curved
pinna; soft,
but
ready recoil
Slightly curved
pinna; soft,
slow recoil
Lids open,
pinna flat
stays folded
Lids fused
loosely: –1
Tightly: –2
Raised
areola
3–4-mm bud
Stippled
areola
1–2-mm bud
flat areola
no bud
barely
preceptible
Imperceptible
Leathery
cracked
wrinkled
Parchment
deep
cracking
no vessels
Cracking
pale areas
rare veins
Superficial
peeling
and/or rash,
few veins
Smooth pink,
visible veins
Gelatinous
red,
translucent
Mostly
bald
Bald areas
Thinning
Abundant
Sparse
Creases
over 
entire sole
Creases
anterior 2/3
Anterior
transverse
crease only
Faint
red marks
>50 mm
no crease
heel — toe
40–50 mm: –1
<40 mm: –2
Sticky
friable
transparent
Genitals
female
Genitals
male
Eye/ear
Breast
Plantar
surface
Lanugo
Neuromuscular Maturity
The New Ballard Score for Determining Gestational Age in Weeks
<90˚
90˚
100˚
120˚
140˚
160˚
180˚
90º−110˚
110º−140˚
140º−180˚
180º
0º
30º
45º
60º
90º
>90º
<90º
5
4
3
2
1
0
Heel to ear
Scarf sign
Arm recoil
Square
window
(wrist)
Posture
F I G U R E  1 8 - 6 .  The sum of the scores for all of the neuromuscular and physical maturity items provides an estimate of 
gestational age in weeks, using the maturity rating scale at the lower right potion of the ﬁgure. (Redrawn from Ballard JL, Khoury JC, Wedig K, 
et al. New Ballard Score, expanded to include extremely premature infants. J Pediatr. 1991;119:417.)
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
807
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
A useful classiﬁcation, shown below, is derived from the gestational age and birth 
weight on the intrauterine growth curve.
Newborn Classiﬁcations
Category
Abbreviation
Percentile
Small for gestational age
SGA
<10th
Appropriate for gestational age
AGA
10–90th
Large for gestational age
LGA
>90th
Figure 18-7 displays the intrauterine growth curves for the 10th and 90th per-
centiles and depicts the categories of maturity for newborns based on gestational 
age and birth weight.
25
27
29
31
33
35
37
39
41
43
45
5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
90%
10%
Birth Weight (kg)
Weeks of Gestation
Large for gestational age
Appropriate
for gestational age
Small for
gestational age
Premature
Term
Postmature
A
B
Intrauterine Growth Curves
F I G U R E  1 8 - 7 .  Level of intrauterine growth based on gestational age and birth 
weight of liveborn, single, white infants. Point A represents a premature infant; point 
B indicates an infant of similar birth weight who is mature but SGA. (Adapted from Sweet YA. 
Classiﬁcation of the low-birth-weight infant. In: Klaus MH, Fanaroff AA. Care of the High-Risk Neonate, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: 
WB Saunders; 1986. Reproduced with permission.)
LGA infants may experience difficul-
ties during birth. Infants of mothers 
with diabetes are often LGA and may 
have metabolic abnormalities shortly 
after birth, as well as congenital 
anomalies.
A common complication among LGA 
newborns is hypoglycemia, which can 
result in jitteriness, irritability, cyanosis, 
or other health issues.
While no etiology is noted for many 
SGA infants, known causes include 
fetal, placental, and maternal factors. 
Maternal smoking is associated with 
SGA newborns.
The three babies shown in Figure 18-8 were all born at 32 weeks gestational age 
and weighed 600 g (SGA), 1,400 g (AGA), and 2,750 g (LGA). Each of these 
categories has a different mortality rate, highest for preterm SGA and LGA 
infants, and lowest for term AGA infants.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Preterm AGA infants are more prone to 
respiratory distress syndrome, apnea, 
patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) with 
left-to-right shunt, and infection. Pre-
term SGA infants are more likely to 
experience asphyxia, hypoglycemia, 
and hypocalcemia. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
808 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
F I G U R E  1 8 - 8 .  Infants who are small, average, and large for their gestational age.
(Reprinted with permission from Korones SB: High-Risk Newborn Infants: The Basis for Intensive Nursing Care, 4th ed. St. Louis: 
CV Mosby; 1986.)
Assessment Several Hours After Birth
During the ﬁrst day of life, newborns should have a comprehensive examination. 
Wait until 1 or 2 hours after a feeding, when the baby is most responsive, and ask the 
parents to remain in the room. Follow the sequence shown on pp. 803–807. See 
Techniques of Examination (p. 813) for details on examining newborns and infants.
Observe the undressed newborn. Note the newborn’s color, size, body propor-
tions, nutritional status, and posture, as well as respirations and movements of 
the head and extremities. Most normal, full-term newborns lie in a symmetric 
position, with the limbs semiﬂexed and the legs partially abducted at the hip.
Note the baby’s spontaneous motor activity with ﬂexion and extension alternat-
ing between the arms and legs. The ﬁngers are usually ﬂexed in a tight ﬁst, but 
may extend in slow athetoid posturing movements. You will observe brief trem-
ors of the body and extremities during vigorous crying, and even at rest.
Studies by Dr. T. Berry Brazelton and others have demonstrated the wide range 
of abilities in newborns which are described below.11 Parents will be delighted 
by these abilities.
In breech babies (buttock first), the 
knees are flexed in utero; in a frank 
breech baby, the knees are extended 
in utero. In both, the hips are flexed. 
By 4 days after birth, tremors at rest 
signal central nervous system disease 
from various possible causes, ranging 
from asphyxia to drug withdrawal. 
Asymmetric movements of the arms  
or legs at any time suggest central or 
peripheral neurologic deficits, birth injury 
(such as a fractured clavicle or brachial 
plexus injury), or congenital anomalies. 
Newborns who do not demonstrate 
these behaviors may have a neuro-
logic condition, drug withdrawal, or a 
serious illness such as infection. 
What a Newborn Can Do
Core Elements11
● Newborns use all ﬁve senses. For example, they will look at human faces and 
turn to a parent’s voice.
● Newborns are unique individuals. Marked diﬀerences exist in temperaments, 
personality, behavior, and learning.
● Newborns interact dynamically with caregivers—a two-way street!
(continued )
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
809
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
ASSESSING THE INFANT
Development
Physical Development. Physical growth during infancy is faster than at 
any other age.12 By 1 year, the infant’s birth weight should have tripled and 
height increased by 50% from weight and height at birth.
Newborns have surprising abilities, such as ﬁxing upon and following human 
faces. Neurologic development progresses centrally to peripherally. Thus, new-
borns learn head control before trunk control and use of arms and legs before 
use of hands and ﬁngers (Fig. 18-9).
Activity, exploration, and environmental manipulation contribute to learning. By 
3 months, normal infants lift the head and clasp the hands. By 6 months, they roll 
over, reach for objects, turn to voices, and possibly sit with support. With increas-
ing peripheral coordination, infants reach for objects, transfer them from hand to 
hand, crawl, stand by holding on, and play with objects by banging and grabbing. 
At 1 year a child may be standing and putting objects in the mouth (Fig. 18-10).13
Cognitive and Language Development. Exploration fosters increased 
understanding of self and environment. Infants learn cause and effect (e.g., shaking 
a rattle produces sound), object permanence, and use of tools. By 9 months, they 
may recognize the examiner as a stranger deserving wary cooperation, seek comfort 
from parents during examinations, and actively manipulate reachable objects (e.g., 
your stethoscope). Language development proceeds from cooing at 2 months, to 
babbling at 6 months, to saying one to three words by 1 year.14
Social and Emotional Development. Understanding of self and 
family also matures. Social tasks include bonding, attachment to caregivers, and 
trust that caregivers will meet their needs (Fig. 18-11). Temperaments vary. 
Some infants are predictable, adaptable, and respond positively to new stimuli; 
others are less so and respond intensely or negatively. Because environment 
affects social development, observe the infant’s interactions with caregivers.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 9 .  Sitting up is a 
developmental milestone among 
infants.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 1 0 .  Children often 
take their ﬁrst steps after one year.
What a Newborn Can Do (continued )
Examples of Complex Newborn Behavior
Habituation
Ability to selectively and progressively shut out negative 
stimuli (e.g., a repetitive sound)
Attachment
A reciprocal, dynamic process of interacting and bonding 
with the caregiver
State regulation
Ability to modulate the level of arousal in response to dif-
ferent degrees of stimulation (e.g., self-consoling)
Perception
Ability to regard faces, turn to voices, quiet in presence of 
singing, track colorful objects, respond to touch, and 
recognize familiar scents
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
810 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Start with the infant sitting or lying in 
the parent’s lap (Fig. 18-12). If the infant 
is tired, hungry, or ill, ask the parent to 
hold the baby against the parent’s chest. 
Make sure appropriate toys, a blanket, 
or other familiar objects are nearby. A 
hungry infant may need to be fed before 
you initiate the examination.
Close observation of an awake infant sitting on the parent’s lap can reveal 
potential abnormalities such as hypotonia or hypertonia, conditions with abnor-
mal skin color, jaundice or cyanosis, jitteriness, or respiratory problems.
If you cannot distract the infant or 
engage the awake infant with an 
object, your face, or a sound, consider 
a possible visual or hearing deficit. 
Tips for Examining Infants
● Approach the infant gradually, using a toy or object for distraction.
● Perform as much of the examination as possible with the infant in the parent’s lap.
● Speak softly to the infant or mimic the infant’s sounds to attract attention.
● If the infant is cranky, make sure he or she is well fed before proceeding.
● Ask a parent about the infant’s strengths to elicit useful developmental and 
parenting information.
● Don’t expect to do a head-to-toe examination in a speciﬁc order. Work with 
what the infant gives you and save the mouth and ear examination for last.
General Guidelines
Use developmentally appropriate methods such as distraction and play to exam-
ine the infant. Because infants pay attention to one thing at a time, it is relatively 
easy to distract the infant from the examination as it is performed. You can use a 
moving object, a ﬂashing light, a game of peek-a-boo (for older infants), tickling, 
or any sort of noise.
Fixes/follows
Focuses
Responds
to sounds
Coos
Smiles
Works for toy
Uses spoon
Indicates wants
Feeds self
Regards face
Squeals
Laughs
Babbles
Dada/Mama
specific
2 words
3 words
Head control
Grasps rattle
Crawls
Rolls over
Sits
Pulls to stand
Walks
Physical
Birth
1 m
2 m
3 m
4 m
5 m
6 m
7 m
8 m
9 m
10 m
11 m
12 m
Developmental Milestones During Infancy13
Cognitive/
Language
Social/
Emotional
Waves and
plays peek-a-boo
F I G U R E  1 8 - 1 1 .  Developmental milestones during infancy.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 1 2 .  Start the exam 
while the child is still on the parent’s lap.
Many neurologic conditions can be 
diagnosed during this general part of 
the examination. For example, you 
can detect hypotonia, conditions 
associated with irritability or signs of 
cerebral palsy (see neurologic 
examination below). 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
811
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Observe parent–infant interactions. Watch the parent’s affect when talking about 
the infant. Note the parent’s manner of holding, moving, dressing, and comfort-
ing the infant. Assess and comment on positive interactions, such as the obvious 
pride in the mother’s face in Figure 18-13.
Infants do not object to having their clothing removed. To keep yourself and 
your surroundings dry, it is wise to leave the diaper in place throughout the 
examination; remove it only to examine the genitals, rectum, and hips.
Testing for Developmental 
Milestones. Because you want to 
measure the infant’s best performance, 
check milestones at the end of the 
interview, just before the examination. 
This “fun and games” interlude also 
enhances cooperation during the 
examination. Experienced clinicians can 
weave the developmental examination 
into the other parts of the examination. 
The table on p. 810 shows some key 
physical or motor, cognitive or language, and social–emotional milestones during 
the ﬁrst year. As an example, the infant in Figure 18-13 can squeal and laugh and 
interact with the examiner.
The AAP recommends that health care providers use a standardized develop-
mental screening instrument for infants as young as several months of age.15 
Several developmental screening instruments have been tested widely and vali-
dated in many nations. In general, these instruments assess ﬁve critical domains 
of infant/child development: gross motor, ﬁne motor, cognitive (or problem-solving), 
communication, and personal/social domains of development. Pediatric health care 
providers are recommended to use these standardized instruments periodically 
during preventive health visits because they perform better than a clinician’s 
physical examination in identifying developmental delays, which can often be 
subtle and challenging to determine because of the wide spectrum of normal 
development in children. These screening instruments are practical to use in 
clinical settings and have reasonable sensitivity and speciﬁcity for identifying 
developmental delays. Some useful developmental screening instruments 
include the Ages and Stages Questionnaire (ASQ), the Early Language Milestone 
Scale (ELM Scale-2), the Modiﬁed Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (MCHAT), 
and the Parents’ Evaluation of Developmental Status (PEDS). Combined with 
your ﬁndings on interview and physical examination, results from these screen-
ing tests can help determine an appropriate management strategy.
Use these screening instruments as adjuncts to a comprehensive developmental 
examination. Suspected delays warrant further examination. For babies born 
prematurely, adjust expected developmental milestones for the gestational age up to 
24 months.
Observation of the infant’s communi-
cation with the parent can reveal 
abnormalities such as developmental 
delay, language delay, hearing deficits, 
or inadequate parental attachment. 
Likewise, such observations may iden-
tify maladaptive nurturing patterns 
that may stem from maternal depres-
sion or inadequate social support. 
F I G U R E  1 8 - 1 3 .  Children can have 
fun during the developmental exam.
Many disorders cause delays in more 
than one milestone. For most children 
with developmental delay, the causes 
are unknown. Some known causes 
include abnormality in embryonic devel-
opment (e.g., prenatal insult); hereditary 
and genetic disorders (e.g., inborn errors, 
genetic abnormalities); environmental 
and social problems (e.g., insufficient 
stimulation); pregnancy or perinatal 
problems (e.g., placental insufficiency, 
prematurity); and childhood diseases 
(e.g., infection, trauma, chronic illness). 
If a cooperative infant fails items on a 
standardized screening instrument, 
developmental delay is possible, 
necessitating more precise testing 
and evaluation.
An infant or toddler who has develop-
mental skills that plateau or are out of 
sequence may have autism or cerebral 
palsy.
As an example, an infant who was born  
8 weeks prematurely at 32-week gestation 
will have abnormal findings on develop-
mental screening if expected milestones 
are not adjusted for prematurity. At a visit 
at 12 months of age, the infant should be 
expected to have attained milestones 
appropriate for a 10-month old. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
812 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
The AAP and the group Bright Futures4 recommend health supervision visits for 
infants at the following ages: at birth, at 3 to 5 days, by 1 month, and at 2, 4, 6, 
9, and 12 months (Fig. 18-14). This is called the Infant Periodicity Schedule. 
Health supervision visits provide opportunities to answer questions for parents, 
assess the infant’s growth and development, perform a comprehensive physical 
examination, and provide anticipatory guidance. Age-appropriate anticipatory 
guidance includes healthy habits and behaviors, social competence of caregivers, 
parenting techniques, family relationships, and community interactions.
Regular visits provide an opportunity to plot a course for healthy and successful 
development. That infants generally are well during these visits enhances the 
quality of the experience. Parents are usually receptive to suggestions about 
health promotion which can have major, long-term inﬂuences on the child and 
family. Strong interviewing skills are necessary as you discuss strategies to opti-
mize the health and well-being of their infants. Adjust the content to the appro-
priate developmental level of the infant. As an exercise, review the critical 
components of a health supervision visit for a 6-month-old.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 1 4 .  Regular health 
supervision serves many purposes.
Components of a Health Supervision Visit for a 6-Month-Old
Discussions with Parents
● Address parents’ concerns/questions
● Provide advice
● Obtain social history
● Assess development, nutrition, 
sleep, elimination, safety, oral 
health, family relationships, 
stressors, parenting beliefs, 
community factors
Developmental Assessment
● Use a standardized developmental 
instrument to measure milestones
● Assess milestones by history
● Assess milestones by examination
Physical Examination
● Perform a careful examination, 
including growth parameters with 
percentiles for age
Screening Tests
● Vision and hearing (by examination), 
possibly hematocrit and lead (if 
high risk), screen for social risk 
factors
Immunizations
● See schedule (AAP or CDC website)
Anticipatory Guidance
Healthy Habits and Behaviors
● Injury and illness prevention
Use infant seat, watch for rolling, 
caution on walkers, poisons, 
tobacco exposure
● Nutrition
Breastfeeding or bottle, solids, no 
juice, prevent choking, overfeeding
● Oral health
No bottle in bed, ﬂuoride, brushing 
teeth
Parent–Infant Interaction
● Promoting development (play, 
reading, music, talking)
Family Relationships
● Time for self; babysitters
Community Interaction
● Child care, resources
Health Promotion and 
Counseling: Evidence and 
Recommendations
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
813
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
General Survey and Vital Signs
Measure the infant’s body size and vital signs. Tables on the World Health 
Organization website (www.who.int) show norms for blood pressure, height, 
weight, BMI (starting age 2 years), and head circumference. Compare vital signs 
or body proportions with age-speciﬁc norms because they change dramatically as 
children grow. Pediatric practitioners also assess pain regularly, using standardized 
pain scales.
Somatic Growth. Measurement of growth is one of the most important 
indicators of infant health. Deviations may provide an early indication of an 
underlying problem. Compare growth parameters with respect to normal values 
for age and sex, as well as prior readings on the same child, to assess trends. 
Conﬁrm abnormalities in somatic growth by repeat measurement to account for 
potential measurement error.
Measure growth parameters carefully using consistent technique and, optimally, 
the same scales to measure height and weight.
The most important tools for assessing somatic growth are the growth charts 
which are published by the National Center for Health Statistics (www.cdc.
gov/nchsv)16 and also the World Health Organization (www.who.int).17 All 
charts include height, weight, and head circumference for children up to 
36 months and height and weight for children 2 to 18 years. Charts plotting 
weight by length as well as BMI are also available. These growth charts have 
percentile lines indicating the percentage of normal children above and below 
the child’s measurement by chronologic age. Special growth charts are available 
for use in infants born prematurely to correct for this result.
The AAP, NIH, and CDC now recommend that clinicians use the 2006 WHO Inter-
national growth charts for children 0 to 23 months of age. CDC growth charts 
should be used in the United States to assess growth in children 2 to 19 years of age.
Length. For children younger 
than age 2 years, measure body length 
by placing the child supine on a mea-
suring board or in a measuring tray, as 
shown in Figure 18-15. Direct mea-
surement of the infant using a tape mea-
sure is inaccurate unless an assistant 
holds the child still with hips and knees 
extended. Velocity growth curves are 
helpful for older children, especially 
those who are suspected of having 
endocrine disorders.
Variations beyond two standard devi-
ations for age or above the 95th per-
centile or below the 5th percentile are 
indications for more detailed evalua-
tion. These deviations may be the first 
and only indicators of disease (see 
examples on the website tables). 
Although many healthy infants cross 
percentiles on growth charts, a 
sudden or significant change in 
growth may indicate systemic disease 
due to various possible organ systems 
or inappropriate excess weight gain 
usually due to overfeeding. 
Abnormalities that can cause devia-
tion from normal growth patterns 
include chronic disease or prematurity. 
Growth charts are also available for 
children with specific conditions such 
as Down syndrome or Turner syndrome. 
F I G U R E  1 8 - 1 5 .
Accurate length 
measurement requires careful assistance.
Reduced growth velocity, shown by a 
drop in height percentile on a growth 
curve, may signify a chronic condi-
tion. Comparison with normal stan-
dards is essential because growth 
velocity is normally less during the 
second year than during the first year.
Chronic conditions causing reduced 
length or height include neurologic, 
renal, cardiac, gastrointestinal, and 
endocrine disorders as well as cystic 
fibrosis.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Techniques of Examination
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
814 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Weight. Weigh infants directly with an infant scale. Infants should be 
weighed naked or be clothed only in a diaper.
Head Circumference. The head 
circumference should always be mea-
sured during the ﬁrst 2 years of life, 
but measurement can be useful at 
any age to assess growth of the head 
(Fig. 18-16). The head circumference 
in infants reﬂects the rate of growth of 
the cranium and the brain.
Vital Signs
Blood Pressure. Although obtain-
ing accurate blood pressure readings in 
infants is challenging  (Fig. 18-17), this 
measurement is nevertheless important 
for some high-risk infants and should 
be routinely performed after age 3 years. 
You will need your skills in distraction 
or play.
An alternative to using the blood pressure cuff, and the most easily used measure 
of systolic blood pressure in infants, is the Doppler method which detects arterial 
blood ﬂow vibrations, converts them to systolic blood pressure levels, and trans-
mits them to a digital read-out device.
Systolic blood pressure gradually increases throughout childhood. For example, 
normal systolic pressure in males is about 70 mm Hg at birth, 85 mm Hg at 
1 month, and 90 mm Hg at 6 months (see WHO or CDC website).
Failure to thrive is inadequate weight 
gain for age. Common indicators are: 
(a) growth <5th percentile for age; 
(b) drop >2 quartiles in 6 months; or 
(c) weight for length <5th percentile. 
Causes include environmental or psy-
chosocial factors and a variety of gas-
trointestinal, neurologic, cardiac, 
endocrine, renal, and other diseases.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 1 6 .  Head circumference 
is a vital metric during early childhood.
A small head size may result from  
premature closure of the sutures or 
microcephaly, which may be familial 
or due to chromosomal abnormalities, 
congenital infections, maternal meta-
bolic disorders, and neurologic insults.
An abnormally large head size (>95th 
percentile or 2 standard deviations 
above the mean) is macrocephaly, 
which may result from hydrocephalus, 
subdural hematoma, or rare causes like 
brain tumor or inherited syndromes. 
Familial megaloencephaly (large head) 
is a benign familial condition.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 1 7 .  Practice is 
required to accurately measure blood 
pressure in early childhood.
Causes of sustained hypertension in 
newborns include renal artery disease 
(stenosis, thrombosis), congenital renal 
malformations, and coarctation of the 
aorta.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
815
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Pulse. The heart rate of infants is more sensitive to the effects of illness, 
exercise, and emotion than that of adults.
While sinus tachycardia may be 
extremely rapid, a pulse rate that is 
too rapid to count (usually >180/min) 
may indicate paroxysmal supraventric-
ular tachycardia (PSVT).
Bradycardia may be from drug inges-
tion, hypoxia, intracranial or neuro-
logic conditions, or, rarely, cardiac 
dysrhythmia such as heart blockage.
Heart Rates from Birth to 1 Year
Age
Average Heart Rate
Range
Birth–1 mo
140
90–190
1–6 mo
130
80–180
6–12 mo
115
75–155
You may have trouble obtaining an accurate pulse rate in a squirming infant. 
Palpate the femoral arteries in the inguinal area or the brachial arteries in the 
antecubital fossa, or auscultate the heart.
Respiratory Rate. As with heart rate, the respiratory rate in infants has a 
greater range and is more responsive to illness, exercise, and emotion than that 
of adults or older children. The rate of respirations per minute ranges between 
30 and 60 in the newborn.
The respiratory rate may vary considerably from moment to moment in the 
newborn, with alternating periods of rapid and slow breathing (called “peri-
odic breathing”). The sleeping respiratory rate is most reliable. Respiratory rates 
during active sleep compared with quiet sleep may be up to 10 breaths per min-
ute faster. The respiratory pattern should be observed for at least 60 seconds to 
asses both the rate and the pattern. In infancy and early childhood, diaphrag-
matic breathing is predominant; thoracic excursion is minimal.
Commonly accepted cutoffs for deﬁning tachypnea are >60/min from birth to 
2 months, and >50/min from 2 to 12 months.
Temperature. Because 
fever is so common in infants 
and children, obtain an accu-
rate body temperature when 
you suspect infection. Axil-
lary and thermal-tape skin 
temperature recordings in 
infants and children are inac-
curate. Auditory canal tem-
peratures are accurate.
Rectal temperatures are the 
most accurate for infants. 
The technique for obtaining a 
rectal temperature is relatively simple. One method is illustrated in Figure 18-18. 
Place the infant prone, separate the buttocks with the thumb and foreﬁnger on one 
Extremely rapid and shallow respira-
tory rates are seen in newborns with 
cyanotic cardiac disease and right-to-
left shunting, and metabolic acidosis. 
Fever can raise respiratory rates in 
infants by up to 10 respirations per 
minute for each degree centigrade  
of fever. 
Tachypnea and increased respiratory 
effort in an infant are signs of lower 
respiratory disease such as bronchiol-
itis or pneumonia. 
Fever (>38°C or >100.4°F) in infants 
younger than age 2 to 3 months may 
be a sign of serious infection or dis-
ease. These infants should be evalu-
ated promptly and thoroughly. 
F I G U R E  1 8 - 1 8 .  Rectal thermometers are the 
most accurate tool for infants.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Potentially sick febrile infants under  
3 months of age may have serious 
bacterial infection and should have 
temperatures assessed using a rectal 
thermometer.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
816 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
hand and with the other hand gently insert a well-lubricated rectal thermometer to 
a depth of 2 to 3 cm. Keep the thermometer in place for at least 2 minutes.
Body temperature in infants and children is less constant than in adults. The 
average rectal temperature is higher in infancy and early childhood, usually 
above 99°F (37.2°C) until after age 3 years. Body temperature may ﬂuctuate as 
much as 3°F during a single day, approaching 101°F (38.3°C) in normal chil-
dren, particularly in late afternoon and after vigorous activity.
The Skin
Inspection. Examine the skin of the newborn or infant carefully to identify 
both normal markings and potentially abnormal ones. The photos on pp. 818–820 
demonstrate normal markings. The newborn’s skin has a unique characteristic 
texture and appearance. The texture is soft and smooth because it is thinner than 
the skin of older children. Within the ﬁrst 10 minutes after birth a normal new-
born progresses from generalized cyanosis to pinkness. In lighter-skinned 
infants, an erythematous ﬂush, giving the skin the appearance of a “boiled lob-
ster,” is common during the ﬁrst 8 to 24 hours after which the normal pale pink 
coloring predominates.
Vasomotor changes in the dermis and subcutaneous tissue—a response to cool-
ing or chronic exposure to radiant heat—can produce a lattice-like, bluish mot-
tled appearance (cutis marmorata), particularly on the trunk, arms, and legs. This 
response to cold may last for months in normal infants. Acrocyanosis, a blue cast 
to the hands and feet when exposed to cold (see p. 818), is very common in 
newborns for the ﬁrst few days and may recur throughout early infancy. Occa-
sionally in newborns, a remarkable color change (harlequin dyschromia) appears 
with transient cyanosis of one half of the body or one extremity, presumably from 
temporary vascular instability.
The amount of melanin in the skin of newborns varies, affecting pigmentation. 
Black newborns may have a lighter skin color initially, except in the nail beds, 
genitalia, and ear folds which are dark at birth. A dark or bluish pigmentation 
over the buttocks and lower lumbar regions is common in newborns of African, 
Asian, and Mediterranean descent. These areas, called slate blue patches, result 
from pigmented cells in the deep layers of the skin; they become less noticeable 
with age and usually disappear during childhood. Document these pigmented areas 
to avoid later concern about bruising.
At birth, there is a ﬁne, downy growth of hair called lanugo over the entire body, 
especially the shoulders and back. This hair is shed within the ﬁrst few weeks. 
Lanugo is prominent in premature infants. Hair thickness on the head varies 
considerably among newborns and is not predictive of later hair growth. All of 
Anxiety may elevate the body temper-
ature of children. Excessive bundling of 
infants may elevate skin temperature 
but not core temperature.
Temperature instability in a newborn 
may result from sepsis, metabolic 
abnormality, or other serious condi-
tions. Older infants rarely manifest 
temperature instability.
Some newborns with polycythemia 
have a “ruddy” complexion. This is a 
reddish purple color. 
Cutis marmorata is prominent in 
premature infants and in infants with 
congenital hypothyroidism and Down 
syndrome. If acrocyanosis does not 
disappear within 8 hours or with 
warming, cyanotic congenital heart 
disease should be considered. 
Central cyanosis in a baby or child of 
any age should raise suspicion of con-
genital heart disease. The best area to 
look for central cyanosis is the tongue 
and oral mucosa, not the nail beds, 
lips, or the extremities. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Pigmented light-brown lesions (<1 to 
2 cm at birth) are café-au-lait spots. 
 Isolated lesions have no significance, 
but multiple lesions with sharp borders 
may suggest neurofibromatosis (see 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
817
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
the original hair is shed within months and is replaced with a new crop, some-
times of a different color.
Inspect the newborn closely for a series of common skin conditions. At birth, a 
cheesy white material called vernix caseosa, composed of sebum and desquamated 
epithelial cells, covers the body. Some newborns have edema over their hands, 
feet, lower legs, pubis, and sacrum; this disappears within a few days. Superﬁcial 
desquamation of the skin is often noticeable 24 to 36 hours after birth, particu-
larly in postterm babies (>40 weeks gestation), and it can last for 7 to 10 days.
You should be able to identify four common dermatologic conditions in new-
borns—miliaria rubra, erythema toxicum, pustular melanosis, and milia—which 
are shown on p. 819. None of these is clinically signiﬁcant.
Note any signs of trauma from the birth process and the use of forceps or suction; 
these signs disappear but should prompt a careful neurologic examination.
Jaundice. Carefully examine and touch the newborn’s skin to assess 
the level of jaundice. Normal “physiologic” jaundice, which occurs in half 
of all newborns, appears on the second or third day, peaks at about the ﬁfth 
day, and usually disappears within a week (although it may persist longer 
in breast-fed infants). Jaundice is best seen in natural daylight rather than 
artiﬁcial light. Newborn jaundice appears to progress from head to toe, with 
more intense jaundice on the upper body and less intense yellow color in 
the lower extremities.
To detect jaundice, apply pressure to the skin (Fig. 18-19) to press out the nor-
mal pink or brown color. A yellowish “blanching” indicates jaundice.
Table 18-2, Common Skin Rashes and 
Skin Findings in Newborns and Infants, 
p. 911). 
F I G U R E  1 8 - 1 9 .  Pressing the red color from the skin allows better recognition 
of the yellow of normal skin (left) or jaundice (right). (From Fletcher M. Physical Diagnosis in 
Neonatology. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-Raven; 1998.)
Skin desquamation is normal in full-
term newborns but may rarely be a 
sign of placental circulatory insuffi-
ciency or congenital ichthyosis. 
Both erythema toxicum and pustular 
melanosis may appear similar to the 
pathologic vesiculopustular rash of 
herpes simplex or Staphylococcus 
aureus skin infection. 
Midline hair tufts over the lumbosa-
cral spine region suggest a possible 
spinal cord defect. 
Jaundice within the first 24 hours of 
birth may be from hemolytic disease of 
the newborn.
Late-appearing jaundice or jaundice 
that persists beyond 2 to 3 weeks 
should raise suspicions of biliary 
obstruction or liver disease.
A common source of jaundice during 
the first couple of weeks is breast-
feeding jaundice, which resolves 
around 10 to 14 days of life. Persistent 
jaundice requires evaluation. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
818 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Vascular Markings. A common vascular marking is the “salmon patch” 
(also known as nevus simplex, “ﬂame nevi,” telangiectatic nevus, or capillary 
hemangioma). These ﬂat, irregular, light pink patches (see p. 819) are most of-
ten seen on the nape of the neck (“stork bite”), upper eyelids, forehead, or upper 
lip (“angel kisses”). They are not true nevi, but result from distended capillaries. 
They often disappear by 1 year of age and are covered by the hairline.
Palpation. Palpate the newborn or infant’s skin to assess the degree of hydra-
tion, or turgor. Roll a fold of loosely adherent skin on the abdominal wall 
between your thumb and foreﬁnger to determine its consistency. The skin in 
well-hydrated infants returns to its normal position immediately upon release. 
Delay in return is a phenomenon called “tenting” and usually occurs in children 
with signiﬁcant dehydration.
A unilateral dark, purplish lesion, or 
“port wine stain” over the distribution 
of the ophthalmic branch of the tri-
geminal nerve may be a sign of 
Sturge–Weber syndrome, which is 
associated with seizures, hemiparesis, 
glaucoma, and mental retardation. 
Significant edema of the hands and 
feet of a newborn girl may be sugges-
tive of Turner syndrome. Other fea-
tures such as a webbed neck would 
reinforce this diagnosis.
Dehydration is a common problem in 
infants. Usual causes are insufficient 
intake or excess loss of fluids from 
diarrhea.
Newborn Skin Findings
Finding/Description
Finding/Description
Common Nonpathologic Conditions
Acrocyanosis
This bluish discoloration usually appears in the palms and 
soles. Cyanotic congenital heart disease can present with severe 
acrocyanosis.
Jaundice
Physiologic jaundice occurs during days 2 to 5 of life and pro-
gresses from head to toe as it peaks. Extreme jaundice may 
signify a hemolytic process or biliary or liver disease.
(continued )
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
819
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Newborn Skin Findings (continued )
Finding/Description
Finding/Description
Common Benign Rashes
Miliaria Rubra
Scattered vesicles on an erythematous base, usually on the face 
and trunk, result from obstruction of the sweat gland ducts; this 
condition disappears spontaneously within weeks.
Erythema Toxicum
Usually appearing on days 2 to 3 of life, this rash consists of 
erythematous macules with central pinpoint vesicles scat-
tered diﬀusely over the entire body. They appear similar to 
ﬂea bites. These lesions are of unknown etiology but disap-
pear within 1 week of birth.
Pustular Melanosis
Seen more commonly in black infants, the rash presents at 
birth as small vesiculopustules over a brown macular base; 
these can last for several months.
Milia
Pinhead-sized smooth white raised areas without surrounding 
erythema on the nose (seen here), chin, and forehead result from 
retention of sebum in the openings of the sebaceous glands. 
Although occasionally present at birth, milia usually appear 
within the ﬁrst few weeks and disappears over several weeks.
Benign Birthmarks
Eyelid Patch
This birthmark fades, usually within the ﬁrst year of life.
 
Salmon Patch
Also called the “stork bite,” or “angel kiss,” this splotchy pink 
mark fades with age.
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
820 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The Head
At birth, a baby’s head may seem large relative to the body. A newborn’s head 
accounts for one fourth of the body length and one third of the body weight; 
these proportions change, so that by adulthood the head accounts for one eighth 
of the body length and about one tenth of the body weight.
Sutures and Fontanelles. Membranous tissue spaces called sutures separate 
the bones of the skull from one another. The areas where the major sutures inter-
sect in the anterior and posterior portions of the skull are known as fontanelles. 
Examine the sutures and fontanelles carefully (Fig. 18-20).
On palpation, the sutures feel like ridges and the fontanelles like soft concavi-
ties. The anterior fontanelle at birth measures 4 to 6 cm in diameter and usually 
closes between 2 and 26 months of age (90% between 7 and 19 months). The 
posterior fontanelle measures 1 to 2 cm at birth and usually closes by 2 months.
Newborn Skin Findings (continued )
Finding/Description
Finding/Description
Café-au-lait Spots
These light-brown pigmented lesions usually have borders and 
are uniform. They are noted in more than 10% of black infants. If 
more than ﬁve café-au-lait spots exist, consider the diagnosis of neu-
roﬁbromatosis (see Table 18-2, Common Skin Rashes and Skin Find-
ings in Newborns and Infants, p. 911).
Slate Blue Patches
These are more common among dark-skinned babies. It is 
important to note them so that they are not mistaken for 
bruises.
An enlarged posterior fontanelle may be 
present in congenital hypothyroidism.
Overlap of the cranial bones at the 
sutures at birth, called molding, results 
from passage of the head through the 
birth canal; it disappears within 2 days.
A bulging, tense fontanelle is 
observed in infants with increased 
intracranial pressure, which may be 
caused by central nervous system infec-
tions, neoplastic disease, or hydroceph-
alus (obstruction of the circulation of 
cerebrospinal fluid within the ventri-
cles of the brain) (see Table 18-5, 
Abnormalities of the Head, p. 913).
Early closure of the fontanelles can be 
due to developing microcephaly or to 
craniosynostosis or some metabolic 
abnormalities.
Delayed closure of the fontanelles is 
usually a normal variant, but can be 
due to hypothyroidism, megaloceph-
aly, increased intracranial pressure, or 
rickets.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
821
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Carefully examine the fontanelle, because its fullness reﬂects intracranial pres-
sure. Palpate the fontanelle while the baby is sitting quietly or being held upright. 
Clinicians often palpate the fontanelles at the beginning of the examination. In 
normal infants, the anterior fontanelle is soft and ﬂat. A full anterior fontanelle 
with increased intracranial pressure is seen when a baby cries or vomits. Pulsa-
tions of the fontanelle reﬂect the peripheral pulse and are normal (and parents 
often inquire about them). Learn to palpate the fontanelle because a bulging 
fontanelle is concerning for increased intracranial pressure and a depressed 
fontanelle may suggest dehydration.
Inspect the scalp veins carefully to assess for dilatation.
Skull Symmetry and Head Cir-
cumference. Carefully assess skull 
symmetry (Fig. 18-21). Various conditions 
can cause asymmetry; some are benign, 
while others reﬂect underlying pathology.
Look for asymmetric head swelling. A 
newborn’s scalp may be swollen over the 
occipitoparietal region. This is called 
caput succedaneum and results from cap-
illary distention and extravasation of 
blood and ﬂuid resulting from the vac-
uum effect of rupture of the amniotic 
sac. This swelling typically crosses suture 
lines and resolves in 1 to 2 days.
The premature infant’s head at birth is relatively long in the occipitofrontal diam-
eter and narrow in the bitemporal diameter (dolichocephaly). Usually, the skull 
shape normalizes within 1 to 2 years.
Anterior fontanelle
Posterior fontanelle
Lambdoidal suture
Sagittal
suture
Coronal
suture
Metopic
suture
F I G U R E  1 8 - 2 0 .  Sutures and fontanelles.
A depressed anterior fontanelle may 
be a sign of dehydration. 
Dilated scalp veins are indicative of long-
standing increased intracranial pressure. 
F I G U R E  1 8 - 2 1 .  Skull shape and 
symmetry should be assessed.
A common type of localized swelling 
of the scalp is a cephalohematoma, 
caused by subperiosteal hemorrhage 
from the trauma of birth. This swelling 
does not cross over suture lines and 
resolves within 3 weeks. As the hem-
orrhage resolves and calcifies, there 
may be a palpable bony rim with a 
soft center (see Table 18-5, Abnormal-
ities of the Head, p. 913). 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
822 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Pick up the infant and examine the skull shape from behind. Asymmetry of the 
cranial vault (positional plagiocephaly) occurs when an infant lies mostly on one 
side, resulting in a ﬂattening of the parieto-occipital region on the dependent 
side and a prominence of the frontal region on the ipsilateral side. It disappears 
as the baby becomes more active and spends less time in one position, and sym-
metry is almost always restored. Interestingly, the current trend to have newborns 
sleep on their backs to reduce the risk for sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) 
has resulted in more cases of positional plagiocephaly (Fig. 18-22). This condition 
can be prevented by frequent repositioning (providing “tummy time” when the 
infant is awake).
Measure the head circumference (p. 814) to detect abnormally large head size 
(macrocephaly) or small head size (microcephaly), both of which may signify an 
underlying disorder affecting the brain.
Palpate along the suture lines. A raised, bony ridge at a suture line suggests cra-
niosynostosis.
Palpate the infant’s skull with care. The cranial bones generally appear “soft” or 
pliable; they will normally become ﬁrmer with increasing gestational age.
Facial Symmetry. Check the face of infants for symmetry. In utero position-
ing may result in transient facial asymmetries. If the head is ﬂexed on the ster-
num, a shortened chin (micrognathia) may result. Pressure of the shoulder on the 
jaw may create a temporary lateral displacement of the mandible.
Examine the face for an overall impression of the facies; it is helpful to compare 
with the face of the parents. A systematic assessment of a child with abnormal-
appearing facies can identify speciﬁc syndromes.18 The box on the next page 
describes steps for evaluating facies.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 2 2 .  Careful 
assessment may reveal plagiocephaly.
Plagiocephaly may also reflect pathol-
ogy such as torticollis from injury to 
the sternocleidomastoid muscle at 
birth or lack of stimulation of the 
infant. 
Premature closure of cranial sutures 
causes craniosynostosis (p. 913) and 
an abnormally shaped skull. Sagittal 
suture synostosis causes a narrow 
head from lack of growth of the 
 parietal bones. 
In craniotabes, the cranial bones feel 
springy. Craniotabes can result from 
increased intracranial pressure, as 
with hydrocephaly, metabolic distur-
bances such as rickets, and infection 
such as congenital syphilis. 
Micrognathia may also be part of a 
syndrome, such as the Pierre Robin 
syndrome. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
823
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Chvostek Sign. Percuss the cheek to check for Chvostek sign, which is present 
in some metabolic disturbances and occasionally in normal infants. Percuss at 
the top of the cheek just below the zygomatic bone in front of the ear, using the 
tip of your index or middle ﬁnger.
The Eyes
Inspection. Newborns keep their eyes closed except during brief awake peri-
ods. If you attempt to separate their eyelids, they will tighten them even more. 
Bright light causes infants to blink, so use subdued lighting. Awaken the baby 
gently and support the baby in a sitting position; often the eyes open.
To examine the eyes of infants and young children, use some tricks to encourage 
cooperation. Small colorful toys are useful as ﬁxation devices in examining the 
eyes.
Evaluating a Newborn or Child with  
Possible Abnormal Facies
Carefully review the history, especially:
● Family history
● Pregnancy
● Perinatal history
Note abnormalities on other parts of the physical examination, especially:
● Growth
● Development
● Other dysmorphic somatic features
Perform measurements (and plot percentiles), especially:
● Head circumference
● Height
● Weight
Consider the three mechanisms of facial dysmorphogenesis:
● Deformations from intrauterine constraint
● Disruptions from amniotic bands or fetal tissue
● Malformations from intrinsic abnormality in face/head or brain
Examine the parents and siblings:
● Similarity to a parent may be reassuring (e.g., large head) but may also be an 
indication of a familial disorder
Try to determine whether the facial features ﬁt a recognizable syndrome, 
 comparing with:
● References (including measurements) and pictures of syndromes
● Tables/databases of combinations of features
Most developmental and genetic 
syndromes with abnormal facies also 
have other abnormalities. 
An infant with congenital hyperthy-
roidism may have coarse facial fea-
tures and other abnormal facial 
features (Table 18-6, Diagnostic Facies 
in Infancy and Childhood, pp. 914–915). 
A child with abnormal shape or length 
of palpebral fissures (see Table 18-6, 
Diagnostic Facies in Infancy and 
Childhood, pp. 914–915):
Upslanting (Down syndrome)
Downslanting (Noonan syndrome)
Short (fetal alcohol effects)
A positive Chvostek sign produces 
facial grimacing caused by repeated 
contractions of the facial muscles. A 
Chvostek’s sign is noted in cases of 
hypocalcemic tetany, tetanus, and 
 tetany due to hyperventilation. 
A newborn who truly cannot open an 
eye (even when awake and alert) may 
have congenital ptosis. Causes include 
birth trauma and third cranial nerve 
palsy. 
Subconjunctival hemorrhages are 
common in neonates born via vaginal 
delivery. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
824 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Newborns may look at your 
face and follow a bright light if 
you catch them during an alert 
period. Some newborns can 
follow your face and turn their 
heads 90° to each side. Exam-
ine infants for eye movements. 
Hold the baby upright, sup-
porting the head. Rotate your-
self with the baby slowly in one 
direction. This usually causes 
the baby’s eyes to open, allow-
ing you to examine the sclerae, 
pupils, irises, and extraocular 
movements (Fig. 18-23). The 
baby’s eyes gaze in the direction 
you are turning. When the rotation stops, the eyes look in the opposite direction, 
after a few nystagmoid movements.
During the ﬁrst 10 days of life, the eyes may stare in one direction if just the head 
is turned without moving the body (doll’s eye reﬂex).
During the ﬁrst few months of life, some infants have intermittent crossed eyes 
(intermittent alternating convergent strabismus, or esotropia) or laterally deviated 
eyes (intermittent alternating divergent strabismus, or exotropia).
Look for abnormalities or congenital problems in the sclera and pupils. Sub-
conjunctival hemorrhages are common in newborns and resolve within a 
couple of weeks. The eyes of many newborns are edematous from the birth 
process.
Observe pupillary reactions by response to light or by covering each eye with 
your hand and then uncovering it. Although there may be initial asymmetry in 
the size of the pupils, over time they should be equal in size and reaction to 
light.
Inspect the irises carefully for abnormalities.
Examine the conjunctiva for swelling or redness. Most newborn nurseries use an 
antibiotic eye ointment to help prevent gonococcal eye infection.
You will not be able to measure the visual acuity of newborns or infants. You can 
use visual reﬂexes to indirectly assess vision: direct and consensual pupillary 
F I G U R E  1 8 - 2 3 .  Carefully assess gaze and 
eye movements.
Nystagmus (wandering or shaking 
eye movements) persisting after a few 
days or persisting after the maneuver 
described on the left may indicate 
poor vision or central nervous system 
disease. 
If a newborn fails to gaze at you and 
follow your face during alert periods, 
pay particular attention to the rest of 
the ocular examination. The newborn 
may have visual impairment from con-
genital cataracts or other disorders. 
Alternating convergent or divergent 
strabismus persisting beyond 
3 months, or persistent strabismus of 
any type, may indicate ocular motor 
weakness or another abnormality in 
the visual system. 
Colobomas may be seen with the 
naked eye and represent defects in 
the iris. 
Brushfield spots (seen with an oph-
thalmoscope) are a ring of white 
specks in the iris (see Table 18-7, 
Abnormalities of the Eyes, Ears, and 
Mouth, p. 916). Although sometimes 
present in normal children, these 
strongly suggest Down syndrome. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
825
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
constriction in response to light, blinking in response to bright light (optic 
blink reﬂex), and blinking in response to quick movement of an object toward 
the eyes. During the ﬁrst year of life, visual acuity sharpens as the ability to focus 
improves. Infants achieve the following visual milestones:
Persistent ocular discharge and tear-
ing beginning at birth may be from 
dacryocystitis or nasolacrimal duct 
obstruction. 
Visual Milestones of Infancy
Birth19
1 month
1½–2 months
3 months
12 months
Blinks, may regard face
Fixes on objects
Coordinated eye movements
Eyes converge, baby reaches 
toward a visual stimulus
Acuity around 20/60–20/80
Failure to progress along these visual 
developmental milestones may indi-
cate delayed visual maturation. 
Ophthalmoscopic Examination. For the ophthalmoscopic examination, 
with the newborn awake and eyes open, examine the red retinal (fundus) reﬂex 
by setting the ophthalmoscope at 0 diopters and viewing the pupil from about 
10 inches. Normally, a red or orange color is reﬂected from the fundus through 
the pupil.
A thorough ophthalmoscopic examination is difﬁcult in young infants but may 
be needed if ocular or neurologic abnormalities are noted. The cornea can ordi-
narily be seen at +20 diopters, the lens at +15 diopters, and the fundus at 0 
diopters.
Examine the optic disc area as you would for an adult. In infants, the optic disc 
is difﬁcult to visualize but is lighter in color, with less macular pigmentation. The 
foveal light reﬂection may not be visible. Papilledema is rare in infants because 
the fontanelles and open sutures accommodate any increased intracranial pres-
sure, sparing the optic discs.
The Ears
The physical examination of the ears of infants is important because many 
abnormalities can be detected, including structural problems, otitis media, and 
hearing loss.
The goals are to determine the position, shape, and features of the ear and to detect 
abnormalities. Note ear position in relation to the eyes. An imaginary line drawn 
across the inner and outer canthi of the eyes should cross the pinna or auricle; 
if the pinna is below this line the infant has low-set ears. Draw this imaginary 
line across the face of the baby on p. 821; note that it crosses the pinna.
Otoscopic examination of the newborn’s ear can detect only patency of the ear 
canal because accumulated vernix caseosa obscures the tympanic membrane for 
the ﬁrst few days of life.
Congenital glaucoma may cause 
cloudiness of the cornea. A dark light 
reflex can result from cataracts, reti-
nopathy of prematurity, or other disor-
ders. A white retinal reflex (leukokoria) 
is abnormal, and cataract, retinal 
detachment, chorioretinitis, or retino-
blastoma should be suspected. 
Occlusion of the lens may represent a 
cataract. 
Small retinal hemorrhages may occur 
in normal newborns. Extensive hem-
orrhages may suggest severe anoxia, 
subdural hematoma, subarachnoid 
hemorrhage, or trauma. 
Small, deformed, or low-set auricles 
may indicate associated congenital 
defects, especially renal disease. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
826 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
A small skin tab, cleft, or pit found just forward of the tragus represents a rem-
nant of the ﬁrst branchial cleft and usually has no signiﬁcance. However, occa-
sionally it may also be associated with renal disease and acquired hearing loss if 
there is a family history of hearing loss.
The infant’s ear canal is directed downward from the outside; therefore, pull 
the auricle gently downward, not upward, for the best view of the eardrum. 
Once the tympanic membrane is visible, note that the light reﬂex is diffuse; it 
does not become cone-shaped for several months.
The acoustic blink reﬂex is a blinking of the infant’s eyes in response to a sudden 
sharp sound. You can produce it by snapping your ﬁngers or using a bell, beeper, 
or other noisemaking device approximately 1 foot from the infant’s ear. Be sure you 
are not producing an airstream that may cause the infant to blink. This reﬂex may 
be difﬁcult to elicit during the ﬁrst 2 to 3 days of life. After it is elicited several times 
within a brief period, the reﬂex disappears, a phenomenon known as habituation. 
This crude test of hearing certainly is not diagnostic. Most newborns in the United 
States undergo hearing screenings, which are mandatory in the majority of states.
Otitis media (see pp. 869–870) can 
occur in infants. 
Perinatal problems raising the risk for 
hearing defects include birth weight 
<1,500 g, anoxia, treatment with 
potentially ototoxic medications, con-
genital infections, severe hyperbiliru-
binemia, and meningitis. 
Signs That an Infant Can Hear
Age
Sign
0–2 mo
2–3 mo
3–4 mo
6–7 mo
Startle response and blink to a sudden noise
Calming down with soothing voice or music
Change in body movements in response to sound
Change in facial expression to familiar sounds
Turning eyes and head to sound
Turning to listen to voices and conversation
Appropriate language development
In the absence of universal hearing 
screening, many children with hearing 
deficits are not diagnosed until 2 years. 
Clues to hearing deficits include paren-
tal concern about hearing, delayed 
speech, and lack of developmental 
indicators of hearing. 
The Nose and Sinuses
The most important component of the examination of the infant nose is to test 
for patency of the nasal passages. You can do this by gently occluding each nostril 
alternately while holding the infant’s mouth closed. This usually will not cause 
stress because most infants are nasal breathers. Some infants are obligate nasal 
breathers and have difﬁculty breathing through their mouths. Do not occlude 
both nares simultaneously, as this will cause considerable distress.
Inspect the nose to ensure that the nasal septum is midline.
At birth, the maxillary and the ethmoid sinuses are present. Palpation of the 
sinuses of newborns is not helpful.
The Mouth and Pharynx
Use both inspection with a tongue depressor and ﬂashlight and palpation to inspect 
the mouth and pharynx (Fig. 18-24). One method employs the parent to hold the 
The nasal passages in newborns may 
be obstructed in choanal atresia. In 
severe cases, nasal obstruction can be 
assessed by attempting to pass a no. 8 
feeding tube through each nostril into 
the posterior pharynx. This is usually 
done in the delivery room to assess 
for choanal atresia. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
827
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
infant’s head and arms. The newborn’s 
mouth is edentulous and the alveolar 
mucosa is smooth with ﬁnely serrated 
borders. Occasionally, pearl-like re-
tention cysts are seen along the alveolar 
ridges and are easily mistaken for teeth; 
these disappear within 1 or 2 months. 
Petechiae are commonly found on the 
soft palate after birth.
Palpate the upper hard palate to make sure it is intact. Epstein pearls, tiny white 
or yellow, rounded mucous retention cysts, are located along the posterior mid-
line of the hard palate. They disappear within months.
Cysts may be noted on the tongue or mouth. Thyroglossal duct cysts may open 
under the tongue.
Infants produce little saliva during the ﬁrst 3 months. Older infants produce a 
lot of saliva and drool frequently.
Inspect the tongue. The frenulum varies in tightness; sometimes it extends 
almost to the tip and other times it is short, limiting protrusion of the tongue 
(ankyloglossia or tongue tie).
You will often see a whitish covering on the tongue. If this coating is from milk, 
it can be easily removed by scraping or wiping it away. Use a tongue depressor 
or your gloved ﬁnger to wipe away the coating.
While there is a predictable pattern of tooth eruption, there is wide variation in the 
age at which teeth appear. A rule of thumb is that a child will have 1 tooth for 
each month of age between 6 and 26 months, up to a maximum of 20 primary 
teeth.
The pharynx of the infant is best seen while the baby is crying. You will likely have 
difﬁculty using a tongue depressor because it produces a strong gag reﬂex. Infants 
do not have prominent lymphoid tissue so you will probably not visualize the 
tonsils which increase in size as children grow.
Listen to the quality of the infant’s cry. Normal infants have a lusty, strong cry. The 
following box lists some unusual types of infant cries.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 2 4 .  Parental 
assistance helps with oral assessment.
Rarely, supernumerary teeth are noted. 
These are usually dysmorphic and are 
shed within days but are removed to 
prevent aspiration. 
Although unusual, a prominent, pro-
truding tongue may signal congenital 
hypothyroidism or Down syndrome. 
Oral candidiasis (thrush) is common in 
infants. The white plaques are difficult 
to wipe away and have an erythema-
tous raw base (see Table 18-7, Abnor-
malities of the Eyes, Ears, and Mouth, 
p. 916). They are found on the buccal 
mucosa, palate, and tongue. 
Macroglossia is associated with several 
systemic conditions. If associated with 
hypoglycemia and omphalocele, the 
diagnosis is likely Beckwith–Wiedemann 
syndrome. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Natal teeth are teeth that are present 
at birth. They are usually simply early 
eruptions of normal teeth, but they 
can be part of syndromes. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
828 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The Neck
Palpate the lymph nodes of the neck and assess for any additional masses such as 
congenital cysts (Fig. 18-25). Because the necks of infants are short, it is best to 
palpate the neck while infants are lying supine, whereas older children are best 
examined while sitting. Check the position of the thyroid cartilage and trachea.
Jugulogastric 
node
Epidermoid cyst
Submandibular 
node
Submental 
node
Cystic hygroma
Thyroglossal
duct cyst
Parotid nodes
Preauricular cyst
Occipital node
Retroauricular 
(mastoid) nodes
Superior deep 
cervical nodes
Middle deep 
cervical nodes
Posterior 
cervical nodes
2nd branchial 
cleft cyst
Supraclavicular 
node
Inferior deep 
cervical nodes
Anterior 
cervical nodes
F I G U R E  1 8 - 2 5 .  Nodes and cysts of the head and neck.
Branchial cleft cysts appear as small 
dimples or openings anterior to the 
midportion of the sternocleidomas-
toid muscle. They may be associated 
with a sinus tract. 
Preauricular cysts and sinuses are com-
mon, pinhole-size pits, usually located 
anterior to the helix of the ear. They 
are often bilateral and may be associ-
ated with hearing deficits and renal 
disorders.
Thyroglossal duct cysts are located at 
the midline of the neck, just above the 
thyroid cartilage. These small, firm, 
mobile masses move upward with 
tongue protrusion or with swallow-
ing. They are usually detected after 
2 years.
Congenital torticollis, or a “wry neck,” 
is from bleeding into the sternoclei-
domastoid muscle during the stretch-
ing process during delivery. A firm 
fibrous mass is felt within the muscle 
2 to 3 weeks after birth and generally 
disappears over months.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Inspiratory stridor beginning at birth 
suggests a congenital abnormality as 
described in this table. Stridor that 
appears following birth can be due to 
infections such as croup, a foreign 
body, or gastroesophageal reflux. 
A congenital fissure of the median 
line of the palate is a cleft palate.
Abnormal Infant Cries (If Persistent)
Type
Possible Abnormality
Shrill or high-
pitched
Increased intracranial pressure. Also in newborns born to  
narcotic-addicted mothers.
Hoarse
Hypocalcemic tetany or congenital hypothyroidism
Continuous 
inspiratory 
and expiratory 
stridor
Upper airway obstruction from various lesions (e.g., a polyp 
or hemangioma), a relatively small larynx (infantile laryn-
geal  stridor), or a delay in the development of the cartilage 
in the  tracheal rings (tracheomalacia)
Absence of cry
Severe illness, vocal cord paralysis, or profound brain damage
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
829
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
In newborns, palpate the clavicles and look for evidence of a fracture. If present, 
you may feel a break in the contour of the bone, tenderness, crepitus at the frac-
ture site, and may notice limited movement of the arm on the affected side.
The Thorax and Lungs
The infant’s thorax is more rounded than that of adults. The thin chest wall has 
little musculature; thus, lung and heart sounds are transmitted quite clearly. The 
bony and cartilaginous rib cage is soft and pliant. The tip of the xiphoid process 
often protrudes anteriorly, immediately beneath the skin.
Inspection. Carefully assess respirations and breathing patterns. Newborns, 
especially those born prematurely, show periods of normal rate (30 to 40 per 
minute) alternating respirations that may even cease for 5 to 10 seconds. This 
alternating pattern of rapid and slow breathing is called “periodic respiration” or 
“periodic breathing.”
Do not rush to the stethoscope. Instead, observe the infant carefully as demon-
strated in Figure 18-26, which demonstrates locations for retractions among 
infants. Inspection is easiest when infants are not crying; thus, work with the 
parents to settle the child. Observe for 30 to 60 seconds, note general appear-
ance, respiratory rate, color, nasal component of breathing, audible breath 
sounds, and work of breathing, as described below.
A fracture of the clavicle may occur dur-
ing birth, particularly during  delivery of 
a difficult arm or shoulder extraction. 
Two types of chest wall abnormalities 
noted in childhood include pectus exca-
vatum, or “funnel chest,” and  pectus car-
inatum, or “chicken breast deformity.” 
Apnea is cessation of breathing for 
more than 20 seconds. It is often 
accompanied by bradycardia and may 
indicate respiratory disease, central 
nervous system disease, or, rarely, a 
cardiopulmonary condition. Apnea 
may be a high-risk factor for SIDS. 
Supraclavicular retractions
Intercostal retractions
Substernal retractions
Subcostal retractions
F I G U R E  1 8 - 2 6 .  Anatomic locations of retractions (chest indrawing).
Because infants are obligate nasal breathers, observe their nose as they breathe. 
Look for nasal ﬂaring. Observe breathing with the infant’s mouth closed or during 
nursing or sucking on a bottle to assess for nasal patency. Listen to the sounds of 
breathing; note any grunting, audible wheezing, or lack of breath sounds (obstruction). 
Nasal ﬂaring, grunting, retractions, and wheezing are all signs of respiratory distress.
Observe two aspects of the infant’s breathing: audible breath sounds and work of 
breathing. These are particularly relevant in assessing both upper and lower respi-
ratory illness. Studies in countries with poor access to chest radiographs have 
In newborns and young infants, nasal 
flaring may be the result of upper 
respiratory infections, with subsequent 
obstruction of their small nares, but it 
may also be caused by pneumonia or 
other serious respiratory infections. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Lower respiratory infections, defined 
as infections below the vocal cords, 
are common in infants and include 
bronchiolitis and pneumonia.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
830 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Observing Respiration— 
Before You Touch the Child
Type of Assessment
Speciﬁc Observable Pathology
General appearance
Inability to feed or smile
Lack of consolability
Respiratory rate
Tachypnea (see p. 815), apnea
Color
Pallor or cyanosis
Nasal component of breathing
Nasal ﬂaring (enlargement of both nasal 
openings during inspiration)
Audible breath sounds
Grunting (repetitive, short expiratory sound)
Wheezing (musical expiratory sound)
Stridor (high-pitched, inspiratory noise)
Obstruction (lack of breath sounds)
Work of breathing
Nasal ﬂaring (excessive movement of nares)
Grunting (expiratory noises)
Retractions (chest indrawing):
Supraclavicular (soft tissue above clavicles)
Intercostal (indrawing of the skin between ribs)
Substernal (at xiphoid process)
Subcostal (just below the costal margin)
Acute stridor is a potentially serious 
condition; causes include laryngotra-
cheobronchitis (croup), epiglottitis, 
bacterial tracheitis, foreign body, hem-
angioma, or a vascular ring.
In infants, abnormal work of breathing 
plus abnormal findings on auscultation 
are the best findings for ruling in pneu-
monia. The best sign for ruling out pneu-
monia is the absence of tachypnea.
In healthy infants, the ribs do not move much during quiet breathing. Any out-
ward movement is produced by descent of the diaphragm which compresses the 
abdominal contents and in turn shifts the lower ribs outward.
Pulmonary disease causes increased abdominal breathing and can result in 
retractions (chest indrawing), an indicator of pulmonary disease before 2 years 
of age.
Chest indrawing is inward movement of the skin between the ribs during inspi-
ration. Movement of the diaphragm primarily affects breathing with little assis-
tance from the thoracic muscles. As mentioned in the preceding table, four types 
of retractions can be noted in infants: suprasternal, intercostal, substernal, and 
subcostal.
Asymmetric chest movement may 
indicate a space-occupying lesion.  
Airway obstruction or lower respiratory 
tract disease in infants can result in the 
Hoover sign, or paradoxical (seesaw) 
breathing in which the abdomen 
moves outward while the chest moves 
inward during inspiration.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
found these signs at least as useful as auscultation. Any of the abnormalities listed 
below should raise concern about underlying respiratory pathology.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
831
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Thoracoabdominal paradox, inward movement of the chest and outward movement 
of the abdomen during inspiration (abdominal breathing), is a normal ﬁnding in 
newborns (but not older infants). It persists during active, or rapid eye movement 
(REM), sleep even when it is no longer seen during wakefulness or quiet sleep 
because of the decreased muscle tone of active sleep. As muscle strength increases 
and chest wall compliance decreases with age, abdominal breathing should no 
longer be noted. If observed, it may signify respiratory disease.
Palpation. Assess tactile fremitus by palpation. Place your hand on the 
chest when the infant cries or makes noise. Place your hand or ﬁngertips over 
each side of the chest and feel for symmetry in the transmitted vibrations. 
Percussion is not helpful in infants except in extreme instances. The infant’s 
chest is hyperresonant throughout, and it is difﬁcult to detect abnormalities 
on  percussion.
Auscultation. After performing these maneuvers, you are ready for ausculta-
tion. Infant breath sounds are louder and harsher than those of adults because 
the stethoscope is closer to the origin of the sounds. It is often difﬁcult to dis-
tinguish transmitted upper airway sounds from sounds originating in the chest. 
Upper airway sounds tend to be loud, transmitted symmetrically throughout the 
chest, and loudest as you move your stethoscope toward the neck. They are usu-
ally coarse inspiratory sounds. Lower airway sounds are loudest over the site of 
pathology, are often asymmetric, and often occur during expiration.
Children with muscle weakness may 
be noted to have thoracoabdominal 
paradox at several years of age. 
Because of the excellent transmission  
of sounds throughout the chest, any 
abnormalities of tactile fremitus or on 
percussion suggest severe pathology, 
such as a large pneumonic consolidation. 
Diminished breath sounds in one side 
of the chest of a newborn suggest 
unilateral lesions (e.g., congenital dia-
phragmatic hernia or pneumothorax). 
Distinguishing Upper Airway from  
Lower Airway Sounds in Infants
Technique
Upper Airway
Lower Airway
Compare sounds from 
nose/stethoscope
Same sounds
Often diﬀerent sounds
Listen to harshness of 
sounds
Harsh and loud
Variable
Note symmetry (left/right)
Symmetric
Often asymmetric
Compare sounds at dif-
ferent locations 
(higher or lower)
Sounds are louder as 
stethoscope is moved 
up chest
Often sounds are louder 
lower in chest toward 
abdomen
Inspiratory vs. expiratory
Almost always inspiratory
Often has expiratory 
phase
Biphasic sounds imply severe obstruc-
tion from intrathoracic airway narrow-
ing or severe obstruction from 
extrathoracic airway narrowing. 
Expiratory sounds usually arise from an intrathoracic source, whereas inspira-
tory sounds can arise from an extrathoracic airway such as the trachea or from 
an intrathoracic source. During expiration, the diameter of the intrathoracic air-
ways decreases because radial forces from the surrounding lung do not “tether” 
the airways open as occurs during inspiration. Higher ﬂow rates during inspira-
tion produce turbulent ﬂow, resulting in appreciable sounds.
Upper respiratory infections are not 
serious in infants but can produce 
loud inspiratory sounds that are often 
transmitted to the chest. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
832 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The characteristics of the breath sounds, such as vesicular and bronchovesicular, and 
of the adventitious lung sounds, such as crackles, wheezes, and rhonchi, are the same 
as those for adults, except that they may be more difﬁcult to distinguish in infants 
and often occur together. Wheezes and rhonchi are common in infants. Wheezes, 
often audible without the stethoscope, occur more frequently because of the smaller 
size of the tracheobronchial tree. Rhonchi reﬂect obstruction of larger airways, or 
bronchi. Crackles (rales) are discontinuous sounds (see p. 325), near the end of inspi-
ration; they are usually caused by lung disorders and are far less likely to represent 
cardiac failure in infants than in adults. They tend to be harsher than in adults.
The Heart
Inspection. Before examining the heart itself, observe the infant carefully for any 
cyanosis. Acrocyanosis in the newborn is discussed on pages 816 and 918. It is 
important to detect central cyanosis because it is always abnormal and because 
many congenital cardiac abnormalities, as well as respiratory diseases, present with 
cyanosis.20
Recognizing minimal degrees of cyanosis requires care. Look inside the body 
(i.e., the inside of the mouth, the tongue, or the conjunctivae) in addition to 
assessing skin color. A true strawberry pink is normal, whereas any hint of 
raspberry red suggests desaturation and requires urgent evaluation.
The distribution of the cyanosis should be evaluated. An oximetry reading will 
conﬁrm desaturation.
Observe the infant for general signs of health. The infant’s nutritional status, 
responsiveness, irritability, and fatigue are all clues that may be useful in evaluat-
ing cardiac disease. Note that noncardiac ﬁndings (see box on the next page) are 
often present in infants with cardiac disease.
Wheezes in infants occur commonly 
from asthma or bronchiolitis. 
Rhonchi in infants occur with upper 
respiratory infections.
Crackles (rales) can be heard with 
pneumonia and bronchiolitis.
Central cyanosis without acute 
respiratory symptoms suggests cardiac 
disease. See Table 18-9, Cyanosis in 
Children, p. 918, and Table 18-10, 
Congenital Heart Murmurs, pp. 919–920.
Cardiac Causes of Central Cyanosis in  
Infants and Children
Age of Onset
Potential Cardiac Cause
Immediately at birth
Transposition of the great arteries
Pulmonary valve atresia
Severe pulmonary valve stenosis
Possibly Ebstein malformation
Within a few days after birth
All of the above plus:
Total anomalous pulmonary venous return
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome
Truncus arteriosus (sometimes)
Single ventricle variants
Weeks, months, or years of life
All of the above plus:
Pulmonary vascular disease with atrial, 
 ventricular, or great vessel shunting 
(right-to-left shunting)
In general, cardiac causes of central 
cyanosis involve right-to-left shunting 
and can be caused by a variety of 
congenital cardiac lesions. 
The combination of tachypnea, tachy-
cardia, and hepatomegaly in infants 
suggests heart failure. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
833
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Noncardiac Findings Commonly Present in 
Infants with Cardiac Disease
Poor feeding
Tachypnea
Poor overall appearance
Failure to thrive
Hepatomegaly
Weakness
Irritability
Clubbing
Fatigue
Observe the respiratory rate and pattern to help distinguish the degree of illness 
and cardiac versus pulmonary diseases. An increase in respiratory effort is 
expected from pulmonary diseases, whereas in cardiac disease there may be 
tachypnea without increased work of breathing (called “peaceful tachypnea”) 
until heart failure becomes signiﬁcant.
Palpation. Palpation of the chest wall will allow you to assess volume changes 
within the heart. For example, a hyperdynamic precordium reﬂects a big volume 
change.
The point of maximal cardiac impulse, or PMI, is not always palpable in infants and 
is affected by respiratory patterns, a full stomach, and the infant’s positioning. It 
is usually an interspace higher than in adults during the ﬁrst few years of life 
because the heart lies more horizontally within the chest.
Thrills are palpable when turbulence within the heart or great vessels is transmit-
ted to the surface. Knowledge of the structures of the precordium helps pinpoint 
the origin of the thrill. Thrills are easiest to feel with your palm or the base of 
your ﬁngers rather than your ﬁngertips. Thrills have a somewhat rough, vibrat-
ing quality. Figure 18-27 shows locations of thrills that occur in infants and 
children from various cardiac abnormalities.
A diffuse bulge outward of the left 
side of the chest suggests long- 
standing cardiomegaly. 
Aortic valve
stenosis
Severe right
ventricular 
 outflow tract 
  obstruction
   at infundibular
    level, tetralogy
     of Fallot
Pulmonary valve
stenosis
Ventricular
septal defect
F I G U R E  1 8 - 2 7 .  Location of thrills in infants and children.
PDA is associated with hyperdynamic 
precordium and bounding distal 
pulses. 
Visible and palpable chest pulsations 
suggest a hyperdynamic state from 
either increased metabolic rate or 
inefficient pumping as a result of an 
underlying cardiac defect. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
A “rolling” heave at the left sternal 
border suggests an increase in right 
ventricular work, whereas the same 
kind of motion closer to the apex 
suggests the same thing for the left 
ventricle.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
834 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Pulses. The major branches of the aorta can be assessed by evaluation of 
the peripheral pulses. All neonates should have an evaluation of all pulses at the 
time of their newborn examination. In neonates and infants, the brachial artery 
pulse in the antecubital fossa is easier to feel than the radial artery pulse at the wrist. 
Both temporal arteries should be felt just in front of the ear.
Palpate the femoral pulses. They lie in the midline just below the inguinal crease, 
between the iliac crest and the symphysis pubis. Take your time to search for 
femoral pulses; they are difﬁcult to detect in chubby, squirming infants. If you 
ﬁrst ﬂex the infant’s thighs on the abdomen, this may overcome the reﬂex ﬂexion 
that occurs when you then extend the legs.
Palpate the pulses in the lower extrem-
ities using your index or middle ﬁnger. 
The dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial 
pulses (Fig. 18-28) may be difﬁcult to 
feel unless there is an abnormality 
involving aortic run-off. Normal pulses 
should have a sharp rise and should be 
ﬁrm and well localized.
As discussed on p. 814, carefully measure the blood pressure of infants and chil-
dren (using an appropriate-sized infant blood pressure cuff) as part of the cardiac 
examination.
Auscultation. You can evaluate the heart rhythm more easily in infants by 
listening to the heart than by feeling the peripheral pulses; in older children 
assess the rhythm either way.
Infants and children commonly have a normal sinus dysrhythmia, with the 
heart rate increasing on inspiration and decreasing on expiration, sometimes 
quite abruptly. This normal ﬁnding can be identiﬁed by its repetitive nature and 
its correlation with respiration.
Many neonates and some older children have premature atrial or ventricular 
beats that are often described as “skipped” beats. You can usually eradicate them 
by increasing their intrinsic sinus rate through exercise such as crying in an 
infant or jumping in an older child, although they may also be more frequent 
in the postexercise period. In a completely healthy child, they are usually benign 
and rarely persist.
The absence or diminution of femoral 
pulses is indicative of coarctation of 
the aorta. If you cannot detect femoral 
pulses, measure blood pressures of 
one of the lower and both upper 
extremities. Normally, the blood pres-
sure in the lower extremity is slightly 
higher than in the upper extremities. 
If they are equal or lower in the leg, 
coarctation is likely to be present. 
F I G U R E  1 8 - 2 8 .  Palpating pulses in 
lower extremity.
A weak or thready, difficult-to-feel 
pulse may reflect myocardial dysfunc-
tion and heart failure, particularly if 
associated with an unusual degree of 
tachycardia. 
Although the pulses in the feet of neo-
nates and infants are often faint, sev-
eral conditions can cause full pulses, 
such as PDA or truncus arteriosus.
The most common abnormal 
dysrhythmia in infants is paroxysmal 
atrial tachycardia (PAT). It can occur  
at any age, including in utero. It is 
remarkably well tolerated by some 
infants and children and is found on 
examination. The child may look 
perfectly healthy or may be mildly 
pale or with tachypnea. The heart rate 
is sustained and regular at around  
240 beats per minute or more. Some 
children, particularly neonates, may 
appear very ill. In older children, this 
dysrhythmia is more likely to be truly 
paroxysmal, with episodes of varying 
duration and frequency. 
Distant heart tones suggest pericardial 
effusion; mushy, less distinct heart 
sounds suggest myocardial dysfunction. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
835
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Heart Sounds. Heart sounds are very challenging to assess in infants be-
cause they are rapid and often obscured by respiratory or other sounds. Never-
theless, evaluate the S1 and S2 heart sounds carefully and systematically. They 
are normally crisp. You can usually hear the second sounds (S2) at the base 
separately, but they should fuse into a single sound in deep expiration. In the 
neonate, you should be able to detect a split S2 if you examine the infant when 
the infant is completely quiet or asleep. Detecting this split eliminates many, 
but not all, of the more serious congenital cardiac defects.
Pathologic arrhythmias in children 
can be from structural cardiac lesions 
but also from other causes such as 
drug ingestion, metabolic abnormali-
ties, endocrine disorders, serious 
infections, and postinfectious states, 
or conduction disturbances without 
structural heart disease. 
Although ventricular premature con-
tractions generally occur in otherwise 
healthy infants, they can occur with 
underlying cardiac disease, particularly 
cardiomyopathies and congenital heart 
disorders. Electrolyte or metabolic dis-
turbances are also causes. 
Characteristics of Normal Variants of  
Heart Rhythms in Children
Characteristics
Atrial Premature 
Contractions (APCs) 
or Ventricular 
Premature 
Contractions (VPCs)
Normal Sinus 
Dysrhythmias
Most common age
Neonates (may occur at 
any time)
After infancy
Throughout childhood
Correlation with 
respiration
No
Yes: Increases on inspiration, 
decreases on expiration
Eﬀect of exercise on 
tachycardia
Eradicated by exercise
May be more frequent 
postexercise
Disappears
Characteristic of 
rhythm
Skipped or missed beat
Irregularly occurring
Gradually faster with inspira-
tion
Often suddenly slower on 
expiration
Number of beats
Usually single abnormal 
beats
Several beats, usually in 
repetitive cycles
Severity
Usually benign
Benign (by deﬁnition)
In addition to trying to detect splitting of the S2, listen for the intensity of A2 and 
P2. The aortic, or ﬁrst component of the second sound at the base, is normally 
louder than the pulmonic, or second component (Fig. 18-29).
S1
S2
A2
P2
Inspiration
S1
S2
Expiration
F I G U R E  1 8 - 2 9 .  Healthy heart 
sounds in infants.
A louder-than-normal pulmonic com-
ponent, particularly when louder than 
the aortic sound, suggests pulmonary 
hypertension. 
Persistent splitting of S2 may indicate 
a right ventricular volume load such 
as atrial septal defect, anomalies of 
pulmonary venous return, or chronic 
anemia. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
836 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
You may detect third heart sounds which are low-pitched, early diastolic sounds 
best heard at the lower left sternal border, or apex; they reﬂect rapid ventricular 
ﬁlling. These are frequently heard in children and are normal.
Fourth heart sounds represent decreased ventricular compliance, suggesting heart 
failure.
You may also detect an apparent gallop (widely split S2 that varies), in the pres-
ence of a normal heart rate and rhythm. This is frequently found in normal 
children and does not represent pathology.
Heart Murmurs. One of the most challenging aspects of the cardiac ex-
amination in children is the evaluation of heart murmurs. In addition to listening 
to a squirming, perhaps uncooperative child, a major challenge is distinguishing 
common benign murmurs from unusual or pathologic ones. Characterize heart 
murmurs in infants and children by noting their speciﬁc location (e.g., left up-
per sternal border, not just left sternal border), timing, intensity, and quality. If 
each murmur is delineated completely, the diagnosis is usually made clinically, 
and laboratory tools such as ECG, chest x-ray, and echocardiography are needed 
for conﬁrmation and better characterization.
An important rule of thumb is that, by deﬁnition, benign murmurs in children have 
no associated abnormal ﬁndings. Many (but not all) children with serious cardiac 
malformations have signs and symptoms other than a heart murmur obtain-
able on careful history or examination. Many have noncardiac signs and symp-
toms, including evidence of genetic defects that may offer helpful diagnostic 
clues.
Most children, if not all, will have one or more functional, or benign, heart mur-
murs before reaching adulthood.21–23 It is important to identify functional mur-
murs by their speciﬁc qualities rather than by their intensity. You will learn to 
recognize the common functional murmurs of infancy and childhood, which 
under most circumstances do not require evaluation.
The box on the next page characterizes two benign heart murmurs in infants 
according to their locations and key characteristics.
The third heart sound (S3) should be 
differentiated from the higher-intensity 
third heart sound gallop, which is a 
sign of underlying pathology. 
Fourth heart sounds (S4), not often 
heard in children, are low-frequency, 
late diastolic sounds, occurring just 
before the first heart sound. 
A true gallop rhythm (in contrast to a 
widely split S2 which gives an apparent 
gallop)—tachycardia plus a loud S3, S4, 
or both—is pathologic and indicates 
heart failure (poor ventricular function). 
Any of the noncardiac findings that 
frequently accompany cardiac disease 
in children markedly raises the possi-
bility that a murmur is pathologic. 
Some pathologic murmurs of congeni-
tal heart disease are present at birth. 
Others are not apparent until later, 
depending on their severity, drop in 
pulmonary vascular resistance follow-
ing birth, or changes associated with 
growth of the child. Table 18-10, Con-
genital Heart Murmurs, on pp. 919–920, 
shows examples of pathologic mur-
murs of childhood. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
837
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
In some infants, you will detect a soft, somewhat ejectile murmur, not over the 
precordium but over the lung ﬁelds, particularly in the axillae. This represents 
peripheral pulmonary artery ﬂow and is partly the result of inadequate pulmo-
nary artery growth in utero (when there is little pulmonary blood ﬂow) and the 
sharp angle at which the pulmonary artery curves backward. In the absence of 
any physical ﬁndings to suggest additional underlying diseases, this peripheral 
pulmonary ﬂow murmur (which is common) can be considered benign and usu-
ally disappears by 1 year.
Two Common Benign Murmurs in Infants
Pulmonary flow
Closing 
ductus
Typical Age
Name
Characteristics
Description and Location
Newborn
Closing ductus
Transient, soft, ejection, systolic
Upper left sternal border
Newborn to 1 yr
Peripheral pulmonary 
ﬂow murmur
S1
S2
Soft, slightly ejectile, systolic
Upper left sternal border, radiating to lung ﬁelds 
and axillae
A pulmonary flow murmur in the 
newborn with other signs of disease is 
more likely to be pathologic. Diseases 
may include Williams syndrome, con-
genital rubella syndrome, and Alagille 
syndrome. 
Physiologic Basis for Some Pathologic  
Heart Murmurs
Change in Pulmonary Vascular Resistance
Heart murmurs that are dependent on a postnatal drop in pulmonary vascular resis-
tance, allowing turbulent ﬂow from the high-pressure systemic circuit to the lower-
pressure pulmonary circuit, are not audible until such a drop has occurred. Except in 
premature infants, murmurs of a ventricular septal defect or PDA are not heard in the 
ﬁrst few days of life and usually become audible after a week to 10 days.
Obstructive Lesions
Obstructive lesions, such as pulmonic and aortic stenosis, are caused by normal 
blood ﬂow through two small valves. They are not dependent on a drop in pulmo-
nary vascular resistance. They are audible at birth.
(continued )
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Characteristics of specific pathologic 
heart murmurs in children are 
described in Table 18-10, Congenital 
Heart Murmurs, pp. 919–920. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
838 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
When you detect a murmur in a child, note all of the qualities as described in 
Chapter 9, The Cardiovascular System, to help you distinguish pathologic murmurs 
from benign murmurs. Heart murmurs that reﬂect underlying structural heart 
disease are easier to evaluate if you have a good knowledge of intrathoracic anat-
omy and the functional cardiac changes following birth and if you understand the 
physiologic basis for heart murmurs. Understanding these physiologic changes can 
help you distinguish pathologic murmurs from benign heart murmurs in children.
The Breasts
The breasts of the newborn in both males and females are often enlarged from 
maternal estrogen effect; this may last several months. The breasts may also be 
engorged with a white liquid, sometimes colloquially called “witch’s milk,” which 
may last 1 or 2 weeks.
The Abdomen
Inspection. Inspect the abdomen with the infant lying supine (and, optimally, 
asleep). The infant’s abdomen is protuberant as a result of poorly developed 
abdominal musculature. You will easily notice abdominal wall blood vessels and 
intestinal peristalsis.
Inspect the newborn’s umbilical cord to detect abnormalities. Normally, there are 
two thick-walled umbilical arteries and one larger but thin-walled umbilical vein 
which is usually located at the 12 o’clock position.
The umbilicus in the newborn may have a long cutaneous portion (umbilicus 
cutis) which is covered with skin, and an amniotic portion (umbilicus amnioticus) 
which is covered by a ﬁrm gelatinous substance. The amniotic portion dries up 
and falls off within 2 weeks, whereas the cutaneous portion retracts to be ﬂush 
with the abdominal wall.
Physiologic Basis for Some Pathologic  
Heart Murmurs (continued )
Pressure Gradient Differences
Murmurs of atrioventricular valve regurgitation are audible at birth because of the 
high-pressure gradient between the ventricle and its atrium.
Changes Associated with Growth of Children
Some murmurs do not follow the patterns above, but become audible because  
of alterations in normal blood ﬂow that occur with growth. For example, even 
though it is an obstructive defect, aortic stenosis may not be audible until consid-
erable growth has occurred and is frequently not heard until adulthood, although 
a congenitally abnormal valve is responsible. Similarly, the pulmonary ﬂow mur-
mur of an atrial septal defect may not be heard for a year or more because right 
ventricular compliance gradually increases and the shunt becomes larger, eventu-
ally producing a murmur caused by too much blood ﬂow across a normal pulmonic 
valve.
A single umbilical artery may be asso-
ciated with congenital anomalies or 
be an isolated anomaly. 
An umbilical granuloma at the base of 
the navel is the development of pink 
granulation tissue formed during the 
healing process. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
A newborn with a heart murmur and 
central cyanosis is likely to have con-
genital heart disease and requires 
urgent cardiac evaluation. 
In premature thelarche, breast devel-
opment occurs, most often between  
6 months and 2 years. Other signs of 
puberty or hormonal abnormalities 
are not present.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
839
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Inspect the area around the umbilicus for redness or swelling.
Umbilical hernias are detectable by a few weeks of age. Most disappear by 1 year, 
nearly all by 5 years.
In some normal infants, you will notice a diastasis recti. This involves separation 
of the two rectus abdominis muscles, causing a midline ridge most apparent 
when the infant contracts the abdominal muscles. A benign condition in most 
cases, it resolves during early childhood.
Auscultation. Auscultation of a quiet infant’s abdomen is easy. You may hear 
an orchestra of musical tinkling bowel sounds upon placement of your stetho-
scope on the infant’s abdomen.
Percussion and Palpation. You can percuss an infant’s abdomen as you 
would an adult’s, but may note greater tympanitic sounds because of the infant’s 
propensity to swallow air. Percussion is useful for determining the size of organs 
and abdominal masses.
It is easy to palpate an infant’s abdomen because infants like being touched. A 
useful technique to relax the infant is to hold the legs ﬂexed at the knees and 
hips with one hand and palpate the abdomen with the other. A paciﬁer may 
quiet the infant in this position.
When palpating the liver, start gently low in the abdomen, moving upward with 
your ﬁngers. This technique helps to identify an extremely enlarged liver that 
extends down into the pelvis. With a careful examination, you can feel the liver 
edge in most infants, 1 to 3 cm below the right costal margin.
One technique for assessing liver size in infants is simultaneous percussion and 
auscultation.24 Percuss and simultaneously auscultate, noting a change in sound 
as you percuss over the liver or beyond it. Of note, a scratch test (described on 
page 880 for older children) can be attempted in infants.
Infection of the umbilical stump 
(omphalitis) can be a serious condi-
tion and is characterized by perium-
bilical edema and erythema. 
Umbilical hernias in infants are caused 
by a defect in the abdominal wall  
and can be quite protuberant with 
increased intra-abdominal pressure 
(i.e., during crying). 
An increase in pitch or frequency of 
bowel sounds is heard with gastroenteri-
tis or, rarely, with intestinal obstruction. 
A silent, tympanic, distended, and 
tender abdomen suggests peritonitis. 
An enlarged, tender liver may be due 
to heart failure or due to storage dis-
eases. Among newborns, causes of 
hepatomegaly include hepatitis, stor-
age diseases, vascular congestion, and 
biliary obstruction. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Liver Size in Healthy Term Newborns
By palpation and percussion25
Projection below right costal margin
Mean, 5.9 ± 0.7 cm
Mean, 2.5 ± 1.0 cm
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
840 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The spleen, like the liver, is felt easily in most infants. It is soft with a sharp edge 
and it projects downward like a tongue from under the left costal margin. The 
spleen is moveable and rarely extends more than 1 to 2 cm below the left costal 
margin.
Palpate the other abdominal structures. You will commonly note pulsations in the 
epigastrium caused by the aorta. This is felt on deep palpation to the left of the 
midline.
You may be able to palpate the kidneys of infants by carefully placing the ﬁngers 
of one hand in front of and those of the other behind each kidney. The descend-
ing colon is a sausage-like mass in the left lower quadrant.
Once you have identiﬁed the normal structures in the infant’s abdomen, use 
palpation to identify abnormal masses.
Male Genitalia
Inspect the male genitalia with the infant supine noting the appearance of the 
penis, testes, and scrotum. The foreskin completely covers the glans penis. It is 
nonretractable at birth though you may be able to retract it enough to visualize 
the external urethral meatus. The foreskin gradually loosens over months to 
years and becomes retractable. The rate of circumcision had declined over several 
decades in North America and varies worldwide, depending on cultural practices, 
but is now recommended by the AAP and by experts in many parts of the world 
due to reduced rates of HIV and other infections among circumcised males.
Inspect the shaft of the penis, noting any abnormalities on the ventral surface. 
Make sure the penis appears straight.
Inspect the scrotum noting rugae which should be present by 40 weeks gestation. 
Scrotal edema may be present for several days following birth because of the 
effect of maternal estrogen.
Palpate the testes in the scrotal sacs, proceeding downward from the external 
inguinal ring to the scrotum. If you feel a testis up in the inguinal canal, gently 
milk it downward into the scrotum. The newborn’s testes should be about 
10 mm in width and 15 mm in length and should lie in the scrotal sacs most 
of the time.
Abnormal abdominal masses in 
infants can be associated with the 
kidney (e.g., hydronephrosis), bladder 
(e.g., urethral obstruction), bowel  
(e.g., Hirschsprung disease, or 
intussusception), and tumors. 
In pyloric stenosis, deep palpation in the 
right upper quadrant or midline can 
reveal an “olive,” or a 2-cm firm pyloric 
mass. While feeding, some infants with 
this condition will have visible peristal-
tic waves pass across their abdomen, 
followed by projectile vomiting. Infants 
present at about 4 to 6 weeks of age. 
Hypospadias refers to an abnormal 
location of the urethral orifice to some 
point along the ventral surface of the 
glans or shaft of the penis (see 
Table 18-12, The Male Genitourinary 
System, p. 922). The foreskin is 
incompletely formed ventrally. 
A fixed, downward bowing of the 
penis is a chordee; this may accom-
pany a hypospadias. 
In newborns with an undescended testi-
cle (cryptorchidism), the scrotum often 
appears underdeveloped and tight, 
and palpation reveals an absence of 
scrotal contents (see Table 18-12, The 
Male Genitourinary System, p. 922). 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Several diseases can cause spleno-
megaly, including infections, hemo-
lytic anemias, infiltrative disorders, 
inflammatory or autoimmune diseases, 
and portal hypertension. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
841
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
In about 3% of neonates, one or both testes cannot be felt in the scrotum or 
inguinal canal. This raises concern of cryptorchidism. In two thirds of these cases, 
both testes are descended by 1 year of age.
Examine the testes for swelling within 
the scrotal sac and over the inguinal 
ring. If you detect swelling in the scro-
tal sac try to differentiate it from the 
testis. Note whether the size changes 
when the infant increases abdominal 
pressure by crying. See if your ﬁngers 
can get above the mass, trapping it in 
the scrotal sac. Apply gentle pressure 
to try to reduce the size of the mass 
and note any tenderness. Note whether 
it transilluminates (Fig. 18-30).
Female Genitalia
Become familiar with the anatomy of an infant’s female genitalia. Examine the 
female genitalia with the infant supine.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 3 0 .  Transillumination 
of a hydrocele. From Fletcher M. Physical Diagnosis in 
Neonatology. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-Raven; 1998.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Two common scrotal masses in new-
borns are hydroceles and inguinal 
hernias; frequently both coexist, and 
both are more common on the right 
side. Hydroceles overlie the testes 
and the spermatic cord, are not 
reducible, and can be transillumi-
nated (Fig. 18-30). Most resolve by 
18 months. Hernias are separate 
from the testes, are usually reduc-
ible, and often do not transillumi-
nate. They do not resolve. 
Sometimes a thickened spermatic 
cord (called the silk sign) is noted.
Anterior commissure
Prepuce
Clitoris
Labia majora
Labia minora
Hymenal membrane
Hymenal orifice
(introitus)
Fossa navicularis
(vestibular fossa)
Posterior fourchette
(frenulum of labia)
Urethral meatus
Paraurethral duct
orifice (skene)
Greater vestibular
glands of Bartholin
Prepubetal girl
Newborn girl
F I G U R E  1 8 - 3 1 .  Highly estrogenized hymen of a newborn with thickening and hypertrophy of hymenal tissue.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
842 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
In the newborn female, the genitalia will be prominent due to the effects of 
maternal estrogen. The labia majora and minora have a dull pink color in light-
skinned infants and may be hyperpigmented in dark-skinned infants. During the 
ﬁrst few weeks of life there is often a milky white vaginal discharge that may be 
blood tinged and is not a cause for concern. This estrogenized appearance of 
the genitalia decreases during the ﬁrst year of life.
Examine the different structures systematically, including the size of the clitoris, 
the color and size of the labia majora, and any rashes, bruises, or external lesions 
(Fig. 18-31). Next, separate the labia majora at their midpoint with the thumb 
of each hand, or as shown in Figs. 18-83 and 18-84 below.
Inspect the urethral oriﬁce and the labia minora. Assess the hymen, which in 
newborns and infants is a thickened, avascular structure with a central oriﬁce, 
covering the vaginal opening. You should note a vaginal opening, although the 
hymen will be thickened and redundant. Note any discharge.
Rectal Examination
The rectal examination generally is not performed for infants or children 
unless there is question of patency of the anus or an abdominal mass. In such 
cases, ﬂex the infant’s hips and fold the legs to the head. Use your lubricated and 
gloved pinky to perform the examination.
The Musculoskeletal System
Enormous changes in the musculoskeletal system occur during infancy. Much of 
the examination of the infant focuses on detection of congenital abnormalities, 
particularly in the hands, spine, hips, legs, and feet. Combine the musculoskeletal 
examination with the neurologic and developmental examination.
The newborn’s hands are clenched. Because of the palmar grasp reﬂex (see the 
discussion on the nervous system, p. 849) you will need to help the infant extend 
the ﬁngers. Inspect the ﬁngers carefully, noting any defects.
Palpate along the clavicle noting any lumps, tenderness, or crepitus; these may 
indicate a fracture.
Inspect the spine carefully. Although major defects of the spine such as meningo-
myelocele are obvious and often detected by ultrasound before birth, subtle 
abnormalities may include pigmented spots, hairy patches, or deep pits. These 
abnormalities, if present within 1 cm or so of the midline, may overlie external 
openings of sinus tracts that extend to the spinal canal. Do not probe sinus tracts 
because of the potential risk for introducing infection. Palpate the spine in the 
lumbosacral region, noting any deformities of the vertebrae.
An imperforate hymen may be noted 
at birth. 
A common cause of blood in the stool of 
infants is an anal fissure which is a super-
ficial break in the surface of the anus 
and observable with the naked eye. 
Careful inspection can reveal gross 
deformities such as dwarfism, congen-
ital abnormalities of the extremities or 
digits, and annular bands that constrict 
an extremity. 
Skin tags, remnants of digits, polydac-
tyly (extra fingers), or syndactyly 
(webbed fingers) are congenital 
defects noted at birth. 
A fracture of the clavicle can occur 
 during a difficult birth. 
Spina bifida occulta (a defect of the ver-
tebral bodies) may be associated with 
defects of the spinal cord, which can 
cause severe neurologic dysfunction. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Ambiguous genitalia, involving mas-
culinization of the female external 
genitalia, is a rare condition caused by 
endocrine disorders such as congeni-
tal adrenal hyperplasia. 
Labial adhesions occur frequently, 
tend to be paper thin, and often dis-
appear without treatment. The paper-
thin adhesions attach the labial 
minora to each other at the midline. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
843
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Examine the newborn and infant’s hips carefully at each examination for signs 
of dislocation.26,27 Figures 18-32 to 18-36 and discussion cover the two major 
techniques, one to test for the presence of a posteriorly dislocated hip (Ortolani 
test) (Fig. 18-32), and another to test for the ability to sublux or dislocate an 
intact but unstable hip (Barlow test) (Fig. 18-33).
F I G U R E  1 8 - 3 2 .  Ortolani test, overhead view.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 3 3 .  Barlow test, overhead view.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 3 4 .  Ortolani test, starting position.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 3 5 .  Ortolani test, ending position.
Developmental dysplasia of the hip  
is important to detect as early 
 treatment has excellent outcomes. 
A soft audible “click” heard with these 
maneuvers does not prove a dislo-
cated hip, but should prompt a careful 
examination.
With a developmental dysplasia of the 
hip, you feel a “clunk” as the femoral 
head, which lies posterior to the ace-
tabulum, enters the acetabulum. A 
palpable movement of the femoral 
head back into place constitutes a 
positive Ortolani sign.
Make sure the baby is relaxed for these techniques. For the Ortolani test, place 
the baby supine with the legs pointing toward you. Flex the legs to form right 
angles at the hips and knees, placing your index ﬁngers over the greater trochan-
ter of each femur and your thumbs over the lesser trochanters (Fig. 18-34). 
Abduct both hips simultaneously until the lateral aspect of each knee touches 
the examining table (Fig. 18-35).
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
844 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
For the Barlow test, place 
your hands in the same 
position as for the Orto-
lani test. Pull the leg for-
ward and adduct with 
posterior force; that is, 
press in the opposite 
direction 
with 
your 
thumbs moving down 
toward the table and out-
ward (Fig. 18-36). Feel 
for any movement of the 
head of the femur later-
ally. Normally, there is no 
movement and the hip 
feels “stable.”
Test for femoral shortening using the Galeazzi or Allis sign. Place the feet (with 
knee ﬂexed and sacrum ﬂat on the table) together and note any difference in 
knee heights.
Examine a newborn or infant’s legs and feet to detect developmental abnormali-
ties. Assess symmetry, bowing, and torsion of the legs. There should be no dis-
crepancy in leg length. It is common for normal infants to have asymmetric thigh 
skin folds, but if you do detect asymmetry, make sure you perform the instability 
tests because dislocated hips are commonly associated with this ﬁnding.
Most newborns are bowlegged, reﬂecting their curled-up intrauterine position.
Some normal infants exhibit twisting or torsion of the tibia inwardly or out-
wardly on its longitudinal axis. Parents may be concerned about a toeing in 
or toeing out of the foot and an awkward gait, all of which are usually normal. 
Tibial torsion usually corrects itself during the second year of life after months of 
weight bearing.
A positive Barlow sign is not diagnos-
tic of a dysplastic hip, but indicates 
laxity and a potentially dislocatable 
hip. If a Barlow sign is present, the 
baby needs to be followed very 
closely. If you feel the head of the 
femur slipping out onto the posterior 
lip of the acetabulum, this constitutes 
a positive Barlow sign. If you feel this 
dislocation movement, abduct the hip 
by pressing with your index and mid-
dle fingers back inward and feel for 
the movement of the femoral head as 
it returns to the hip socket. 
Children older than age 3 months may 
have a negative Ortolani or Barlow 
sign and still have a dislocated hip due 
to tightening of the hip muscles and 
ligaments. Of note, all babies should 
receive serial hip examinations until 
they are walking. In infants beyond 
3 months of age, limited abduction  
is concerning for developmental 
 dysplasia of the hip.
Severe bowing of the knees can be 
normal, but it can also be due to 
rickets or Blount disease. The most 
common cause of bowing is tibial 
torsion. 
Pathologic tibial torsion occurs only in 
association with deformities of the feet 
or hips. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
F I G U R E  1 8 - 3 6 .  Barlow test.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
845
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Examine the feet of new-
borns and infants. At birth, 
the feet may appear deformed 
from retaining their intra-
uterine positioning, often 
turned inward (Fig. 18-37). 
You should be able to cor-
rect the feet to the neutral 
and even to an overcor-
rected position (Fig. 18-38). 
Scratch or stroke along the 
outer edge to see if the foot 
assumes a normal position.
The normal newborn’s foot 
has several benign features 
that may initially cause con-
cern. The newborn’s foot 
appears ﬂat because of a 
plantar fat pad. There is 
often inversion of the foot, 
elevating the outer margin 
(see p. 922). Other babies will 
have adduction of the forefoot 
without inversion, called 
metatarsus adductus which 
requires close follow-up. 
Still others will have adduc-
tion of the entire foot. Finally, most toddlers have some pronation during early 
stages of weight-bearing with eversion of the foot. In all of these normal variants 
the abnormal position can be easily overcorrected past midline. They all tend to 
resolve within 1 or 2 years.
The Nervous System
The examination of the nervous system in infants includes techniques that are 
highly speciﬁc to this particular age. Unlike many neurologic abnormalities in 
adults that produce asymmetric localized ﬁndings, neurologic abnormalities in 
infants often present as developmental abnormalities such as failure to do age-
appropriate tasks. Therefore, the neurologic and developmental examinations 
need to proceed together. A developmental abnormality should prompt you to pay 
particular attention to the neurologic examination.
The neurologic screening examination of all newborns should include assess-
ment of mental status, gross and ﬁne motor function, tone, cry, deep tendon 
reﬂexes, and primitive reﬂexes. More detailed examination of cranial nerve func-
tion and sensory function are indicated if you suspect any abnormalities from the 
history or screening.28
F I G U R E  1 8 - 3 7 .  Assess alignment of the feet.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 3 8 .  Assess alignment by turning 
to an overcorrected position.
True deformities of the feet do not 
return to the neutral position even 
with manipulation. 
The most common severe congenital 
foot deformity is talipes equinovarus 
or clubfoot. 
See Table 18-13, Common Musculo-
skeletal Findings in Young Children,  
p. 922.
Signs of severe neurologic disease in 
infants include extreme irritability, 
persistent asymmetry of posture, per-
sistent extension of extremities, con-
stant turning of the head to one side, 
marked extension of the head, neck, 
and extremities (opisthotonus), 
severe flaccidity, and limited response 
to pain, and sometimes seizures. 
Subtle neonatal behaviors such as 
fine tremors, irritability, and poor self-
regulation may indicate withdrawal 
from nicotine if the mother smoked 
during pregnancy. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
846 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The neurologic examination can reveal extensive disease but will not pinpoint 
speciﬁc functional deﬁcits or minute lesions.
Mental Status. Assess the mental status of newborns by observing the new-
born activities discussed on p. 808 (“What a Newborn Can Do”). Make sure you 
test the newborn during alert periods. A detailed description of the assessment 
of development follows.
Motor Function and Tone. Assess 
the motor tone of newborns and infants, 
ﬁrst by carefully observing their posi-
tion at rest and testing their resistance 
to passive movement.
Further, assess tone as you move each 
major joint through its range of motion, 
noting any spasticity or ﬂaccidity. Hold the 
baby in your hands to determine whether 
the tone is normal, increased, or decreased 
(Fig. 18-39). Either increased or decreased 
tone may indicate intracranial disease 
although such disease is usually accom-
panied by a number of other signs.
Sensory Function. You can test for sensory function of the newborn in only a 
limited way. Test for pain sensation by ﬂicking the infant’s palm or sole with your 
ﬁnger. Observe for withdrawal, arousal, and change in facial expression. Do not 
use a pin to test for pain.
Cranial Nerves. The cranial nerves of the newborn or infant can be tested. 
The following table provides useful strategies.
Persistent irritability in the newborn 
may be a sign of neurologic insult or 
may reflect a variety of metabolic, 
infectious, or other constitutional 
abnormalities, or environmental 
 conditions such as drug withdrawal. 
F I G U R E  1 8 - 3 9 .  Assessing motor tone.
Newborns with hypotonia often lie in 
a frog-leg position, with arms flexed 
and hands near the ears. Hypotonia 
can be caused by a variety of central 
nervous system abnormalities and 
 disorders of the motor unit. 
If changes in facial expression or cry 
follow a painful stimulus but no with-
drawal occurs, weakness or paralysis 
may be present. 
Strategies to Assess Cranial Nerves in 
Newborns and Infants
Cranial Nerve
Strategy
I
Olfactory
Very diﬃcult to test
II
Visual acuity
Have infant regard your face and look 
for facial response and tracking.
II, III
Response to 
light
Darken room, raise infant to sitting 
position to open eyes.
Use light and test for optic blink reﬂex 
(blink in response to light).
Use the otoscope’s light (without spec-
ulum) to assess pupillary responses.
Abnormalities in the cranial nerves 
suggest an intracranial lesion such  
as hemorrhage or a congenital 
 malformation. 
(continued )
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
847
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Strategies to Assess Cranial Nerves in 
Newborns and Infants (continued )
Cranial Nerve
Strategy
III, IV, VI
Extraocular 
movements
Observe how well the infant tracks 
your smiling face (or a bright light) 
and whether the eyes move 
together.
V
Motor
Test rooting reﬂex.
Test sucking reﬂex (watch infant suck 
breast, bottle, or paciﬁer) and 
strength of suck.
VII
Facial
Observe infant crying and smiling; note 
symmetry of face.
VIII
Acoustic
Test acoustic blink reﬂex (blinking of 
both eyes in response to a loud 
noise).
Observe tracking in response to sound.
IX, X
Swallow
Observe coordination during 
swallowing.
Gag
Test for gag reﬂex.
XI
Spinal accessory
Observe symmetry of shoulders.
XII
Hypoglossal
Observe coordination of sucking, 
swallowing, and tongue thrusting.
Pinch nostrils; observe reﬂex opening 
of mouth with tip of tongue to 
midline.
Deep Tendon Reﬂexes. The deep tendon reﬂexes are present in newborns 
but may be difﬁcult to elicit and may vary in their intensity because the 
corticospinal pathways are immature. Their exaggerated presence or their 
absence has little diagnostic signiﬁcance, unless this response is different from 
results of previous testing or extreme responses are observed or they are very 
asymmetric.
Use the same techniques to elicit deep tendon reﬂexes as you would for an adult. 
You can substitute your index or middle ﬁnger for the reﬂex hammer as shown 
in Figure 18-40.
Congenital facial nerve palsy can result 
from birth trauma or developmental 
defects. 
Dysphagia, or difficulty in swallowing, 
can occasionally be due to injury to 
cranial nerve IX, X, and XII. 
A progressive increase in deep tendon 
reflexes during the first year of life may 
indicate central nervous system dis-
ease such as cerebral palsy, especially  
if it is coupled with increased tone. 
Another common pattern of presenta-
tion is central hypotonia followed by 
progressively increased tone. 
As in adults, asymmetric reflexes 
 suggest a lesion of the peripheral 
nerves or spinal segment. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
848 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The triceps, brachioradialis, and abdominal reﬂexes are difﬁcult to elicit before 
6 months of age. The anal reﬂex is present at birth and important to elicit if a 
spinal cord lesion is suspected.
In newborns, a positive Babinski response to plantar stimulation (dorsiﬂexion of 
big toe and fanning of other toes) can be elicited and may persist for several 
months.
In order to best elicit the ankle reﬂex of an infant, grasp the infant’s malleolus 
with one hand and abruptly dorsiﬂex the ankle (Fig. 18-41). You may note rapid, 
rhythmic plantar ﬂexion of the newborn’s foot (ankle clonus) in response to this 
maneuver. Up to 10 beats are normal in newborns and young infants; this is 
unsustained ankle clonus.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 4 0 .  Assessing deep tendon reﬂexes with ﬁnger.
An absent anal reflex suggests loss of 
innervation of the external sphincter 
muscle caused by a spinal cord abnor-
mality such as a congenital anomaly 
(e.g., spina bifida), tumor, or injury. 
F I G U R E  1 8 - 4 1 .  Assessing ankle reﬂexes.
When the contractions are continuous 
(sustained ankle clonus), central 
nervous system disease should be 
suspected. 
A newborn who is irritable, jittery and 
has tremors, hypertonicity, and hyper-
active reflexes may have drug with-
drawal from maternal substance use 
during pregnancy.
Neonatal abstinence syndrome results 
from the use of opioids by the mother 
while pregnant. In addition to the 
signs listed above, the newborn may 
also have autonomic signs, as well as 
poor feeding and seizures.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
	
C h a p t e r  18  |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence	
849
Techniques of Examination
Primitive Reflexes.  Evaluate the newborn’s and infant’s developing central 
nervous system by assessing infantile automatisms, called primitive reflexes. 
These develop during gestation, are generally demonstrable at birth, and disap-
pear at defined ages. Abnormalities in these primitive reflexes suggest neurologic 
disease and merit more intensive investigation.29
The most important primitive reflexes are illustrated below.
Development.  Refer to the developmental milestones on p. 810 and to the 
items on a standardized developmental screening instrument to learn which age-
specific developmental tasks to evaluate. By observation and play with the 
infant, you can do both a developmental screening examination and an assess-
ment for gross and fine motor achievement. Specifically, look for weakness by 
observing sitting, standing, and transitions. Note station, or the posture of sitting 
or standing. Assess fine motor development in a similar way, combining the 
neurologic and developmental examination. Key milestones include the devel-
opment of the pincer grasp, ability to manipulate objects with the hands, and 
more precise tasks, such as building a tower of cubes or scribbling. Fine and 
gross motor development progresses in a proximal to distal direction.
Assess the infant’s cognitive and social–emotional development as you proceed 
with the comprehensive neurologic and developmental examination. Some neu-
rologic abnormalities produce deficits or slowing in cognitive and social devel-
opment. Infants who have developmental delay may have abnormalities on the 
neurologic examination because much of the examination is based on age-­
specific norms.
A neurologic or developmental abnor-
mality is suspected if primitive 
reflexes are:
•  Absent at appropriate age
•  Present longer than normal
•  Asymmetric
•  Associated with posturing or 
twitching 
Many causes of developmental delay 
exist but often no cause is identified. 
Etiologies include prenatal (genetic, 
central nervous system, congenital 
hypothyroidism), perinatal (preterm, 
asphyxia, infection, trauma), and post-
natal (trauma, infection, toxin, abuse). 
Developmental delay across more 
than one domain (e.g., motor plus 
cognitive) suggests more severe 
­disease. 
Primitive Reflex
Primitive 
Reflex
Maneuver
Ages
Palmar Grasp 
Reflex
Place your fingers 
into the infant’s 
hands and press 
against the palmar 
surfaces.
The infant will flex all 
fingers to grasp 
your fingers.
Birth to 
3–4 mo
Plantar Grasp 
Reflex
Touch the sole at the 
base of the toes.
The toes will curl.
Birth to 
6–8 mo
Persistence of palmar grasp reflex 
beyond 4 months suggests pyramidal 
tract dysfunction. 
Persistence of clenched hand beyond 
2 months suggests central nervous 
system damage, especially if fingers 
overlap the thumb.
Persistence of plantar grasp reflex 
beyond 8 months suggests pyramidal 
tract dysfunction. 
(continued )
examples of abnormalities
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
850 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Primitive Reﬂex (continued )
Primitive 
Reﬂex
Maneuver
Ages
Rooting Reﬂex
Stroke the perioral 
skin at the corners 
of the mouth.
The mouth will open 
and the infant will 
turn the head 
toward the stimu-
lated side and 
suck.
Birth to 
3–4 mo
Moro Reﬂex 
(Startle 
Reﬂex)
Hold the infant 
supine, supporting 
the head, back, 
and legs. Abruptly 
lower the entire 
body about 2 feet.
The arms will abduct 
and extend, hands 
will open, and legs 
will ﬂex. The 
infant may cry.
Birth to 4 mo
Asymmetric 
Tonic Neck 
Reﬂex
With the infant 
supine, turn head 
to one side, hold-
ing jaw over shoul-
der.
The arms/legs on 
side to which head 
is turned will 
extend while the 
opposite arm/leg 
will ﬂex. Repeat 
on other side.
Birth to 2 mo
Trunk 
Incurvation 
(Galant) 
Reﬂex
Support the infant 
prone with one 
hand and stroke 
one side of the 
back 1 cm from 
midline, from 
shoulder to but-
tocks.
The spine will curve 
toward the stimu-
lated side.
Birth to 2 mo
Absence of rooting indicates severe 
generalized or central nervous system 
disease. 
Persistence beyond 4 months 
suggests neurologic disease (e.g., 
cerebral palsy); persistence beyond 
6 months strongly suggests it. 
Asymmetric response suggests 
fracture of clavicle or humerus or 
brachial plexus injury. 
Persistence beyond 2 months 
suggests asymmetric central nervous 
system development and sometimes 
predicts the development of cerebral 
palsy. 
Absence suggests a transverse spinal 
cord lesion or injury. 
Persistence may indicate delayed 
development.
(continued )
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
851
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Primitive Reﬂex (continued )
Primitive 
Reﬂex
Maneuver
Ages
Landau Reﬂex
Suspend the infant 
prone with one 
hand.
The head will lift up, 
and the spine will 
straighten.
Birth to 6 mo
Parachute 
Reﬂex
Suspend the infant 
prone and slowly 
lower the head 
toward a surface.
The arms and legs 
will extend in a 
protective fashion.
8 mo and 
does not 
disappear
Positive 
Support 
Reﬂex
Hold the infant 
around the trunk 
and lower until the 
feet touch a ﬂat 
surface.
The hips, knees, and 
ankles will extend, 
the infant will 
stand up, partially 
bearing weight, 
sagging after 
20–30 seconds.
Birth or 2 mo 
until 6 mo
Placing and 
Stepping 
Reﬂexes
Hold the infant 
upright as in 
 positive support 
reﬂex. Have one 
sole touch the 
tabletop.
The hip and knee of 
that foot will ﬂex 
and the other foot 
will step forward.
Alternate stepping 
will occur.
Birth (best 
after 4 
days; vari-
able age 
to disap-
pear)
Persistence may indicate delayed 
development. 
Delay in appearance may predict 
future delays in voluntary motor 
development. 
Lack of reflex suggests hypotonia or 
flaccidity. 
Fixed extension and adduction of legs 
(scissoring) suggests spasticity from 
neurologic disease, such as cerebral 
palsy. 
Absence of placing may indicate 
paralysis. 
Newborns born by breech delivery 
may not have a placing reflex. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
852 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
A normative measure of development is the developmental quotient,30 shown 
here:
Development quotient =
× 100
 
Development age
Chronologic age
Assess the development of an infant or child using standard scales for each type 
of development. Assign to each child a gross motor developmental quotient, a 
ﬁne motor developmental quotient, a cognitive developmental quotient, and so 
forth. Importantly, these estimates are never a perfect assessment of a child’s 
development or potential because both can change over time.31
Developmental Quotients
>85
70–85
<70
Normal
Possibly delayed; follow-up needed
Delayed
Case Examples of Gross and Fine  
Motor Development
Gross Motor Development
Fine Motor Development
A 12-mo-old child who is just pulling to 
stand (gross motor developmental 
age of 9 mo), cruising (10 mo), and 
walking when both hands are held 
(10 mo) has a gross motor develop-
mental age of 10 mo. This child’s 
gross motor developmental  
quotient is:
(
) = 83
×  100
10
12
This child is in the gray zone, is likely to 
do well without intervention, but 
requires close follow-up.
A 12-mo-old child can transfer objects 
from hand to hand (a ﬁne motor 
developmental age of 6 mo), rake 
objects into his palm (7 mo), and pull 
things (7 mo). He cannot hold blocks 
in each hand and does not have 
thumb and ﬁnger grasp (8–9 mo).
He has normal primitive reﬂexes 
(most absent), increased tone, scis-
soring of legs when held, spasticity, 
and delays on the gross motor part 
of a standardized developmental 
screening instrument.
This child’s ﬁne motor developmental 
quotient is:
(
) = 58
×  100
7
12
This child is delayed in ﬁne motor 
development and has signs of cere-
bral palsy.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
853
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
ASSESSING YOUNG AND  
SCHOOL-AGED CHILDREN
Development
Early Childhood: 1 to 4 Years
Physical Development. After infancy, the rate of physical growth slows 
by approximately half. After 2 years, toddlers gain about 2 to 3 kg and grow 5 cm per 
year. Physical changes are impressive. Chubby, clumsy toddlers transform into 
leaner, more muscular preschoolers.
Gross motor skills also develop quickly. Almost all children walk by 15 months, 
run well by 2 years, and pedal a tricycle and jump by 4 years. Fine motor skills 
develop through neurologic maturation and environmental manipulation 
(Fig. 18-42). The 18-month-old who scribbles becomes a 2-year-old who draws 
lines and then a 4-year-old who makes circles.
Cognitive and Language Development. Toddlers move from senso-
rimotor learning (through touching and looking) to symbolic thinking, solving 
simple problems, remembering songs, and engaging in imitative play. Language 
develops with extraordinary speed. An 18-month-old with 10 to 20 words 
becomes a 2-year-old with three-word sentences, and a 3-year-old who con-
verses well. By 4 years, preschoolers form complex sentences. They remain pre-
operational, however, without sustained logical thought processes.
Social and Emotional Development. New intellectual pursuits are sur-
passed only by an emerging drive for independence (Fig. 18-43). Because tod-
dlers are impulsive and have poor self-regulation, temper tantrums are common. 
Self-regulation is an important developmental task with a wide range of normal 
(Fig. 18-44).
F I G U R E  1 8 - 4 2 .  Fine motor 
skills develop along with cognition.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 4 3 .  Individual 
personalities emerge as the intellect 
grows.
Walks
Physical/
Motor
1 yr
2 yr
3 yr
Developmental Milestones During Early Childhood
4 yr
Copies
Skips
Balances well 
on 1 foot
2–3 single 
words
Cognitive/
Language
Plays peek-
a-boo
Separation
anxiety
Social/
Emotional
Imitates
activities
Prefers to do
tasks by self
at times
Sings songs
5 yr
Dresses self, 
buttons, zips
Imaginative
Says ABCs
Copies figures
Defines words
Cuts with 
scissors
Hops
Balances 
on 1 foot
Walks on 
tiptoes
Pedals tricyle
Jumps in 
place
Runs
Feeds self 
with utensils
Throws a ball 
overhand
100% of speech 
understandable
Talks in 
paragraphs
Knows colors
2-3 word 
phrases
Sentences
Draws circle
Asks “why?”
Knows whole 
name and 
telephone 
number
Imaginary play
Knows gender
Takes turns
Puts on 
clothes
Plays games
Sings
Knows self in 
mirror
F I G U R E  1 8 - 4 4 .  Developmental milestones during early childhood.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
854 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Middle Childhood: 5 to 10 Years. Middle childhood is an active 
period of growth and development. Goal-directed exploration, increased physical 
and cognitive abilities, and achievements by trial and error mark this stage. The 
physical examination is more straightforward during this age period, but always 
consider the developmental stages and tasks that school-aged children are facing.
Physical Development. Children grow steadily but more slowly. Strength 
and coordination improve dramatically with more participation in activities 
(Fig. 18-45). This is also when children with physical disabilities or chronic ill-
nesses become more aware of their limitations.
Cognitive and Language Development. Children become “concrete 
operational”—capable of limited logic and more complex learning. They remain 
rooted in the present with little ability to understand consequences or abstrac-
tions. School, family, and environment greatly inﬂuence learning (Fig. 18-46). A 
major developmental task is self-efﬁcacy, or the ability to thrive in different situ-
ations. Language becomes increasingly complex.
Social and Emotional Development. Children become progressively 
more independent, initiating activities and enjoying accomplishments. Achieve-
ments are critical for self-esteem and developing a “ﬁt” within major social struc-
tures—family, school, and peer activity groups. Guilt and poor self-esteem also 
may emerge. Family and environment contribute enormously to the child’s self-
image. Moral development remains simple and concrete with a clear sense of 
“right and wrong.”
F I G U R E  1 8 - 4 5 .  Physical abilities 
rapidly progress in early childhood.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 4 6 .  A child’s 
cognitive development is shaped by 
family relationships.
Developmental Tasks during Middle Childhood
Task
Characteristic
Health Care Needs
Physical
Enhanced strength and coordi-
nation
Competence in various tasks 
and activities
Screening for strengths, 
assessing problems
Involving parents
Support for disabilities
Anticipatory guidance: safety, 
exercise, nutrition, sleep
Cognitive
“Concrete operational:” focus on 
the present
Emphasis on short-term conse-
quences
Achievement of knowledge and 
skills, self-eﬃcacy
Support; screening for skills 
and school performance
Social
Achieving good “ﬁt” with family, 
friends, school
Assessment, support, advice 
about interactions including 
peer relationships
Sustained self-esteem
Support, emphasis on 
strengths
Evolving self-identity
Understanding, advice, support
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
855
THE HEALTH HISTORY
An important aspect of examining children is that parents are usually watching 
and taking part in the interaction, providing you the opportunity to observe the 
parent–child interaction. Note whether the child displays age-appropriate behav-
iors. Assess the “goodness of ﬁt” between parents and child. Although some 
abnormal interactions may result from the unnatural setting of the examination 
room, others may be a consequence of interactional problems. Careful observa-
tion of the child’s interactions with parents and the child’s unstructured play in 
the examination room can reveal abnormalities in physical, cognitive, and social 
development or issues with parent–child relationship.
Normal toddlers are occasionally terriﬁed or angry at the examiner. Often, they 
are completely uncooperative. Most eventually warm up to you. If this behavior 
continues or is not developmentally appropriate, there may be an underlying 
behavioral or developmental abnormality. Older, school-aged children have more 
self-control and prior experience with clinicians and are generally cooperative 
with the examination.
Abnormalities Detected While Observing Play
Behaviorala
Poor parent–child interactions
Sibling rivalry
Inappropriate parental discipline
“Diﬃcult temperament”
Developmental
Gross motor delay
Fine motor delay
Language delay (expressive or 
receptive)
Delay in social or emotional tasks
Social or Environmental
Parental stress, depression
Risk for abuse or neglect
Neurologic
Weakness
Abnormal posture
Spasticity
Clumsiness
Attentional problems, hyperactivity
Autistic features
Musculoskeletal abnormalities
aNote: The child’s behavior during the visit may not represent typical behavior but your observations 
may serve as a springboard for discussion with parents.
Assessing Younger Children
One challenge in examining children in this age group is avoiding a physical 
struggle, a crying child, or a distraught parent. Accomplishing this successfully 
is one aspect of the “art of medicine” in the practice of pediatrics.
Gain the child’s conﬁdence and allay the child’s fears from the start of the encoun-
ter. Your approach will vary with the circumstances of the visit. A health supervi-
sion visit allows greater rapport than a visit when the child is ill.
The child should remain dressed during the interview to minimize the child’s 
apprehension. It also allows you to interact more naturally and observe the child 
playing, interacting with the parents, and undressing and dressing.
The Health History
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
856 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Toddlers who are of 9 to 15 months may have stranger anxiety, a fear of strangers 
that is developmentally normal. It signals the toddler’s growing awareness that 
the stranger is new. You should not approach these toddlers quickly. Play can 
help the child warm up to you. Make sure they remain solidly in their parent’s 
lap throughout much of the examination and that the parent remains close when 
the child is on the examination table.
Some Tips for Examining Young Children  
(1- to 4-Year-Olds)
Useful Strategies for 
Examination
Useful Toys and Aids
Examine a child sitting on parent’s lap. 
Try to be at the child’s eye level.
First examine the child’s toy or teddy 
bear, then the child.
Let the child do some of the examination 
(e.g., move the stethoscope). Then go 
back and “get the places we missed.”
Ask the toddler who keeps pushing you 
away to “hold your hand.” Then have 
the toddler “help you” with the 
examination.
Some toddlers believe that if they can’t 
see you, then you aren’t there. Perform 
the examination while the child stands 
on the parent’s lap, facing the parent.
If 2-yr-olds are holding something in 
each hand (such as tongue depres-
sors), it is more diﬃcult for them to 
ﬁght or resist.
Hand the child an age-appropriate book 
and engage the child in reading.
“Blow out” the otoscope light.
“Beep” the stethoscope on your nose.
Make tongue-depressor puppets.
Use the child’s own toys for play.
Jingle your keys to test for hearing.
Shine the otoscope through the tip of 
your ﬁnger (or the child’s ﬁnger) to 
show it doesn’t hurt, “lighting it 
up,” and then examine the child’s 
ears with it.
Use age-appropriate toys and books.
Engage children in age-appropriate conversation. Ask simple questions about 
their illness or toys. Compliment their appearance or behavior, tell a story, or 
play a simple game (Fig. 18-47). If a child is shy, turn your attention to the par-
ent to allow the child to warm up gradually. Also, sometimes the parent is anx-
ious. Helping the parent relax or asking them to help by reading to the child or 
playing with the child can help relax everyone in the examination room.
With certain exceptions, physical examination does not require use of the exam-
ining table; it can be done on the ﬂoor or with the child in a parent’s lap. The key 
is to engage the child’s cooperation. For young children who resist undressing, 
expose only the body part being examined. When examining siblings, begin with 
the oldest child who is more likely to cooperate and set a good example. Approach 
the child pleasantly. Explain each step as you perform it. Continue conversing 
with the family to provide distraction.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 4 7 .  Engaging 
children in play is sometimes part of 
the assessment.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
857
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Plan the examination to start with the 
least distressing procedures and end 
with the most distressing ones, usually 
involving the throat and ears. Begin 
with parts that can be done with the 
child sitting such as examining the 
eyes or palpating the neck. Lying down 
may make a child feel vulnerable, so 
change positions with care. Once a 
child is supine, begin with the abdo-
men, saving throat and ears or genitalia 
for last. You may need a parent’s help to 
restrain the child for examination of 
the ears or throat; however, use of formal restraints is inappropriate. Patience, 
distraction, play, ﬂexibility in the order of the examination, and a caring but ﬁrm and 
gentle approach, are all key to successfully examining the young child (Fig. 18-48).
F I G U R E  1 8 - 4 8 .  Familiarizing the 
child with the equipment and procedures 
can reduces anxiety in children.
More Tips for Examining the Young Child
Use a reassuring voice throughout the examination.
Let the child see and touch the examination tools you will be using.
Avoid asking permission to examine a body part because you will do the examina-
tion anyway. Instead, ask the child which ear or which part of the body he or 
she would like you to examine ﬁrst.
Examine the child in the parent’s lap. Let the parent undress the child.
If unable to console the child, give the child a short break.
Make a game out of the examination! For example, “Let’s see how big your 
tongue is!” or “Is Elmo in your ear? Let’s see!”
Reassure parents that resistance to examination is developmentally 
appropriate. Some embarrassed parents scold the child, compounding 
the problem. Involve parents in the examination. Learn which tech-
niques and approaches work best and are most comfortable for you.
Assessing Older Children
Examining children after they reach school age usually poses few 
difﬁculties. Although some have unpleasant memories of previous 
clinical encounters, most children respond well when the examiner 
is attuned to their developmental level.
Many children at this age are modest (Fig. 18-49). Providing gowns 
and leaving underwear in place as long as possible are wise 
approaches. Suggest that children disrobe behind a curtain. Consider 
leaving the room while they change with their parents’ help. Some 
children may prefer opposite-sex siblings to leave, but most prefer a 
parent of either sex to remain in the room. Parents of children younger 
than 11 years should stay with them.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 4 9 .  Clinicians need to 
be aware of older children’s developing 
modesty.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
858 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Children are usually accompanied by a parent or caregiver. Even when alone, 
they are often seeking health care at the request of their parent; indeed, the par-
ent is usually sitting in the waiting room. When interviewing a child, you need 
to consider the needs and perspectives of both the child and the caregivers.
Establishing Rapport. Begin the 
interview by greeting and establishing 
rapport with each person present 
(Fig. 18-50). Refer to the child by 
name rather than by “him” or “her.” 
Clarify the role or relationship of all of 
the adults and children. “Now, are you 
Jimmy’s grandmother?” “Please help 
me by telling me Jimmy’s relationship 
to everyone here.” Address the parents 
as “Mr. Smith” and “Ms. Smith” rather 
than by their ﬁrst names or “Mom” or 
“Dad.” When the family structure is 
not immediately clear, you may avoid 
embarrassment by asking directly about other members. “Who else lives in the 
home?” “Who is Jimmy’s father?” “Do you live together?” Do not assume that just 
because parents are separated, only one parent is actively involved in the child’s 
life. Families come in many varieties—these include traditional families, single 
parents, separated/divorced parents, blended, same-sex parents, kinship fami-
lies, foster families, and adoptive families.
Use your personal experiences with children to guide how you interact in a 
health care setting. To establish rapport, meet children on their own level. Eye 
contact on their level, participating in playful engagement, and talking about 
what interests them are always good strategies. Ask children about their clothes, 
one of their toys, what book or TV show they like, or their adult companion in 
an enthusiastic but gentle style. Spending time at the beginning of the interview to 
calm and connect with an anxious child can put both the child and the caregiver at ease.
Working with Families. One challenge when several people are present is decid-
ing to whom to direct your questions. While eventually you need to get informa-
tion from both the child and the parent, it is useful to start with the child. 
Asking simple open-ended questions like “Are you sick? . . . Tell me about it,” fol-
lowed by more speciﬁc questions, often provides much of the clinical data. The 
parents can then verify the information, add details that give you the larger context, 
and identify other issues you need to address. Sometimes children are embarrassed 
to begin, but once the parent has started the conversation, direct questions back to 
the child. Characterize symptom attributes the same way you do with adults.
Your mom tells me that you get stomachaches. Tell me about them.
Show me where you get the pain. What does it feel like?
Is it sharp like a pinprick, or does it ache?
Does it stay in the same spot, or does it move around?
What helps make it go away? What makes it worse?
What do you think causes it?
F I G U R E  1 8 - 5 0 .  Establishing 
rapport enables more effective evaluation.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
859
THE HEALTH HISTORY
The presence of family members allows you to observe how they interact with 
the child. A child may be able to sit still or may get restless and start ﬁdgeting. 
Watch how the parents set, or fail to set, limits when needed.
Multiple Agendas. Each individual in the room, including the clinician, may 
have a different idea about the nature of the problem and what needs to be done 
about it. Discover as many of these perspectives and agendas as possible. Family 
members who are not present (e.g., the absent parent or grandparent) may also 
have concerns. Ask about those concerns, too. “If Suzie’s father were here today, 
what questions or concerns would he have?” “Have you, Mrs. Jones, discussed 
this with your mother or anyone else?” “What does she think?”
For example, Mrs. Jones brings Suzie in for abdominal pain because she is wor-
ried that Suzie may have an ulcer and is also worried about Suzie’s eating habits. 
Suzie is not worried about the belly pain, but is uneasy about the changes in her 
body and about getting fat. Mr. Jones thinks that Suzie’s schoolwork is not get-
ting enough attention. You, as the clinician, need to balance these concerns with 
what you see as a healthy 12-year-old girl in early puberty with some mild func-
tional abdominal pain and appropriate concern for possible emerging obesity. 
Your goals need to include uncovering the concerns of each person and helping 
the family to be realistic about the range of “normal.”
The Family as a Resource. In general, family members provide most of the 
care and are your natural allies in promoting the child’s health. Being open to a 
wide range of parenting behaviors helps to make this alliance. Raising a child 
reﬂects cultural, socioeconomic, and family practices. It is important to respect the 
tremendous variation in these practices. A good strategy is to view the parents as 
experts in the care of their child and yourself as their consultant. This demonstrates 
respect for the parents’ care and minimizes their likelihood of discounting or ignor-
ing your advice. Parents face many challenges raising children, so practitioners 
need to be supportive, not judgmental. Comments like, “Why didn’t you bring him 
in sooner?” or “What did you do that for?” do not improve your rapport with the 
parent. Statements acknowledging the hard work of parenting and praising 
successes are always appreciated. “Mr. Smith, you are doing such a wonderful job 
with Bobby. Being a parent takes so much work and Bobby’s behavior here today 
clearly shows your efforts. We might have some suggestions for you at the end of 
the visit.” Or to the child, “Bobby you are so lucky to have such a wonderful dad.”
Hidden Agendas. As with adults, the chief complaint 
may not relate to the real reason the parent has brought 
the child to see you (Fig. 18-51). The complaint may be 
a bridge to concerns that may not seem like a legitimate 
reason to go to the clinician. Create a trusting atmo-
sphere that allows parents to be open about all their con-
cerns by asking facilitating questions such as:
Do you have any other concerns about Randy? 
Was there anything else that you wanted to tell/ask 
me today?
F I G U R E  1 8 - 5 1 .  Talking with 
parents about their children can reveal 
hidden agendas.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
860 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Children 1 to 4 Years
The AAP and Bright Futures periodicity schedules for children include health 
supervision visits at 12, 15, 18, and 24 months followed by annual visits when 
the child is 3 and 4 years old.8 An additional visit at 30 months is also 
recommended to assess the child’s development.
During these health supervision visits clinicians address concerns and questions from 
parents, evaluate the child’s growth and development, perform a comprehensive phys-
ical examination, and provide anticipatory guidance about healthy habits and behav-
iors, social competence of caregivers, family relationships, and community interactions.
This is a critical age for preventing childhood obesity as many children begin their 
trajectory toward obesity between ages 3 and 4 years. It is also important to assess 
the child’s development. Standardized developmental screening instruments are 
recommended to measure the different dimensions of a child’s development (see 
p. 853). Similarly, it is important to differentiate normal (but potentially challeng-
ing) childhood behavior from abnormal behavioral or mental health problems.32
The following box demonstrates the major components of a health supervision 
visit for a 3-year-old, stressing health promotion. You do not have to wait for a 
health supervision visit to address many of these health promotion issues; they 
can be addressed during other types of visits, even when the child is mildly ill.
Components of a Health Supervision Visit for a 3-Year-Old
Discussions with Parents
● Parental concerns8
● Providing advice
● Child care, school, social
● Major topic areas: development, nutrition, safety, oral 
health, family relationships, community
Developmental Assessment
● Assessment of milestones: gross and ﬁne motor, per-
sonal–social, language, and cognitive; use a validated 
developmental screener.
Physical Examination
● Careful examination, including growth parameters with 
percentiles for age.
Screening Tests
● Vision and hearing (formal testing at age 4 years), hema-
tocrit and lead (if high risk or at ages 1 to 3 years), screen 
for social risk factors
Immunizations
● See updated AAP schedule
Anticipatory Guidance
Healthy Habits and Behaviors
● Injury and illness prevention
Car seats, poisons, tobacco exposure, supervision
● Nutrition and exercise
Obesity assessment; healthy meals and snacks
● Oral health
Brushing teeth; dentist
Parent–Child Interaction
● Reading and fun times, child-directed play, limiting 
screen time
Family Relationships
● Activities, babysitters
Community Interaction
● Child care, resources
Health Promotion and 
Counseling: Evidence and 
Recommendations
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
861
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Children 5 to 10 Years
The AAP and Bright Futures periodicity 
schedules for children recommend 
annual health supervision visits during 
this period.8 As for earlier ages, these 
visits present opportunities to assess 
the child’s physical, mental, and 
developmental health and the parent–
child relationship and the child’s 
relationships with peers and school 
performance (Fig. 18-52). Once again, 
health promotion should be in-
corporated into all interactions with 
children and families.
Older children enjoy talking directly with the examiner. In addition to discussing 
health, safety, development, and anticipatory guidance with parents, include the 
child in these conversations using age-appropriate language and concepts. Dis-
cuss the child’s experience and perceptions of school, interactions with peers, 
and other cognitive and social activities. Focus on healthy habits such as good 
nutrition, exercise, reading, stimulating activities, health sleep hygiene, screen 
time, and safety.
About 12% to 20% of children have some 
type of chronic physical, developmental, 
or mental condition.33 These children 
should be seen more frequently for 
monitoring, disease management, and 
preventive care (Fig. 18-53). Some 
behaviors that become established at 
this age can lead to or exacerbate 
chronic conditions such as obesity or 
eating disorders. Health promotion is 
critical to optimize healthy habits and 
minimize unhealthy ones. Helping 
families and children with chronic dis-
eases deal most effectively with these 
disorders is a key part of health promotion.
For all children, health promotion involves assessing and promoting the fam-
ily’s overall health.
The speciﬁc components of the health supervision visit for older children are the 
same as the components for younger children. Emphasize school performance 
and experiences as well as appropriate and safe sports and activities and healthy 
peer relationships.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 5 2 .  As children develop, 
mental health and peer relationships 
become increasingly important.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 5 3 .  Connecting with 
children with chronic conditions can 
positively affect health outcomes.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
862 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The order of the examination now begins to follow that used for adults. Examine 
painful areas last and forewarn children about areas you are going to examine. If 
a child resists part of the examination you can return to it at the end.
General Survey and Vital Signs
Somatic Growth. Figures 18-54 and 18-55 demonstrate somatic growth 
patterns in children.
Growth Patterns of Various
Systems
180
140
100
60
20
0
4
8
12
16
20
Percent of 20-year-old size
Birth
Age (years)
LYMPHOID
BRAIN AND
HEAD
GENERAL
REPRODUCTIVE
F I G U R E  1 8 - 5 4 .  Growth patterns of 
various systems.
1
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Age (years)
Height change (cm/yr)
Single whole-year
increment (50th percentile)
Boys
Girls
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
F I G U R E  1 8 - 5 5 .  Velocity curves for length and 
height for boys and girls based on intervals of 1 year.
(From Lowrey GH. Growth and Development of Children, 8th ed. Chicago: Mosby, 
1986.)
Height. For children older than 2 years measure standing height, opti-
mally using wall-mounted stadiometers. Have the child stand with heels, back, 
and head against a wall or the back of the stadiometer. If using a wall with a 
marked ruler, make sure to place a ﬂat board or surface against the top of the 
child’s head and at right angles to the ruler. Stand-up weight scales with a height 
attachment are not very accurate.
Short stature, defined as height <5th 
percentile, can be a normal variant or 
caused by endocrine or other diseases. 
Normal variants include familial short 
stature and constitutional delay. 
Chronic diseases include growth 
hormone deficiency, other endocrine 
diseases, gastrointestinal disease, renal 
or metabolic disease, and genetic 
syndromes. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Techniques of Examination
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
863
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
After age 2 years children should grow at least 5 cm per year. During puberty, growth 
velocity increases.
Weight. Children who can stand should be weighed in a gown (or in 
clothing without shoes) on a stand-up scale. Use the same scales across succes-
sive visits to optimize comparability.
Head Circumference. In general, head circumference is measured until 
the child reaches 24 months. Afterward, head circumference measurement may 
be helpful if you suspect a genetic or a central nervous system disorder.
Body Mass Index for Age. Age- and sex-speciﬁc charts are now avail-
able to assess BMI in children. BMI in children is associated with body fat, 
related to subsequent health risks for obesity. BMI measurements are helpful 
for early detection of obesity in children older than 2 years. BMI growth charts 
for children take into account differences by sex and age. Obesity is now a major 
childhood epidemic and it often begins before age 6 to 8 years. Consequences 
of childhood obesity include hypertension, diabetes, metabolic syndrome, and poor 
self-esteem. Childhood obesity often leads to adult obesity and shortened lifespan. 
It is helpful to give parents their child’s BMI results together with information 
about the impact of healthy eating and physical activity.
Young children can have inadequate 
weight and height gain if caloric 
intake is insufficient. Etiologies 
include psychosocial, interactional, 
gastrointestinal, and endocrine 
disorders. 
Most children with exogenous obesity 
are also tall for their age. Children 
with endocrine causes of obesity tend 
to be short. 
Childhood obesity is a major 
epidemic: 32% of U.S. children have a 
BMI greater than the 85th percentile, 
and 17% have a BMI in the 95th 
percentile or greater.34 Long-term 
morbidity from childhood obesity 
spans many organ systems, including 
cardiovascular, endocrine, renal, 
musculoskeletal, gastrointestinal, and 
psychological. Prevention, early 
detection, and aggressive 
management are needed.
Interpreting BMI in Children
Group
BMI-for-Age
Underweight
Healthy weight
Overweight
Obese
<5th percentile
5th–85th percentile
85th–95th percentile
≥95th percentile
Vital Signs
Blood Pressure. Hypertension during childhood is more common than 
previously thought and it is important to recognize, conﬁrm, and appropri-
ately manage it.
Children have elevated blood pressure during exercise, crying, and anxiety. The 
procedure for measuring blood pressure was explained and demonstrated 
beforehand. Most children are cooperative with blood pressure measurement. If 
the blood pressure is initially elevated you can perform blood pressure readings 
again at the end of the examination. Leave the cuff on the arm (deﬂated) and 
repeat the reading later. Elevated readings must always be conﬁrmed by subse-
quent measurements.
A very common cause of apparent 
hypertension is anxiety or “white-coat 
hypertension.” The most frequent 
“cause” of an elevated blood pressure 
in children is probably an improperly 
performed examination, often due to 
an incorrect cuff size. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
864 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
A proper cuff size is essential for accurate 
determinations of blood pressure in chil-
dren. Select the blood pressure cuff as 
you would for adults; it should be wide 
enough to cover two thirds of the 
upper arm or leg (Fig. 18-56). A nar-
rower cuff falsely elevates the blood pres-
sure reading, whereas a wider cuff lowers 
it and may interfere with proper place-
ment of the stethoscope diaphragm 
over the artery.
With children, as with adults, the ﬁrst Korotkoff sound indicates systolic pres-
sure and the point at which the Korotkoff sounds disappear constitutes the dia-
stolic pressure. At times, especially among chubby young children, the Korotkoff 
sounds are not easily heard. In such instances, you can use palpation to deter-
mine the systolic blood pressure, remembering that the systolic pressure obtained 
is approximately 10 mm Hg lower by palpation than by auscultation.
A relatively inaccurate method is “inspection.” If unable to obtain the blood pres-
sure by auscultation/palpation, watch for the needle to bounce by about 10 mm 
Hg. The systolic blood pressure obtained by “inspection” is about 1 mm Hg 
higher than that obtained by auscultation.
In 2004, the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute’s National High Blood 
Pressure Working Group on Hypertension Control in Children and Adolescents 
deﬁned normal, high-normal, and high blood pressure as follows, with measure-
ments on at least three separate occasions.36
F I G U R E  1 8 - 5 6 .  Blood pressure 
monitoring in childhood can be 
challenging.
In children, as in adults, blood pres-
sure readings from the thigh are 
approximately 10 mm Hg higher than 
those from the upper arm. If they are 
the same or lower, coarctation of the 
aorta should be suspected. 
Transient hypertension in children 
can be caused by some common child-
hood medications, including those to 
treat asthma (e.g., prednisone) and 
ADHD (e.g., Ritalin).
Causes of sustained hypertension35 in 
childhood include primary 
hypertension (with no underlying 
etiology) and secondary hypertension 
(which has an underlying etiology). 
Causes of secondary hypertension 
include: renal, endocrine, and 
neurologic disease, vascular causes, 
drugs or medications and psychological 
causes. Obesity is highly associated 
with hypertension in childhood.
Blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents
Blood Pressure 
Category
Average Systolic and/or Diastolic Blood 
Pressure for Age, Sex, and Height
Normal
Prehypertensive
Hypertensive
● stage 1
● stage 2
<90th percentile
90th–95th percentile
≥95th percentile
95th percentile to 5 mm Hg above 99th percentile
≥99th percentile plus 5 mm Hga
aRefer to standard blood pressure tables based on age.
The epidemic of childhood obesity 
has also resulted in a rising preva-
lence of childhood hypertension.37,38 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
865
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Children who have hypertension should be evaluated extensively to determine 
the cause. For infants and young children, a speciﬁc cause can often be found. 
An increasing proportion of older children and adolescents, however, have 
essential or primary hypertension. In all cases it is important to repeat measure-
ments to reduce the possibility that the elevation reﬂects anxiety. Sometimes, 
repeating measurements in school is a way to obtain readings in a more relaxed 
environment. Hypertension and obesity often coexist in children.
It is important not to falsely label a child or adolescent as having hypertension 
because of the stigma of labeling, potential limitations to activities, and pos-
sible side effects of treatment. 
Pulse. Average heart rates and normal ranges are shown in the table below. 
Measure the heart rate over a 60-second interval.
Average Heart Rate of Children at Rest
Age
Average Rate
Range (Two Standard Deviations)
1–2 yrs
2–6 yrs
6–10 yrs
110
103
95
70–150
68–138
65–125
Respiratory Rate. The rate of respirations per minute ranges from 20 to 40 
during early childhood and 15 to 25 during late childhood, reaching adult levels 
at around 15 years of age.39
For young children, observe the movements of the chest wall for two 30-second 
intervals or over 1 minute, preferably before stimulating them. Direct auscultation 
of the chest or placing the stethoscope in front of the mouth is also useful for count-
ing respirations, but the measurement may be falsely elevated if the child becomes 
agitated. For older children use the same technique as that used for adults.
The commonly accepted standard for tachypnea in children older than age 1 year 
is a respiratory rate >40 breaths per minute. The best single physical ﬁnding for 
ruling out pneumonia is an absence of tachypnea. 
Temperature. In children, auditory canal temperature recordings are 
preferable because they can be obtained quickly with essentially no discomfort.
The Skin
After a child’s ﬁrst year of life, the techniques of examination are the same as 
those for the adult (see Chapter 6, The Skin, Hair, and Nails).
The Head
In examining the head and neck, tailor your examination to the child’s stage of 
growth and development.
Sinus bradycardia is a heart rate 
<100 beats per minute in infants and 
toddlers and <60 beats per minute in 
children 3 to 9 years. 
Children with respiratory diseases 
such as bronchiolitis or pneumonia 
have rapid respirations (up to 80 to 
90/min) and increased work of breath-
ing such as grunting, nasal flaring, or 
use of accessory muscles.
Children younger than 3 years, who 
appear very ill with a fever, should be 
evaluated for sepsis, urinary tract 
infection, pneumonia, or other serious 
infection. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
866 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Even before touching the child, carefully observe the shape of the head, its sym-
metry, and the presence of abnormal facies. Abnormal facies may not be apparent 
until later in childhood; therefore, carefully examine the face as well as the head 
of all children.
There are diagnostic facies in childhood (Table 18-6, Diagnostic Facies in Infancy 
and Childhood, pp. 914–915, shows several) that reﬂect chromosomal abnor-
malities, endocrine defects, chronic illness, and other disorders.
The Eyes
The two most important components of the eye examination for young children 
are to determine whether the gaze is conjugate or symmetric and to test visual 
acuity in each eye.
Conjugate Gaze. Use the methods described in Chapter 7 for adults to assess 
conjugate gaze, or the position and alignment of the eyes, and the function of the 
extraocular muscles. The corneal light reﬂex test and the cover–uncover test 
are particularly useful in young children (Figs. 18-57 and 18-58).
Fetal alcohol syndrome can cause 
abnormal facies (p. 914), micro-
cephaly, and developmental delay. 
Strabismus (see Table 18-7, 
Abnormalities of the Eyes, Ears, and 
Mouth, p. 916) in children requires 
treatment by an ophthalmologist. 
Both ocular strabismus and 
anisometropia (eyes with significantly 
different refractive errors) can result 
in amblyopia, or reduced vision in an 
otherwise normal eye. Amblyopia can 
lead to a “lazy eye,” with permanently 
reduced visual acuity if not corrected 
early. 
F I G U R E  1 8 - 5 7 .  Corneal light 
reﬂex test.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 5 8 .  Cover–uncover 
test.
Perform the cover–uncover test as a game by having the young child watch your 
nose or tell you if you are smiling or not while you cover one of the child’s eyes. 
When you uncover the eye, watch for any deviation of that eye. Repeat for the 
other eye. Latent strabismus is indicated by movement of either eye when 
uncovered.
Visual Acuity. It may not be possible to measure the visual acuity of children 
younger than 3 years who cannot identify pictures on an eye chart. For these 
children, the simplest examination is to assess for ﬁxation preference by alter-
nately covering one eye; the child with normal vision will not object, but a child 
with poor vision in one eye will object to having the good eye covered. Impor-
tantly, if you or the parent have any doubts about visual acuity, it is wise to refer 
to an optometrist or ophthalmologist because this aspect of the physical exami-
nation is insensitive. In all tests of visual acuity it is important that both eyes 
show the same result because of the risk for amblyopia.
The common forms of strabismus in 
children involve horizontal deviation: 
nasal (“eso”) or temporal (“exo”). A 
latent strabismus (“phoria”) occurs 
when you disrupt fixation, whereas 
manifest strabismus (“tropia”) is 
present without interruption. 
Reduced visual acuity is more likely 
among children who were born 
prematurely and among those with 
other neurologic or developmental 
disorders. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
867
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Visual Acuity
Age
Acuity
3 mo
Eyes converge, baby reaches
12 mo
∼20/200
Younger than 4 yrs
20/40
4 yrs and older
20/30
F I G U R E  1 8 - 5 9 .  Testing visual 
acuity with a simple chart.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 6 0 .  Test each eye 
and note the difference in acuity.
Visual acuity in children 4 years and older can usually be formally tested using 
an eye chart with one of a variety of optotypes (characters or symbols).40 A child 
who does not know letters or numbers reliably can be tested using pictures, 
symbols, or the “E” chart. Using the “E” chart, most children will cooperate by 
telling you in which direction the “E” is pointing.
Visual Fields. While it is often challenging, the visual ﬁelds can be examined 
in infants and young children with the child sitting on the parent’s lap. One eye 
should be tested at a time with the other eye covered. Hold the child’s head in 
the midline while bringing an object such as a toy into the ﬁeld of vision from 
behind the child. The overall method is the same as that for adults, except that 
you will have to make this into a game for your patient.
The Ears
Examining the ear canal and drum can be difﬁcult in young children who are 
sensitive and fearful because they cannot observe the procedure. With a little 
practice though, you can master this technique. Unfortunately, many young 
The most common visual disorder of 
childhood is myopia, which can be 
easily detected using this examina-
tion technique. 
Some children develop abnormalities 
in near vision, which can lead to read-
ing difficulties, headaches, and school 
problems, as well as double vision. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Any difference in visual acuity 
between the eyes (e.g., 20/20 on the 
left and 20/30 on the right) is abnor-
mal by age 5 years (Figs. 18-59 and 
18-60).
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
868 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
children need to be brieﬂy restrained during this examination, which is why you may 
want to leave it for the end.
If the child is not too fearful, you may examine the ears with the child sitting on 
a parent’s lap. Make a game out of the otoscopic examination, such as ﬁnding an 
imaginary object in the child’s ear or talking playfully to allay fears. It may help 
to place the otoscopic speculum gently into the external auditory canal of one 
ear and then withdraw it so that the child gets used to the procedure before the 
actual examination. It is also helpful to show the child that the speculum does 
not hurt by letting the child touch it and shine a light through your ﬁnger.
Ask the parent for a preference regarding the positioning of the child for the 
examination. There are two common positions: the child lying down and 
restrained, and the child sitting in the parent’s lap. If the child is held supine, 
have the parent hold the arms either extended (Figs. 18-61 and 18-62) or close 
to the sides to limit motion. Hold the head and pull the pinna (auricle) upwards 
with one hand while you hold the otoscope with your other hand. If the child is 
on the parent’s lap, the child’s legs should be between the parent’s legs. The par-
ent could help by placing one arm around the child’s body and using the second 
arm to steady the head (with the parent’s hand on the child’s forehead).
F I G U R E  1 8 - 6 1 .  Gently holding 
the child’s arms reduces reactions to 
the otoscope.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 6 2 .  Hand positions 
for standard otoscope approach.
Gently move and pull on the pinna before or during your otoscopic examination. 
Carefully inspect the area behind the pinna, over the mastoid bone. Many ofﬁces 
now use a tympanometer, which measures the compliance of the tympanic mem-
brane and helps to diagnose a middle ear effusion.
Tympanic Membranes. Many students have difﬁculty visualizing a child’s 
tympanic membrane. In young children, the external auditory canal is directed 
upward and backward from the outside, and the auricle must be pulled upward, 
outward, and backward to afford the best view. Press the child’s head with one hand, 
and with that same hand pull up on the auricle. Position the otoscope with your 
other hand.
With acute mastoiditis, the auricle 
may protrude forward and outward, 
and the area over the mastoid bone is 
red, swollen, and tender. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
869
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
There are two ways to hold the otoscope, as illustrated by the following ﬁgures:
■ The ﬁrst is the method generally used in adults, with the otoscope handle 
pointing upward or laterally while you pull up on the auricle. Hold the 
lateral aspect of your hand that has the otoscope against the child’s head to 
provide a buffer against sudden movements by the patient (Figs. 18-61 and 
18-62).
■ The second position, with the handle of the otoscope pointing down 
 toward the child’s feet, is preferred by many pediatricians because of the 
angle of the auditory canal in children. While holding the otoscope with the 
handle pointing down, pull up on the auricle. Steady your hand against 
the child’s head and pull up on the auricle with that hand, while you hold 
the otoscope with the other hand (Figs. 18-63 and 18-64).
Tips for Conducting the Otoscopic Examination
● Use the best angle of the otoscope.
● Use the largest possible speculum.
● A larger speculum allows you to better visualize the tympanic membrane 
and is less painful since it is not inserted as far as a smaller speculum.
● A small speculum may not provide a seal for pneumatic otoscopy.
● Don’t apply too much pressure which will cause the child to cry and may cause 
false-positive results on pneumatic otoscopy.
● Insert the speculum ¼ to ½ inch into the canal.
● First ﬁnd the landmarks.
● Careful—sometimes the ear canal resembles the tympanic membrane.
● Note whether the tympanic membrane is abnormal.
● Remove cerumen if it is blocking your view, using one of the following:
● Special plastic curettes
● A moistened microtipped cotton swab
● Flushing of ears for older children
● Special instruments that can also be purchased.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 6 3 .  Gently pulling 
up on the auricle gives a better 
otoscope view with many children.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 6 4 .  Auricle pulled 
up, handle pointed down, assessing 
left ear.
Acute otitis media is a common condi-
tion of childhood. A symptomatic child 
typically has a red, bulging tympanic 
membrane with a dull or absent light 
reflex and diminished movement on 
pneumatic otoscopy. Purulent material 
may also be seen behind the tympanic 
membrane. See Table 18-7, Abnormali-
ties of the Eyes, Ears, and Mouth,  
p. 916. The most useful symptom in 
making the diagnosis is ear pain, if 
combined with the above signs.41–43 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
870 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
You can use a pneumatic otoscope to 
improve the accuracy of diagnosis of oti-
tis media in children (Fig. 18-65). This 
allows you to assess the mobility of the 
tympanic membrane as you increase and 
decrease the pressure in the external 
auditory canal by squeezing the rubber 
bulb of the pneumatic otoscope.
First, check the pneumatic otoscope for 
leaks by placing your ﬁnger over the tip 
of the speculum and squeezing the bulb. 
Note the pressure on the bulb. Then 
insert the speculum, obtaining a proper 
seal; this is critical because failure to 
obtain a seal can produce a false-positive 
ﬁnding (lack of movement of the tym-
panic membrane). Of note, this process 
requires a cooperative patient.
When air is introduced into the normal ear canal, the tympanic membrane and 
its light reﬂex move inward. When air is removed, the tympanic membrane 
moves outward. This rapid, subtle to-and-fro movement of the tympanic mem-
brane has been likened to the lufﬁng of a sail. If the tympanic membrane fails 
to move perceptibly as you introduce positive or negative pressure, the child is 
likely to have a middle ear effusion (or the technique was poor). A child with 
acute otitis media may ﬂinch because of pain due to the air pressure.
Hearing Testing. Formal hearing testing is necessary for accurate detection 
of hearing deﬁcits in young children. Once the child is old enough to cooperate, 
use a formal hearing test method. You can grossly test for hearing in very young 
children by using the whispered voice test. Stand behind the child (so that the 
child cannot read your lips), cover one of the child’s ear canals, and rub the 
F I G U R E  1 8 - 6 5 .  Pneumatic 
otoscope.
Sometimes when you are examining 
acute otitis media leads to a ruptured 
tympanic membrane, leading to pus in 
the auditory canal. In these cases, you 
will generally not visualize the tym-
panic membrane. 
With otitis externa (but not otitis 
media), movement of the pinna elicits 
pain.
Movement of the tympanic mem-
brane is absent in middle ear effusion 
(otitis media with effusion).
Significantly, temporary hearing loss 
for several months can accompany 
otitis media with effusion. 
Younger children who fail these 
screening maneuvers or who have 
speech delay should have audiomet-
ric testing. These children may have 
hearing deficits or central auditory 
processing disorders. 
Up to 15% of school-aged children 
have at least mild hearing loss, empha-
sizing the importance of screening for 
hearing prior to school age.41
The two types of hearing loss seen  
in children are conductive and 
sensorineural hearing loss.
Causes of conductive hearing loss 
include congenital abnormalities, 
trauma, recurrent otitis media, and 
tympanic membrane perforation.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 6 6 .  Standardized testing 
equipment provides more precise metrics.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 6 7 .  Children 
often enjoy a full-scale acoustic 
screening test.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
871
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The Nose and Sinuses
Inspect the anterior portion of the nose 
by using a large speculum on your 
otoscope. Inspect the nasal mucous 
membranes, noting their color and 
condition. Look for nasal septal 
deviation and the presence of polyps 
(Fig. 18-68).
Maxillary sinuses are noted on x-rays 
by age 4 years, sphenoid sinuses by 
age 6 years, and frontal sinuses by age 
6 to 7 years. The sinuses of older chil-
dren can be palpated as in adults, 
looking for tenderness.45 Transillumi-
nation of the paranasal sinuses of younger children has poor sensitivity and 
speciﬁcity for diagnosing sinusitis or ﬂuid in the sinuses.
Causes of sensorineural hearing loss 
include hereditary congenital infec-
tions, ototopic drugs, trauma, and 
some infections such as meningitis.
Hearing Ranges on Formal Acoustic  
Screening Tests
Normal hearing
Mild hearing loss
Moderate hearing loss
Severe hearing loss
Profound hearing loss
0–20 dB
21–40 dB
41–60 dB
61–90 dB
>90 dB
F I G U R E  1 8 - 6 8 .  Nasal inspection 
of children often has different results 
than adults.
Pale, boggy nasal mucous membranes 
are found in children with allergic 
rhinitis. 
Purulent rhinitis is common in viral 
infections but may be part of the con-
stellation of symptoms of sinusitis.
Foul-smelling, purulent, unilateral 
discharge from the nose may be due 
to a foreign body. This most often 
occurs among young preschool 
children who tend to stick objects into 
body orifices.
Nasal polyps are flesh-colored 
growths inside the nares. They are 
generally isolated findings, but can  
be part of a syndrome.
Children with purulent rhinorrhea 
(generally unilateral) for more than  
10 days, and also headache, sore 
throat, fever, and tenderness over the 
sinuses may have sinusitis.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
tragus, using a circular motion. Whisper letters, numbers, or a word and have 
the child repeat it, and then test the other ear. This technique has relatively high 
sensitivity and speciﬁcity compared to formal testing.44
The AAP recommends that all children older than 4 years have a full-scale acoustic 
screening test using standardized equipment (Figs. 18-66 and 18-67).4 Even though 
a normal hearing screen at birth is reassuring, some hearing loss is acquired as 
children age and hearing loss can dramatically affect a child’s language and devel-
opment. If you do use an acoustic screening test, be sure to test the entire acous-
tic range, including the speaking range (500 to 6,000 Hz). The table below 
shows one classiﬁcation of hearing ranges.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
872 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The Mouth and Pharynx
For anxious or young children, it is wise to leave the examination of the mouth 
and pharynx until the end because it may require parental restraint. The young, 
cooperative child may be more comfortable sitting in the parent’s lap.
Healthy children are more likely to cooperate with this examination than sick 
children, especially if the sick child sees the tongue depressor or has had previ-
ous experience with throat cultures.
Figure 18-69 demonstrates how to get 
children to open their mouths. The 
child who can say “ahhh” will usually 
offer a sufﬁcient (albeit brief) view of 
the posterior pharynx so that a tongue 
depressor is unnecessary.
If you need to use a tongue depressor, 
push down and pull slightly forward 
toward yourself while the child says 
“ahhh,” being careful not to place the 
depressor too far posteriorly, eliciting a 
gag reﬂex. Sometimes, young and anx-
ious children will need to be restrained and will clamp their teeth and purse their 
lips. In these cases, carefully slip the tongue depressor between the teeth and 
onto the tongue. This will either allow you to push down on the tongue or elicit 
a gag reﬂex, which should permit a brief look at the posterior pharynx and ton-
sils. Careful planning and parental help are needed.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 6 9 .  Children generally 
imitate well enough to allow you to  
inspect the back of their mouths.
Dental caries are the most common 
health problem in children. They are 
particularly prevalent in impover-
ished populations and can cause both 
short-term and long-term problems.46 
Caries are highly treatable but require 
a dental visit. 
How to Get Children to Open Their Mouths 
(a.k.a., “Would You Please Say ’Ahhh’?”)
● Turn it into a game.
● “Now let’s see what’s in your mouth.”
● “Can you stick out your whole tongue?”
● “I bet you can’t open your mouth really wide!”
● “Let me see the inside of your teeth.”
● “Can you pant like a dog on a hot day?”
● Don’t show a tongue depressor unless really necessary.
● Demonstrate ﬁrst on an older sibling (or even the parent).
● Oﬀer enthusiastic praise for opening their mouths a little and encourage 
them to open even wider.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Examine the teeth for the timing and sequence of eruption, number, character, 
condition, and position. Abnormalities of the enamel may reﬂect local or general 
disease.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
873
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Carefully inspect the upper teeth as 
shown in Figure 18-70. This is a common 
location for nursing-bottle caries. The 
technique shown in the photo, called 
“lift the lip,” can help visualize dental 
caries.
Visualize the inside of the upper teeth by 
having the child look up at the ceiling 
with the mouth wide open.
The box below displays the common pat-
tern of tooth eruption. In general, lower 
teeth erupt a bit earlier than upper teeth.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 7 0 .  Lift the lip to 
check for dental caries.
Dental caries are caused by bacterial 
activity. Caries are more likely among 
young children who have prolonged 
bottle-feeding (“nursing-bottle car-
ies”). See Table 18-8, Abnormalities of 
the Teeth, Pharynx, and Neck, p. 917, 
for different stages of caries. 
Staining of the teeth may be intrinsic 
or extrinsic. Intrinsic stains may be 
from tetracycline use before 8 years 
(yellow, gray, or brown stain). Iron 
preparation (black stain) and fluoride 
(white stain) are examples of extrinsic 
stains. Extrinsic stains can be polished 
off; intrinsic stains cannot (see 
Table 18-8, Abnormalities of the 
Teeth, Pharynx, and Neck, p. 917). 
Tooth Types and Age of Eruption
 
Approximate Age of Eruption47
Tooth Type
Primary (mo)
Permanent (yrs)
Central incisor
Lateral incisor
Cuspids
First bicuspids
Second bicuspids
First molars
Second molars
Third molars
5–8
5–11
24–30
           —
           —
16–20
24–30
           —
6–8
7–9
11–12
10–12
10–12
6–7
11–13
17–22
Look for abnormalities of the position of the teeth. These include malocclusion, 
maxillary protrusion (overbite), and mandibular protrusion (underbite). You can 
demonstrate the latter two by asking the child to bite down hard while either you 
or the child parts the lips. Normally, the lower teeth are contained within the 
arch formed by the upper teeth.
Malocclusion and misalignment of 
teeth can be from thumb sucking, a 
hereditary condition, or premature 
loss of primary teeth. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
874 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Carefully inspect the tongue, including 
the underside (Fig. 18-71). Most chil-
dren will happily stick their tongue 
out at you, move it from side to side, 
and demonstrate its color.
Some young children have a tight frenulum. Have the child touch the tongue to 
the roof of the mouth to diagnose this condition which often does not require 
treatment unless it interferes with eating or speech.
Note the size, position, symmetry, and appearance of the tonsils. The peak growth 
of tonsillar tissue is between 8 and 16 years (Fig. 18-54). The size of the tonsils 
varies considerably in children and is often categorized on a scale of 1+ to 4+, 
with 1+ being easy visibility of the gap between the tonsils, and 4+ being tonsils 
that touch in the midline with the mouth wide open. The tonsils in children 
often appear more obstructive than they really are.
Tonsils in children usually have deep crypts on their surfaces, which often have 
white concretions or food particles protruding from their depths. This does not 
indicate disease.
Look for clues of a submucosal cleft palate such as notching of the posterior 
margin of the hard palate or a biﬁd uvula. Because the mucosa is intact, the 
underlying defect is easily missed, but needs referral to otolaryngology.
Extremely rarely, you may encounter a child who has a sore throat and has 
 difﬁculty swallowing saliva and who is sitting up stifﬂy in a “tripod” position 
because of throat obstruction. Do not open this child’s mouth because he may 
have acute epiglottitis, or obstruction from another cause, and examination of 
the throat may induce gagging and laryngeal obstruction.
Note the quality of the child’s voice. Certain abnormalities can change the pitch 
and quality of the voice.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 7 1 .  Inspect all parts of 
the tongue.
Common abnormalities include 
coated tongue in viral infections, and 
strawberry tongue, from scarlet fever. 
A geographic tongue is a benign but 
chronic condition in which a portion 
of the tongue has a rough, unusual 
appearance.
Streptococcal pharyngitis typically 
produces a strawberry tongue, white 
or yellow exudates on the tonsils or 
posterior pharynx, a beefy-red uvula, 
and palatal petechiae; see Table 18-8, 
p. 917.48 
A peritonsillar abscess is suggested by 
erythema and asymmetric enlarge-
ment of one tonsil, pain, and lateral 
displacement of the uvula. 
Acute epiglottitis is now rare in the 
United States because of immunization 
against Haemophilus influenzae type B. 
Bacterial tracheitis can cause airway 
obstruction.
Tonsillitis can be caused by bacteria, 
such as Streptococcus, or viruses.  
The “rocks in the mouth” voice is 
accompanied by enlarged tonsils with 
exudates. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Children who are severely “tongue-
tied” might have a speech impedi-
ment.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
875
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
You may note an abnormal breath odor which may help lead to a speciﬁc diag-
nosis.
The Neck
Beyond infancy, the techniques for examining the neck are the same as for 
adults. Lymphadenopathy is unusual during infancy but very common during 
childhood. The child’s lymphatic system reaches its zenith of growth at 12 years, 
and cervical or tonsillar lymph nodes reach their peak size between 8 and 
16 years (Fig. 18-54).
The vast majority of enlarged lymph nodes in children are due to infections 
(mostly viral, but sometimes bacterial) and not due to malignant disease, 
even though the latter is a concern for many parents. It is important to dif-
ferentiate normal lymph nodes from abnormal ones or from congenital cysts 
of the neck.
Figure 18-25 on p. 828 demonstrates the typical anatomical locations of lymph 
nodes and congenital cysts of the neck.
Check for neck mobility. It is important to ensure that the neck of all children is 
supple and easily mobile in all directions. This is particularly important when 
the patient is holding the head in an asymmetric manner and when central ner-
vous system disease such as meningitis is suspected.
Voice Changes— 
Clues to Underlying Abnormalities
Voice Change
Possible Abnormality
Hypernasal speech
Nasal voice plus snoring
Hoarse voice plus cough
“Rocks in mouth”
Submucosal cleft palate
Adenoidal hypertrophy
Viral infection (croup)
Tonsillitis
The epidemic of childhood obesity 
has resulted in many children who 
snore and have sleep apnea. 
Halitosis in a child can be caused by 
upper respiratory, pharyngeal, or 
mouth infection, foreign body in the 
nose, sinusitis, dental disease, and 
gastroesophageal reflux. 
Lymphadenopathy is usually from viral 
or bacterial infections (see Table 18-8, 
Abnormalities of the Teeth, Pharynx, 
and Neck, p. 917). 
Malignancy is more likely if the node 
is >2 cm, is hard, or is fixed to the skin or 
underlying tissues (i.e., not mobile) 
and is accompanied by serious systemic 
signs such as weight loss. 
In young children with small necks, it 
may be difficult to differentiate low 
posterior cervical lymph nodes from 
supraclavicular lymph nodes (which are 
always abnormal and raise suspicion 
for malignancy). 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
876 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
In children, the presence of nuchal rigid-
ity is a more reliable indicator of menin-
geal irritation than Brudzinski sign or 
Kernig sign. To detect nuchal rigidity in 
older children, ask the child to sit with 
legs extended on the examining table. 
Normally, children should be able to sit 
upright and touch their chins to their 
chests. Younger children can be per-
suaded to ﬂex their necks by having 
them follow a small toy or light beam. 
You also can test for nuchal rigidity with 
the child lying on the examining table, 
as shown in  Figure 18-72. Nearly all 
children with nuchal rigidity will be 
extremely sick, irritable, and difﬁcult 
to examine. In many countries the 
incidence of bacterial meningitis has 
plummeted because of vaccinations.
The Thorax and Lungs
As children age, the lung examination becomes similar to that for adults. 
Cooperation is critical. Auscultation is usually easiest when a child barely 
notices (as when in a parent’s lap). Let a toddler who seems fearful of the 
stethoscope play with it before it touches the child’s chest.
Assess the relative proportion of time spent on inspiration versus expiration. The 
normal ratio is about 1:1. Prolonged inspirations or expirations are a clue to dis-
ease location. Degree of prolongation and effort or “work of breathing” are related 
to disease severity.
Young children asked to “take deep 
breaths” often hold their breath, further 
complicating auscultation. It is easier to 
let preschoolers breathe normally. Dem-
onstrate to older children how to take 
nice, quiet, deep breaths. Make it a 
game. To accomplish a forced expira-
tory maneuver, ask the child to blow 
out candles on an imaginary birthday 
cake or use pinwheels (Fig. 18-73).
F I G U R E  1 8 - 7 2 .  Inspect the neck 
for nuchal rigidity.
Nuchal rigidity is marked resistance to 
movement of the head in any direc-
tion. It suggests meningeal irritation 
due to meningitis, bleeding, tumor, or 
other causes. These children are 
extremely irritable and difficult to 
console and may have “paradoxical 
irritability”—increased irritability 
when being held. 
When meningeal irritation is present, 
the child may assume the tripod posi-
tion and is unable to assume a full 
upright position to perform the  
chin-to-chest maneuver.
With upper airway obstruction such 
as croup, inspiration is prolonged and 
accompanied by other signs such as 
stridor, cough, or rhonchi. 
With lower airway obstruction such as 
asthma, expiration is prolonged and 
often accompanied by wheezing. 
F I G U R E  1 8 - 7 3 .  Getting a child to 
perform a forced expiration.
Pneumonia in young children is gener-
ally manifested by fever, tachypnea, dys-
pnea, and increased work of breathing. 
Although upper respiratory infections 
due to viruses can cause young 
infants to appear quite ill, in children 
they present with the same signs as in 
adults and children generally appear 
well without lower respiratory signs.
Childhood asthma is an extremely com-
mon condition throughout the world. 
Children with acute asthma present 
with varying severity and often have 
increased work of breathing. Expiratory 
wheezing and a prolonged expiratory 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
877
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Older children will be cooperative for the respiratory examination and can even 
go through the maneuvers of assessing fremitus or listening to “E to A” changes 
(see pp. 326–327). As children grow, the evaluation by observation discussed on 
the previous page, such as assessing the work of breathing, nasal ﬂaring, and 
grunting, becomes less helpful in assessing for respiratory pathology. Palpation, 
percussion, and auscultation achieve greater importance in a careful examination 
of the thorax and lungs.
Children in respiratory distress may 
assume a “tripod position” in which they 
lean forward to optimize airway 
patency (Fig. 18-74). This same posi-
tion can also be caused by pharyngeal 
obstruction (see p. 874).
The Heart
The examination of the heart and 
vascular systems in infants and children 
is similar to that in adults. However, a 
child’s fearfulness or inability to cooperate 
may make the examination difﬁcult 
while the desire to play will make the 
examination easier and more productive. 
Use your knowledge of the developmental 
stage of each child. A 2-year-old may be 
the easiest to examine while standing or 
sitting on the mother’s lap, facing her 
shoulder, or being held (Fig. 18-75). 
Give young children something to hold 
in each hand. They cannot ﬁgure out 
how to drop one object and, therefore, 
have no hand free to push you away. 
Endless chatter to small children will 
hold their attention and they may forget you are examining them. Let older children 
move the stethoscope themselves, going back to listen properly.
General abnormalities may suggest increased likelihood of congenital cardiac 
disease as exempliﬁed by Down syndrome or Turner syndrome.
phase, caused by reversible broncho-
spasm, may be heard without the 
stethoscope and are apparent on aus-
cultation. Wheezes are often accompa-
nied by inspiratory rhonchi caused by 
upper respiratory congestion.49 Asthma 
flares often occur with viral infections. 
Tripod 
position
Retractions
Nasal 
flaring
F I G U R E  1 8 - 7 4 .  A child in 
respiratory distress
F I G U R E  1 8 - 7 5 .  Young children are 
easiest to examine when held by a 
parent.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
878 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Blood Pressure. Measure the blood pressure in both arms and one leg at one 
time around age 3 to 4 years to check for possible coarctation of the aorta. There-
after, only the right arm blood pressure needs to be measured.
Benign Murmurs. Preschool and school-aged children often have benign 
murmurs (see ﬁgure on p. 879). The most common (Still’s murmur) is a grade 
I–II/VI, musical, vibratory, early and midsystolic murmur with multiple over-
tones located over the mid or lower left sternal border; it may also be heard over 
the carotid arteries. Carotid artery compression will usually cause the precordial 
murmur to disappear. This murmur may be extremely variable and may be 
accentuated when cardiac output is increased, as occurs with fever or exercise. 
The murmur will diminish as the child goes from supine to sitting to standing.
In preschool or school-aged children, 
you may detect a venous hum. This is a 
soft, hollow, continuous sound, louder 
in diastole, heard just below the right 
clavicle (Fig. 18-76). It can be com-
pletely eliminated by maneuvers that 
affect venous return, such as lying 
supine, changing head position, or 
jugular venous compression. It has the 
same quality as breath sounds and is 
therefore frequently overlooked.
The murmur heard in the carotid area 
or just above the clavicles is known as 
a carotid bruit. It is early and midsys-
tolic with a slightly harsh quality. It is 
usually louder on the left and may be 
heard alone or in combination with the 
Still’s murmur. It may be completely 
eradicated by carotid artery compres-
sion (Fig. 18-77).
F I G U R E  1 8 - 7 6 .  Listening for 
venous hum.
Among young children, murmurs 
without the recognizable features of 
the common benign murmurs may 
signify underlying heart disease and 
should be evaluated thoroughly by a 
pediatric cardiologist. 
Pathologic murmurs that signify car-
diac disease can first appear after 
infancy and during childhood. Exam-
ples include aortic stenosis and mitral 
valve disease.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 7 7 .  Carotid artery 
compression while listening to murmur.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
In coarctation of the aorta the blood 
pressure is lower in the legs than in 
the arms. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
879
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Location and Characteristics of Benign Heart Murmurs in Childrena
Venous hum
Carotid
bruit
Still’s
murmur
Pulmonary
flow
The Abdomen
Toddlers and young children commonly have protuberant abdomens, most 
apparent when they are upright. The examination can follow the same order as 
for adults except that you may need to distract the child during the examination.
Most children are ticklish when you ﬁrst place your hand on their abdomens for pal-
pation. This reaction tends to disappear, particularly if you distract the child with 
conversation and place your whole hand ﬂush on the abdominal surface for a few 
moments without probing. For children who are particularly sensitive and who 
tighten their abdominal muscles you can start by placing the child’s hand under yours. 
Eventually, you will be able to remove the child’s hand and palpate the abdomen freely.
An exaggerated “pot-belly appearance” 
may indicate malabsorption from celiac 
disease, cystic fibrosis, or constipation or 
aerophagia. 
A common condition of childhood 
that can occasionally cause a 
protuberant abdomen is constipation. 
The abdomen is often tympanitic on 
percussion, and stool is sometimes 
felt on palpation. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Typical Age
Name
Characteristics
Description and Location
Preschool or early 
school age
Still’s murmur
Grade I–II/VI, musical, vibratory
Multiple overtones
Early and midsystolic
Mid/lower left sternal border
Frequently also a carotid bruit
Preschool or early 
school age
Venous hum
Soft, hollow, continuous
Louder in diastole
Under clavicle
Can be eliminated by maneuvers
Preschool and later
Carotid bruit
Early and midsystolic
Usually louder on left
Eliminated by carotid compression
Preschool and 
school age
Pulmonary ﬂow 
murmur
S1
S2
Grade 2–3 systolic ejection
Loudest at pulmonary auscultation area
Harsh, nonvibratory
Intensity increases when in the supine position
aSee the table on p. 896 for location and characteristics of benign heart murmurs in older children and adolescents.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
880 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
One method to determine the lower border of the liver involves the scratch test, 
shown in Figures 18-79 and 18-80. Place the diaphragm of your stethoscope just 
above the right costal margin at the midclavicular line. With your ﬁngernail, lightly 
scratch the skin of the abdomen along the midclavicular line, moving from below the 
umbilicus toward the costal margin. When your scratching ﬁnger reaches the liver’s 
edge you will hear a change in the scratching sound as it passes through the liver to 
your stethoscope. The accuracy of the scratch test has not been well studied.50
F I G U R E  1 8 - 7 8 .  Position child as shown to palpate abdomen.
Organic causes of chronic or recurrent 
abdominal pain in children include 
gastritis or ulcer, gastroesophageal 
reflux, constipation, and inflammatory 
bowel disease.
Many children present with abdominal 
pain from acute gastroenteritis. Despite 
pain, their physical examination is rela-
tively normal except for increased 
bowel sounds on auscultation and 
mild tenderness on palpation.
The childhood obesity epidemic has 
resulted in many children who have 
extremely obese abdomens. While it 
is difficult to accurately examine these 
children, the steps to the examination 
are the same as for normal children. 
Expected Liver Span of Children by Percussion
  Mean Estimated Liver Span (cm)
Age in Yrs
Males
Females
2
3
4
5
6
8
10
3.5
4.0
4.4
4.8
5.1
5.6
6.1
3.6
4.0
4.3
4.5
4.8
5.1
5.4
F I G U R E  1 8 - 7 9 .  Palpate the 
lower border of the liver starting low.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 8 0 .  Move your 
ﬁnger cephalad to the rib.
Hepatomegaly in young children is 
unusual. It can be caused by cystic 
fibrosis, protein malabsorption, para-
sites, fatty liver, and tumors. 
If hepatomegaly is accompanied by 
splenomegaly, portal hypertension, 
storage diseases, chronic infections, 
and malignancy should be considered.
Various diseases can cause 
splenomegaly, including infections, 
hematologic disorders such as 
hemolytic anemias, infiltrative 
disorders, and inflammatory or 
autoimmune diseases, as well as 
congestion from portal hypertension.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Chronic or recurrent abdominal pain 
is relatively common in children. 
Causes include both functional 
disorders and organic disorders. 
Functional disorders causing 
abdominal pain include irritable bowel 
syndrome, functional dyspepsia, and 
childhood functional abdominal pain 
syndrome.
Try ﬂexing the knees and hips to relax the child’s abdominal wall, as shown in 
Figure 18-78. Palpate lightly in all areas, then deeply, leaving the site of potential 
pathology to the end.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
881
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The spleen, like the liver, is felt easily in most children. It too is soft with a sharp 
edge, and it projects downward like a tongue from under the left costal margin. 
The spleen is moveable and rarely extends more than 1 to 2 cm below the costal 
margin.
Palpate the other abdominal structures. You will commonly note pulsations in the 
epigastrium caused by the aorta. This is felt most easily to the left of the midline, 
on deep palpation.
Palpating for abdominal tenderness in an older child is the same as for the adult; 
however, the causes of abdominal pain are often different, encompassing a wide 
spectrum of acute and chronic diseases. Localization of tenderness may help you 
pinpoint the abdominal structures most likely to be causing the abdominal pain.
Male Genitalia
Inspect the penis. The size in prepubertal children has little signiﬁcance unless 
it is abnormally large. In obese boys, the fat pad over the symphysis pubis may 
obscure the penis.
In precocious puberty, the penis and testes are enlarged with signs of pubertal 
changes.  Other pubertal changes also occur.
There is an art to palpation of the young boy’s scrotum and testes because many have 
an extremely active cremasteric reﬂex that may cause the testis to retract upward 
into the inguinal canal and thereby appear to be undescended. Examine the child 
when he is relaxed because anxiety stimulates the cremasteric reﬂex. With warm 
hands, palpate the lower abdomen, working your way downward toward the scrotum 
along the inguinal canal. This will minimize retraction of the testes into the canal.
A useful technique is to have the boy sit cross-
legged on the examining table, as shown in 
Figure 18-81. You can also give him a balloon 
to inﬂate or an object to lift to increase intra-
abdominal pressure. If you can detect the tes-
tis in the scrotum it is descended, even if it 
spends much time in the inguinal canal. A 
painful testicle requires rapid treatment.
An abdominal mass felt on 
palpation may represent stool from 
constipation, or a serious condition 
such as a tumor. 
In a child with an acute abdomen, as in 
acute appendicitis, check for involuntary 
rigidity, rebound tenderness, a Rovsing 
sign, or a positive psoas or obturator 
sign (see pp. 485–486).51 Gastroenteritis, 
constipation, and gastrointestinal 
obstruction are other possible etiologies 
of acute abdominal pain. 
F I G U R E  1 8 - 8 1 .  Position of 
child to palpate scrotum.
Cryptorchidism may be noted at this 
age. It requires surgical correction.  
It should be differentiated from a 
retractile testis. 
Possible causes of a painful testicle 
include infection such as epididymitis 
or orchitis, torsion of the testicle, or 
torsion of the appendix testis.
A painless scrotal mass in a young boy 
is usually due to a hydrocele or a 
nonincarcerated inguinal hernia. Other 
rare causes include a varicocele or 
tumor.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Precocious puberty is due to excess 
androgens and can be caused by mul-
tiple conditions including adrenal or 
pituitary tumors.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
882 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The cremasteric reﬂex can be tested by scratching the medial aspect of the thigh. 
The testis on the side being scratched will move upward.
Examine the inguinal canal as you would for adults noting any swelling that may 
reﬂect an inguinal hernia. Have the boy increase abdominal pressure as described 
above and note whether a bulge in the inguinal canal increases with Valsalva.
Female Genitalia
The genital examination can be anxiety provoking for the older child and 
adolescent (especially if you are of the opposite sex) and for parents. Nevertheless, 
not performed, a signiﬁcant ﬁnding may be missed. Depending on the child’s 
developmental stage, explain what parts of the body you will check and that this 
is part of the routine examination.
After infancy, the labia majora and minora ﬂatten out and the hymenal mem-
brane becomes thin, translucent, and vascular, with the edges easily identiﬁed.
The genital examination is the same for 
all ages of children, from late infancy 
until adolescence. Use a calm, gentle 
approach including a developmentally 
appropriate explanation as you do the 
examination. A bright light source is 
essential. Most children can be exam-
ined in the supine, frog-leg position.
If the child seems reluctant, it may be 
helpful to have the parent sit on the 
examination table with the child; alter-
natively, the examination may be per-
formed while the child sits in the 
parent’s lap. Do not use stirrups as 
these may frighten the child. Fig-
ure 18-82 demonstrates a 5-year-old 
girl sitting on her parent’s lap with the 
parent holding her knees outstretched. 
Examine the genitalia in an efﬁcient and systematic manner. Inspect the external 
genitalia for pubic hair, the size of the clitoris, the color and size of the labia 
majora, and the presence of rashes, bruises, or other lesions.
Inguinal hernias in older boys present 
as they do in adult men with swelling 
in the inguinal canal, particularly 
following a Valsalva maneuver. 
The appearance of pubic hair before 
age 7 years should be considered 
precocious puberty and requires 
evaluation to determine the cause. 
Rashes on the external genitals  
can be from physical irritation, 
sweating, and candidal or bacterial 
infections including streptococcal 
infection. 
F I G U R E  1 8 - 8 2 .  Positioning 
mother behind child has a calming effect.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Vulvovaginal pruritis and erythema 
can be caused by external irritants, 
bubble baths, masturbatory activity, 
pinworms, or other infections such as 
Candida or sexually transmitted 
infections.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
883
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Note the condition of the labia minora, urethra, hymen, and proximal vagina. If 
you are unable to visualize the edges of the hymen, ask the child to take a deep 
breath to relax the abdominal muscles. Another useful technique (to be per-
formed by an experienced pediatric examiner) is to position her in the knee–
chest position, as shown in Figures 18-85 and 18-86. These maneuvers will 
often open the hymen. Experienced examiners can also use saline drops to make 
the edges of the hymen less sticky.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 8 3 .  Separate labia 
to assess genital structures.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 8 4 .  Using thumb and 
foreﬁnger to examine inner structures.
A vaginal discharge in early childhood 
can be from perineal irritation (e.g., 
bubble baths or soaps), foreign body, 
nonspecific vulvovaginitis, Candida, 
pinworms, or a sexually transmitted 
infection from sexual abuse. 
Precocious puberty can induce men-
ses in a young girl.
Purulent, profuse, malodorous, and 
blood-tinged discharge should be 
evaluated for the presence of infiltra-
tion, foreign body, or trauma.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 8 5 .  Position for more 
advanced technique to visualize hymen.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 8 6 .  Using thumbs to 
separate labia to open the hymen.
Sexual abuse is unfortunately far too 
common throughout the world. Up to 
25% of women report some history of 
sexual abuse; while many of these do 
not involve severe physical trauma, 
some do.52–54 
Avoid touching the hymenal edges because the hymen is exquisitely tender with-
out the protective effects of hormones. Examine for discharge, labial adhesions, 
lesions, estrogenization (indicating onset of puberty), hymenal variations (such 
as imperforate or septate hymen, which are rare), and hygiene. A thin, white 
discharge (leukorrhea) is often present. A speculum examination of the vagina and 
cervix is contraindicated in a prepubertal child unless there is suspicion of severe 
trauma or foreign body.
Abrasions or signs of trauma of the 
external genitalia can be from benign 
causes such as masturbation, irritants, 
or accidental trauma, but should also 
raise the possibility of sexual abuse. 
See Table 18-11, Physical Signs of 
 Sexual Abuse, p. 932. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Next, visualize the structures by separating the labia with your ﬁngers, as shown 
in Figure 18-83. You can also apply gentle traction by grasping the labia between 
your thumb and index ﬁnger of each hand, separating the labia majora laterally 
and posteriorly to examine the inner structures as shown in Figure 18-84. Labial 
adhesions, or fusion of the labia minora, may be noted in prepubertal children 
and can obscure the vaginal and urethral oriﬁces. They may be a normal variant. 
Vaginal bleeding is always cause for concern.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
884 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The normal hymen in infants and young girls can have various conﬁgurations, 
as shown below.
Normal Conﬁgurations of the Hymen in  
Prepubertal and Adolescent Females
6-yr-old girl with a septate hymen causing two oriﬁces. 
Traction is needed to visualize the two openings.
7-yr-old girl with a crescent-shaped hymen. Crescentic 
hymens do not encircle the vaginal oriﬁce but rather border 
the lower part of the vaginal oriﬁce and extend to the 
posterior and lateral margins of the hymenal ring.
2-yr-old girl with an annular hymen, visible with labial 
traction. Annular means that the hymen surrounds the 
oriﬁce circumferentially.
9-yr-old girl with redundant labial tissue suggesting 
estrogen eﬀect. Greater traction or a knee–chest position 
would reveal a normal oriﬁce. If unable to locate an oriﬁce, 
consider the possibility of an imperforate hymen.
12-yr-old girl with annular hymen and hormonal 
inﬂuence of puberty, causing thickened, pink 
tissue.
Source of photos: Reece R, Ludwig S (eds). Child Abuse: Medical Diagnosis and Management, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
885
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The physical examination may reveal signs that suggest sexual abuse, and the 
examination is particularly important if there are suspicious clues in the history. 
Even with known abuse, the majority of examinations will be unremarkable; 
a normal genital examination does not rule out sexual abuse. Mounds, notches, 
and tags on the hymen may all be normal variants. The size of the oriﬁce can vary 
with age and the examination technique. If the hymenal edges are smooth and with-
out interruption in the inferior half, the hymen is probably normal (but does not rule 
out abuse since the hymen, like most other tissues, can heal over 7 to 10 days). 
Certain physical ﬁndings, however, suggest the possibility of sexual abuse and 
require more complete evaluation by an expert in the ﬁeld. See Table 18-11, 
Physical Signs of Sexual Abuse, p. 921.
The Rectal Examination
The rectal examination is not routine but should be done whenever intra-
abdominal, pelvic, or perirectal disease is suspected.
The rectal examination of the young child can be performed with the child in 
either the side-lying or lithotomy position. For many young children, the lithot-
omy position is less threatening and easier to perform. Have the child lie on the 
back with the knees and hips ﬂexed and the legs abducted. Drape the child from 
the waist down. Provide frequent reassurance during the examination, and ask 
the child to breathe in and out through the mouth to relax. Spread the buttocks 
and observe the anus. You can use your lubricated gloved index ﬁnger, even in 
small children. Palpate the abdomen with your other hand, both to distract the 
child and to note the abdominal structures between your hands. The prostate 
gland is not palpable in young boys.
The Musculoskeletal System
In older children, abnormalities of the upper extremities are rare in the absence 
of injury.
The normal young child has increased lumbar concavity and decreased thoracic 
convexity compared with the adult, and often has a protuberant abdomen.
Observe the child standing and walking barefoot. Ask the child to touch the toes, 
rise from sitting, run a short distance, and pick up objects. You will detect most 
abnormalities by watching carefully from both front and behind. To indirectly 
assess the child’s gait pattern, note the soles of the shoes to see whether one side 
of the soles is worn down.
As demonstrated in Table 18-11, Phys-
ical Signs of Sexual Abuse, p. 921, 
physical signs strongly suggestive  
of sexual abuse include lacerations, 
ecchymoses and newly healed scars 
of the hymen, lack of hymenal tissue 
from 3 to 9 o’clock, and healed 
hymenal transections. Other signs 
such as purulent discharge and her-
petic lesions are concerning as well.
Anal skin tags are present in inflam-
matory bowel disease but are more 
often an incidental finding when 
located in the midline. 
Tenderness noted on rectal examina-
tion of a child usually indicates an 
infectious or inflammatory cause, 
such as an abscess or appendicitis.
Toddlers may acquire nursemaid’s 
elbow or subluxation of the radial 
head from a tugging injury. They will 
hold their arms slightly flexed at the 
elbows. 
The cause of acute limp in childhood is 
usually trauma or injury, although infec-
tion of the bone, joint, or muscle should 
be considered. In an obese child, con-
sider slipped capital femoral epiphysis. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
886 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
During early infancy, there is a common and normal progression from bowleg-
gedness (Fig. 18-87) that begins to disappear at about 18 months of age, often 
followed by transition toward knock-knees. The knock-knee pattern (Fig. 18-88) 
is usually maximal by age 3 to 4 years and gradually corrects by age 9 or 10 years.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 8 7 .  Bowleggedness 
is normal in early childhood.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 8 8 .  Knock-knee is 
not unusual in childhood.
Severe bowing of the legs (genu 
varum) may still be physiologic bow-
ing that will spontaneously resolve. 
Extreme bowing or unilateral bowing 
may be from pathologic causes such 
as rickets or tibia vara (Blount disease). 
The presence of tibial torsion can be 
assessed in several ways55; one method 
is shown in Figure 18-89. Have the 
toddler lie prone on the examination 
table, with the knees ﬂexed to 90°. 
Note the thigh–foot axis. Usually there 
is ±10° of internal or external rotation 
noted by a foot pointing off in a direc-
tion. Check the position of the malle-
oli—they should be symmetric.
Children may toe in when they begin to 
walk. This may increase up to 4 years 
of age and then gradually disappear by 
about 10 years of age.
Inspect any child who can stand for scoliosis using techniques described under 
“Adolescents.”
Determine any leg shortening that may accompany hip disease by comparing the 
distance from the anterior superior spine of the ilium to the medial malleolus on 
each side. Straighten the child by pulling gently on the legs, and then compare 
the levels of the medial malleoli with each other. Put a small ink dot over the 
prominent malleoli and touch them together for a direct measure.
Have the child stand straight and place your hands horizontally over the iliac 
crests from behind. Small discrepancies can be noted. If such a discrepancy is 
noted and you suspect leg length discrepancy, with one iliac crest higher than the 
other, place a book under the shorter leg; this should eliminate the discrepancy.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 8 9 .  Checking for tibial 
torsion.
The most common lower-extremity 
pathology in childhood is injury from 
accidents. Joint injuries, fractures, 
sprains, strains, and serious ligament 
injuries such as anterior cruciate liga-
ment tears of the knee are all too 
common in children. 
A chronic limp in childhood could be 
caused by Blount disease, hip disor-
ders such as avascular necrosis of the 
hip, leg length discrepancy, spinal dis-
order, and serious systemic disease 
such as leukemia.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
887
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Test for severe hip disease with its associ-
ated weakness of the gluteus medius 
muscle. Observe from behind as the child 
shifts weight from one leg to the other 
(Figs. 18-90 and 18-91). A pelvis that 
remains level when weight is shifted from 
one foot to the other is a negative Tren-
delenburg sign.56 With an abnormal posi-
tive sign in severe hip disease, the pelvis tilts 
toward the unaffected hip during weight-
bearing on the affected side (positive 
Trendelenburg sign).
The Nervous System
Beyond infancy, the neurologic examination includes the components evaluated 
in adults. Combine the neurologic and developmental assessment; turn this 
into a game with the child to assess optimal development and neurologic 
performance.
Use a validated developmental screen for preschool children. Children usually 
enjoy this component, and you can too. Many neurologic conditions in children 
are accompanied by developmental abnormalities.
Sensation. The sensory examination can be performed by using a cotton ball 
or tickling the child. This is best performed with the child’s eyes closed. Do not 
use pin pricks.
Normal hip
abductors
F I G U R E  1 8 - 9 0 .  Negative 
Trendelenberg sign.
Weak hip
abductors
F I G U R E  1 8 - 9 1 .  Positive 
Trendelenberg sign.
Children with spastic diplegias will 
often have hypotonia as infants and 
then excessive tone with spasticity, 
scissoring, and perhaps clenched fists 
as toddlers and young children. 
Problems with social interaction, ver-
bal and nonverbal communication, 
restricted interests, and repetitive 
behaviors could be signs of autism. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
888 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Gait, Strength, and Coordination. 
Observe the child’s gait while the child is 
walking and, optimally, running. Note 
any asymmetries, weakness, undue trip-
ping, or clumsiness. Follow developmen-
tal milestones to test for appropriate 
maneuvers such as heel-to-toe walking 
(Fig. 18-92), hopping, and jumping. Use 
a toy to test for coordination and strength 
of the upper extremities.
If you are concerned about the child’s 
strength, have the child lie on the ﬂoor and 
then stand up, and closely observe the stages. 
Most normal children will ﬁrst sit up, then 
ﬂex the knees, and extend the arms to the 
side to push off from the ﬂoor and stand up.
Hand preference is demonstrated in most children by age 2 years. If a younger child 
has clear hand preference, check for weakness in the nonpreferred upper extremity.
Deep Tendon Reﬂexes. Deep tendon reﬂexes can be tested as in adults. 
First, demonstrate the use of the reﬂex hammer on the child’s hand, assuring the 
child that it will not hurt. Children love to feel their legs bounce when you test 
their patellar reﬂexes. Have the child keep the eyes closed during some of this 
examination because tensing will disrupt the results.
Cognitive Development. You can ask children older than 3 years to draw a 
picture or copy objects and then discuss their pictures to test simultaneously for 
ﬁne motor coordination, cognition, and language.
Among school-aged children, the best test for development is their school per-
formance. You can obtain school records or psychological testing results, obviat-
ing the need for the clinician to formally test an older child’s development.
Cerebellar Function. The cerebellar examination can be tested using ﬁnger-to-
nose and rapid alternating movements of the hands or ﬁngers (Figs. 18-93 and 
18-94). Children older than 5 years should be able to tell right from left so you 
can assign them right–left discrimination tasks as is done in the adult patient.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 9 2 .  Heel-to-toe 
walking is a coordination milestone.
In children with uncoordinated gait, be 
sure to distinguish orthopedic causes 
such as positional deformities of the 
hip, knee, or foot from neurologic 
abnormalities such as cerebral palsy, 
ataxia, or neuromuscular conditions. 
In certain forms of muscular dystrophy 
with weakness of the pelvic girdle 
muscles, children will rise to standing 
by rolling over prone and pushing off 
the floor with the arms while the legs 
remain extended (Gower sign). 
Children with mild cerebral palsy may 
have both slightly increased tone and 
hyperreflexia. 
Distinguish between isolated delays 
in one aspect of development (e.g., 
coordination or language) and more 
generalized delays that occur in sev-
eral components. The latter is more 
likely to reflect global neurologic dis-
orders such as cognitive disability that 
can have many etiologies. 
F I G U R E  1 8 - 9 3 .  Finger-to-nose 
test—ﬁrst have child touch your ﬁnger.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 9 4 .  Then have child 
touch her/his nose.
Some children with attention deficit disor-
der with hyperactivity (ADHD) will have 
great difficulty in cooperating with your 
neurologic and developmental examina-
tion because of problems focusing. These 
children often have high energy levels, 
cannot stay still for extended periods, 
and have a history of difficulty in school 
or structured situations. However, other 
conditions may have similar symptoms, 
so a complete history and physical exam-
ination is warranted. 
Delayed or disordered development 
in early childhood can lead to early 
school failure as well as social, behav-
ioral, and emotional problems.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
889
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Cranial Nerves. The cranial nerves can be assessed quite well using develop-
mentally appropriate strategies, as shown in the following table:
Strategies to Assess Cranial Nerves in  
Young Children
Cranial Nerve
Strategy
I
Olfactory
Testable in older children.
II
Visual acuity
Use Snellen chart after age 3 yrs.
Test visual ﬁelds as for an adult. 
A parent may need to hold the 
child’s head.
III, IV, VI
Extraocular movements
Have the child track a light or an 
object (a toy is preferable). A 
parent may need to hold the 
child’s head.
V
Motor
Play a game with a soft cotton 
ball to test sensation.
Have the child clench the teeth 
and chew or swallow some 
food.
VII
Facial
Have the child “make faces” or 
imitate you as you make faces 
(including moving your eye-
brows) and observe symmetry 
and facial movements.
VII
Acoustic
Perform auditory testing after 
age 4 yrs.
Whisper a word or command 
behind the child’s back and 
have the child repeat it.
IX, X
Swallow and gag
Have the child stick the “whole 
tongue out” or “say ‘ah’.” 
Observe movement of the 
uvula and soft palate.
Test the gag reﬂex.
XI
Spinal accessory
Have the child push your hand 
away with his head. Have the 
child shrug his shoulders while 
you push down with your 
hands to “see how strong you 
are.”
XII
Hypoglossal
Ask the child to “stick out your 
tongue all the way.”
Localizing neurologic signs are rare 
in children but can be caused by 
trauma, brain tumor, intracranial 
bleed, or infection. Children with 
increased intracranial pressure can 
develop cranial nerve abnormalities 
as well as papilledema and altered 
mental status. 
Children with meningitis, encephalitis, 
or cerebral abscess can have 
abnormalities of cranial nerves, 
although they also have altered 
consciousness and other signs.
Although facial nerve palsy can be 
congenital, it is often caused by 
infection or trauma.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
890 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
ASSESSING ADOLESCENTS
Development: 11 to 20 Years
Adolescence can be divided into three stages: early, middle, and late. Interview 
and examination techniques vary widely depending on the adolescent’s physical, 
cognitive, and social–emotional levels of development.
Physical Development. Adolescence is the period of transition from 
childhood to adulthood. The physical transformation generally occurs over a 
period of years, beginning at an average age of 10 years in girls and 11 years in 
boys. On average, girls end pubertal development with a growth spurt by age 
14 years and boys by age 16 years. The age of onset and duration of puberty 
vary widely, although the stages follow the same sequence in all adolescents. 
Early adolescents are preoccupied with these physical changes.
Cognitive Development. Although less obvious, cognitive changes 
during adolescence are as dramatic as changes in physique. Most adolescents 
progress from concrete to formal operational thinking, acquiring an ability to 
reason logically and abstractly and to consider future implications of current 
actions (Fig. 18-95). Although the interview and examination resemble those of 
adults, keep in mind the wide variability in cognitive development of adolescents 
and their often erratic and still limited ability to see beyond simple solutions. 
Moral thinking becomes sophisticated with lots of time spent debating issues. 
Recent evidence shows that brain development (especially in the right prefrontal 
cortex) probably continues well into the twenties.
Social and Emotional Development. Adolescence is a tumultuous 
time, marked by the transition from family-dominated inﬂuences to increasing 
autonomy and peer inﬂuence (Fig. 18-96). The struggle for identity, indepen-
dence, and eventually intimacy leads to stress, health-related problems, and 
often, high-risk behaviors. This struggle also provides an important opportunity 
for health promotion.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 9 5 .  Cognitive 
development is often overshadowed 
by continuing physical changes in 
adolescents.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 9 6 .  In adolescence, 
peers often become more inﬂuential 
than family.
Developmental Tasks of Adolescence
Task
Characteristic
Health Care Approaches
Early Adolescence (10- to 14-yr-olds)
Physical
Puberty (F: 10–14; M: 11–16) 
Conﬁdentiality; privacy
Cognitive
Concrete operational
Emphasis on short-term
Social identity
Am I normal? Peers increas-
ingly important
Reassurance and positive atti-
tude
Independence
Ambivalence (family, self, 
peers)
Support for growing autonomy
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
891
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Developmental Tasks of Adolescence (continued )
Task
Characteristic
Health Care Approaches
Middle Adolescence (15- to 16-yr-olds)
Physical
Females more comfortable, 
males awkward
Support if patient varies from 
normal
Cognitive
Transition; many ideas, often 
highly emotional thinker
Problem solving; decision mak-
ing, increased responsibility
Social identity
Who am I? Much introspec-
tion; global issues
Nonjudgmental acceptance
Independence
Limit testing; experimental 
behaviors; dating
Consistency; limit setting
Late Adolescence (17- to 20-yr-olds)
Physical
Adult appearance
Minimal unless chronic illness
Cognitive
Formal operational (for many 
but not all)
Approach as an adult
Social identity
Role with respect to others; 
sexuality; future
Encouragement of identity to 
allow growth; safety and 
healthy decision-making
Independence
Separation from family; 
toward real independence
Support, anticipatory guidance
The key to successfully examining ado-
lescents is a comfortable, conﬁdential 
environment. This makes the examina-
tion more relaxed and informative. 
Consider the teen’s cognitive and social 
development when deciding issues of 
privacy, parental involvement, and 
conﬁdentiality (Fig. 18-97).
Adolescents usually respond positively to 
anyone demonstrating a genuine interest 
in them. Show such interest early and 
then sustain the connection for effec-
tive communication.
Adolescents are more likely to open up when the interview focuses on them 
rather than on their problems. In contrast to most other interviews, start with 
speciﬁc questions to build trust and rapport and get the conversation going. You 
may have to do more talking than usual at the beginning. Chat informally about 
friends, school, hobbies, and family. Using silence in an attempt to get adoles-
cents to talk or asking about feelings directly is usually not a good idea.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 9 7 .  Trust-building is 
vital with the adolescent patient.
The Health History
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
892 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
It is particularly important to use summarization and transitional statements and 
to explain what you are going to do during the physical examination. The  physical 
examination can also be an opportunity to engage young persons. Once you have 
established rapport, return to more open-ended questions. At that point, make sure to 
ask what concerns or questions the adolescent may have. Because adolescents are 
often reluctant to ask their most important questions (which are sometimes 
about sensitive topics), ask if the adolescent has anything else to discuss. A 
useful phrase to use is “tell me what other questions you have.” Another trick is 
to use the phrase: “other kids your age often have questions about …”
Adolescents’ behavior is related to their developmental stage and not necessarily 
to chronologic age or physical maturation. Their appearance may fool you into 
assuming that they are functioning on a more future-oriented and realistic level. This 
is particularly true regarding “early bloomers,” who look older than their age. The 
reverse can also be true, especially in teens with delayed puberty or chronic illness.
Issues of conﬁdentiality are important in adolescence. Explain to both parents and 
adolescents that the best health care allows adolescents some degree of independence 
and conﬁdentiality. It helps if the clinician starts asking the parent to leave the room 
for part of the interview when the child is aged 11 years. This prepares both parents 
and teens for future visits when the patient spends time alone with the clinician.
Before the parent leaves, obtain relevant clinical history from him or her, such as 
certain elements of past history, and clarify the parent’s agenda for the visit. Ado-
lescents need to know that you will hold in conﬁdence what they discuss with 
you. However, never make conﬁdentiality unlimited. Always state explicitly 
that you may need to act on information that makes you concerned about safety: 
“I will not tell your parents what we talk about unless you give me permission or 
I am concerned about your safety. For example, if you were to talk to me about 
hurting yourself or someone else and I thought that you really were at risk to 
follow through, I would need to discuss it with others in order to help you.”
An important goal is to help adolescents bring their concerns or questions to their 
parents. Encourage adolescents to discuss sensitive issues with their parents 
and offer to be present or help. Although young people may believe that their 
parents would “disown them if they only knew,” you may be able to promote more 
open dialogue. Occasionally, you will encounter a parent who is very rigid and 
punitive. It is important to carefully assess the parents’ perspective prior to further 
discussion, and to obtain the explicit consent of the young person.
As in middle childhood, modesty is 
important. The patient should remain 
dressed until the examination begins 
(Fig. 18-98). Leave the room while the 
patient puts on a gown. Not all adoles-
cents are willing to don a gown, so par-
tially uncovering as the examination 
proceeds to preserve the patient’s mod-
esty is important. Most adolescents 
older than 13 years prefer to be exam-
ined without a parent in the room, but 
F I G U R E  1 8 - 9 8 .  Some adolescents 
will request to remain in their clothes.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
893
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
this depends on the patient’s  developmental level, familiarity with the examiner, 
relationship with the parent, and culture. Ask younger adolescents and their 
parent their preferences. It is advisable for clinicians to have a chaperone in the 
room when examining an adolescent of a different gender, for example, a male 
clinician examining a female patient’s breasts or genitalia. However, miscommu-
nication and embarrassing situations can occur with concordant gender between 
clinicians and patients, and it is best to discuss the issue of chaperones with 
patients/parents and record the shared decision in the clinical chart.57
The sequence and content of the physical examination of the adolescent are 
similar to those in the adult. Keep in mind, however, issues unique to adoles-
cents such as puberty, growth, development, family and peer relationships, 
sexuality, healthy decision making, and high-risk behaviors.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 9 9 .  Inquire about 
and encourage adolescents to 
participate in healthy activities.
Health Promotion and 
Counseling: Evidence and 
Recommendations
The AAP recommends annual health supervision visits for adolescents.8 Be sure 
to include health promotion during all health encounters with youth. Adoles-
cents with chronic problems or high-risk behaviors may require additional visits 
for health promotion and anticipatory guidance.
Most chronic diseases of adults have their antecedents in childhood or adolescence. For 
example, obesity, cardiovascular disease, addiction (to drugs, tobacco, or alco-
hol), and depression are all inﬂuenced by childhood and teen experiences and 
by behaviors established during adolescence. For example, most obese adults 
were obese as adolescents or had abnormal indicators such as elevated BMI 
scores. As a second example, almost all adults who are addicted to tobacco began 
their tobacco habits before 18 years. Therefore, a major component of health pro-
motion for adolescents includes discussions about health behaviors or habits 
(Fig. 18-99). Effective health promotion can help patients develop healthy hab-
its and lifestyles and avoid several chronic health problems.
Because some health promotion topics involve conﬁdential issues such as 
mental health, addiction, sexual behavior, and eating disorders, speak to ado-
lescents (particularly older youth) privately during part of a visit that involves 
health supervision.
Self-completed screening questionnaires can be completed before the visit to 
facilitate comprehensive assessment of youth risk behaviors. This approach saves 
time so that you can better address the speciﬁc risk behaviors the adolescent 
endorses during the visit. An excellent instrument is the Guidelines for Adoles-
cent Preventive Services (GAPS).58,59
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
894 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Components of a Health Supervision Visit  
for Adolescents Aged 11 to 18 Years
Discussions with Parents
● Address parent concerns
● Provide advice about supervision, 
encouraging progressively 
responsible decision-making
● Ask about school, activities, social 
interactions
● Assess youth’s behaviors and habits, 
mental health
Discussions with Adolescent
● Social and Emotional: mental health, 
friends, family
● Physical Development: puberty,  
self-concept
● Behaviors and Habits: nutrition, 
exercise, TV or computer screen  
time, drug/alcohol, sleep
● Relationships and Sexuality: dating, 
sexual activity, sexual orientation, 
forced sex
● Family Functioning: relations with par-
ents and siblings
● School Performance: activities, 
strengths, goals
Physical Examination
● Perform a careful examination;  
note growth parameters, sexual 
maturity ratings
Screening Tests
● Vision and hearing, blood pressure; con-
sider hematocrit (especially in females); 
assess emotional health and risk factors 
(using a validated instrument)
Immunizations
● See schedule from the AAP
Anticipatory Guidance—Teen
● Promote Healthy Habits and  Behaviors:
● Injury and illness prevention 
● Seat belts, drunk driving, hel-
mets, sun, weapons
● Nutrition
● Healthy meals/snacks, obesity 
prevention
● Oral health: dentist, brushing
● Physical activity and screen time
● Sexuality:
● Conﬁdentiality, sexual behaviors, 
safer sex, contraception if needed
● High-risk Behaviors:
● Prevention strategies
● Parent–teen interaction, peer 
interactions
● Communication, rules
● Social Achievement:
● Activities, school, future
● Community interaction
● Resources, involvement
Anticipatory Guidance—Parent
● Positive interactions, support, 
safety, limit setting, family values, 
modeling behaviors, increased 
responsibility
General Survey and Vital Signs
Somatic Growth. Adolescents should wear gowns to be weighed or have 
them remove their shoes and heavy clothing. This is particularly important for 
adolescent girls being evaluated for underweight problems. Ideally, serial weights 
(and heights) should use the same scale.
Both obesity and eating disorders 
(anorexia and bulimia) among adoles-
cent girls are major public health 
problems requiring regular assess-
ments of weight, monitoring for com-
plications, and promoting healthy 
choices and self-concept. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Techniques of Examination
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
895
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Vital Signs. Ongoing evaluations of blood pressure are important for adoles-
cents.33 The average heart rate from age 10 to 14 years is 85 beats per minute, 
with a range of 55 to 115 beats per minute considered normal. Average heart rate 
for those 15 years and older is 60 to 100 beats per minute. Percentiles for blood 
pressure are shown on p. 864.
The Skin
Examine the adolescent’s skin carefully. Many adolescents will have concerns 
about various skin lesions, such as acne, dimples, blemishes, warts, and moles. 
Pay particular attention to the face and back in examining adolescents for acne. 
Stretch marks have become more common with the epidemic of obesity.
Many adolescents spend considerable time in the sun and at tanning salons. You 
may detect this during a comprehensive health history or by noticing signs of 
tanning during the physical examination. This is a good opportunity to counsel 
adolescents about the dangers of excessive ultraviolet exposure, the need for 
sunscreen, and the risks of tanning salons.
Counsel older adolescents to begin performing a regular self-examination of the 
skin, as shown on pp. 187–188.
Head, Ears, Eyes, Throat, and Neck
The examination of these body parts is generally the same as for adults.
The methods used to examine the eye, including testing for visual acuity, are the 
same as those for adults. Refractive errors become common, and it is important 
to test visual acuity monocularly at regular intervals, such as during the annual 
health supervision visit.
The ease and techniques of examining the ears and testing the hearing approach 
the methods used for adults. There are no ear, mouth, throat, or neck abnor-
malities or variations of normal unique to this age group.
The Heart
The technique and sequence of examination are the same as those for adults. 
Murmurs are a continued cardiovascular issue for evaluation.
The benign pulmonary ﬂow murmur is a grade I–II/VI soft, nonharsh murmur with 
the timing characteristics of an ejection murmur, beginning after the ﬁrst sound and 
ending before the second sound, but without the marked crescendo–decrescendo 
quality of an organic ejection murmur. If you hear this murmur, evaluate whether the 
Causes of sustained hypertension for 
this age group include primary hyper-
tension, renal parenchymal disease, 
and drug use. 
Adolescent acne, a common skin con-
dition, tends to resolve eventually, 
but often benefits from proper treat-
ment. It tends to begin during middle 
to late puberty. 
Moles or benign nevi may appear dur-
ing adolescence. Their characteristics 
differentiate them from atypical nevi, 
described on p. 912. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
An adolescent with persistent fever, 
tonsillar pharyngitis, and cervical 
lymphadenopathy may have infec-
tious mononucleosis. 
A pulmonary flow murmur accompa-
nied by a fixed split second heart 
sound suggests right-heart volume 
load such as an atrial septal defect. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
896 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Location and Characteristics of Benign Heart Murmurs in Adolescents
Pulmonary
flow
Typical Age
Name
Characteristics
Description and 
Location
Older child, adolescence  
and later
Pulmonary ﬂow murmur
S1
S2
Grade I–II/VI soft, nonharsh
Ejection in timing
Upper left sternal border
Normal P2
pulmonary closure sound is of normal intensity and whether splitting of the second 
heart sound is eliminated during expiration. An adolescent with a benign pulmonary 
ejection murmur will have normal intensity and normally split second heart sounds.
The pulmonary ﬂow murmur may also be heard in the presence of volume over-
load from any cause such as chronic anemia, and following exercise. It may 
persist into adulthood.
The Breasts
Physical changes in a girl’s breasts are one of the ﬁrst signs of puberty. As in 
most developmental changes, there is a systematic progression. Generally, over 
a 4-year period, the breasts progress through ﬁve stages, called Tanner stages or 
Tanner sex maturity rating stages, as shown in the box on the next page. Breast 
buds in the preadolescent stage enlarge, changing the contour of the breasts and 
areola. The areola also darkens in color. These stages are accompanied by the 
development of pubic hair and other secondary sexual characteristics, as shown 
on p. 901. Menarche usually occurs when a girl is in breast stage 3 or 4. By then, 
she has passed her peak growth spurt (see the ﬁgure on p. 897).
For years, the normal range for onset of breast development and pubic hair was 
8 to 13 years (average, 11 years), with earlier onset considered abnormal.60–62 
Some studies suggest that the lower age cutoff should be as low as age 7 years for 
white girls and 6 years for African American and Hispanic girls. Breast develop-
ment varies by age, race, and ethnicity.61,62 Breasts develop at different rates in 
approximately 10% of girls, with resultant asymmetry of size or Tanner stage. 
Reassurance that this generally resolves is helpful to the patient.
Breast buds (pea-size firm masses infe-
rior to the nipple) are common among 
both girls and boys entering puberty 
or during early puberty. 
Breast asymmetry is common in adoles-
cents, particularly when adolescents 
are between Tanner stages 2 and 4. This 
is nearly always a benign condition. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
897
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Guidelines for the usefulness of clinical breast examinations by a clinician are 
changing, and the American Cancer Society no longer recommends clinical 
breast examinations for women of any age to screen for breast cancer.63 However, 
professional organizations consistently recommend providing female patients 
with instructions for self-examination (see p. 442). It is useful to begin this pro-
cess with adolescent females. In the event of a clinical breast examination, a 
chaperone (parent or nurse) should assist male clinicians.
Breasts in boys consist of a small nipple and areola. During puberty, about one 
third of boys develop a breast bud 2 cm or more in diameter, usually in one 
breast. Obese boys may develop substantial breast tissue.
Many adolescent boys develop 
gynecomastia (enlarged breasts) on 
one or both sides. Although usually 
slight, it can be embarrassing. It 
generally resolves in a few years. 
Sexual Maturity Ratings in Girls: Breasts
Stage 1
Preadolescent: elevation of nipple only
Stage 2
Stage 3
Breast bud stage: elevation of breast 
and nipple as a small mound; enlarge-
ment of areolar diameter
Further enlargement of elevation of 
breast and areola, with no separation 
of their contours
Stage 4
Stage 5
Projection of areola and nipple to form 
a secondary mound above the level of 
breast
Mature stage: projection of nipple only; 
areola has receded to general contour 
of the breast (although in some normal 
individuals the areola continues to 
form a secondary mound)
Photos used with permission of the American Academy of Pediatrics, Assessment of Sexual Maturity 
Stages in Girls, 1995.
Masses or nodules in the breasts of 
adolescent girls should be examined 
carefully. They are usually benign 
fibroadenomas or cysts; less likely, 
etiologies include abscesses or 
lipomas. Breast carcinoma is 
extremely rare in adolescence and 
nearly always occurs in families with a 
strong history of the disease.64 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
898 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The Abdomen
Techniques of abdominal examination are the same as for adults. The size of the 
liver approaches the adult size as the teen progresses through puberty, and is 
related to the adolescent’s overall height. Although data are lacking about the 
usefulness of different techniques to assess liver size, it is likely that evidence 
from adult studies apply, particularly for older adolescents. Palpate the liver. If it 
is nonpalpable, hepatomegaly is highly unlikely. If you can palpate the lower 
edge, use light percussion to assess liver span.
Male Genitalia
The genital examination of the adolescent boy proceeds like the examination of 
the adult male. Be aware of the embarrassment many boys experience during this 
aspect of the examination.
Important anatomical changes in the male genitalia accompany puberty and help to 
deﬁne its progress. The ﬁrst reliable sign of puberty (Fig. 18-100), starting between 
ages 9 and 13.5 years is an increase in the size of the testes. Next, pubic hair appears, 
along with progressive enlargement of the penis. The complete change from preado-
lescent to adult anatomy requires about 3 years, with a range of 1.8 to 5 years.
An axiom of development is that pubertal changes follow a well-established 
sequence. The age range for start and completion is wide, but the sequence for 
each boy is the same (Fig. 18-100). This progression is helpful when counseling 
anxious adolescents about current and future maturation and the wide range of 
normal for puberty.
When examining the adolescent male, assign a sexual maturity rating. The ﬁve 
stages of sexual development, ﬁrst described by Tanner, are outlined and illustrated 
Hepatomegaly in teens may be from 
infections such as hepatitis or infec-
tious mononucleosis, inflammatory 
bowel disease, or tumors. 
Delayed puberty is suspected in boys 
who have no signs of pubertal devel-
opment by 14 years of age. 
The most common cause of delayed 
puberty in males is constitutional delay, 
frequently a familial condition involv-
ing delayed bone and physical matura-
tion, but normal hormonal levels. 
10.7–14.5 for PH3
Age (years)
5
4
3
2
13.5–17.0
9.0–13.5
12.5–16.5
10.5–14.5
13.5–17.5
10.5–16
Pubic hair
Testis
Penis
Height spurt
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
Numbers below the bars indicate the ranges in age within which the changes occur.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 1 0 0 .  Male adolescents.
Although nocturnal or daytime ejacu-
lation tends to begin around Sexual 
Maturity Rating 3, a finding on either 
history or physical examination of 
penile discharge may indicate a 
 sexually transmitted infection. 
In addition to constitutional delay, 
less common causes of delayed 
puberty in boys include primary or 
secondary hypogonadism as well as 
congenital GnRH deficiency.65
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
899
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
in the box below. These involve changes in the penis, testes, and scrotum. In about 
80% of men, pubic hair spreads farther up the abdomen in a triangular pattern 
pointing toward the umbilicus; this phase is not completed until the 20s. 
Observe the penis for sores and discharge as you would in an adult male.
In uncircumcised males, the foreskin should be easily retractable by adolescence. 
This is also an opportunity to discuss normal hygiene. Discuss testicular exami-
nation in older boys by age 18 years.
Sexual Maturity Rating in Boys
In assigning sexual maturity rating in boys, observe each of the three characteristics separately because they may develop at 
diﬀerent rates. Record two separate ratings: pubic hair and genital. If the penis and testes diﬀer in their stages, average the 
two into a single ﬁgure for the genital rating. These photos demonstrate pubertal development in an uncircumcised male.
Pubic Hair
Penis
Testes and Scrotum
Stage 1
Preadolescent—no pubic 
hair except for the ﬁne 
body hair (vellus hair) 
similar to that on the 
abdomen
Preadolescent—same size 
and proportions as in 
childhood
Preadolescent—same size 
and proportions as in 
childhood
Stage 2
Sparse growth of long, 
slightly pigmented, downy 
hair, straight or only 
slightly curled, chieﬂy at 
the base of the penis
Slight or no enlargement
Testes larger; scrotum 
larger, somewhat red-
dened, and altered in 
texture
Stage 3
Darker, coarser, curlier hair 
spreading sparsely over 
the pubic symphysis
Larger, especially in length
Further enlarged
Stage 4
Coarse and curly hair, as in 
the adult; area covered 
greater than in stage 3, 
but not as great as in the 
adult and not yet includ-
ing the thighs
Further enlarged in length 
and breadth, with devel-
opment of the glans
Further enlarged; scrotal 
skin darkened
Stage 5
Hair adult in quantity and 
quality, spreads to the 
medial surfaces of the 
thighs but not up over 
the abdomen
Adult in size and shape
Adult in size and shape
Photos reprinted from Wales JKH, Wit JM. Pediatric Endocrinology and Growth, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, W. B. Saunders, 2003.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
900 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Female Genitalia
The external examination of adolescent female genitalia proceeds in the same 
manner as for school-aged children. If clinically necessary to perform a pelvic 
examination, the technique is the same as for an adult female. Of note, indications 
for performing pelvic examinations in adolescents have become much more 
stringent. When performing a pelvic examination, a full explanation of the steps of 
the examination, demonstration of the instruments, and a gentle, reassuring 
approach are necessary because the adolescent is usually quite anxious. A chaperone 
(parent or nurse) must be present. An adolescent’s ﬁrst pelvic examination 
should be performed by an experienced health care provider.
A girl’s initial signs of puberty are hymenal thickening and redundancy second-
ary to estrogen, widening of the hips, and beginning of a height spurt, although 
these changes are difﬁcult to detect. The ﬁrst easily detectable sign of puberty 
is usually the appearance of breast buds although pubic hair sometimes appears 
earlier. The average age of the appearance of pubic hair has decreased in recent 
years, and current consensus is that the appearance of pubic hair as early as 7 
years can be normal, particularly in dark-skinned girls who develop secondary 
sexual characteristics at an earlier age.
Assign a sexual maturity rating to every female, irrespective of chronologic age. 
The assessment of sexual maturity in girls is based on both growth of pubic hair 
and the development of breasts.59 The sexual maturity rating of pubic hair 
growth is shown in the box on page 901. See p. 897 for breast development 
assessment. Counsel girls about this sequence and their current stage.
Although there is a wide variation in the age of onset and completion of puberty 
in girls, the stages occur in a predictable sequence, as shown in Figure 18-101.
Vaginal discharge in a young adoles-
cent should be treated as in the adult. 
Causes include physiologic leukorrhea, 
sexually transmitted infections from 
consensual sexual activity or sexual 
abuse, bacterial vaginosis, foreign 
body, and external irritants. 
Pubertal development prior to the nor-
mal age range may signify precocious 
puberty which has a variety of endocrine 
and central nervous system causes. Pre-
mature adrenarche is usually benign, but 
may occasionally be associated with 
polycystic ovary syndrome, insulin resis-
tance, and metabolic syndrome. 
Delayed puberty (no breasts or pubic 
hair development by age 12 years) is 
usually caused by inadequate gonad-
otropin secretion from the anterior 
pituitary due to defective hypotha-
lamic GnRH production. A common 
cause is anorexia nervosa. 
Numbers below the bars indicate the ranges in age within which the changes occur.
Age (years)
5
4
3
2
5
4
3
2
9.3–13.9 for PH3
11.0–14.1
9.5–14.5
Pubic hair
Breast
Menarche
Height spurt
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
8.2–12.1 for B2
F I G U R E  1 8 - 1 0 1 .  Female adolescents.
Delayed puberty in an adolescent 
female below the third percentile in 
height may be from Turner syndrome 
or chronic disease. The two most 
common causes of delayed sexual 
development in an extremely thin 
adolescent girl are anorexia nervosa 
and chronic disease. 
Obesity in females can be associated 
with early onset of puberty.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
901
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Sexual Maturity Ratings in Girls: Pubic Hair
Stage 1
Preadolescent—no pubic hair except for the ﬁne body hair (vellus hair) similar to 
that on the abdomen
Stage 2
Sparse growth of long, slightly 
pigmented, downy hair, straight or 
only slightly curled, chieﬂy along 
the labia
Stage 3
Darker, coarser, curlier hair, spreading 
sparsely over the pubic symphysis
Stage 4
Coarse and curly hair as in adults; 
area covered greater than in stage 3 
but not as great as in the adult and 
not yet including the thighs
Stage 5
Hair adult in quantity and quality, spreads 
on the medial surfaces of the thighs but 
not up over the abdomen
Photos used with permission of the American Academy of Pediatrics, Assessment of Sexual Maturity 
Stages in Girls, 1995.
Amenorrhea in adolescence can be 
primary (no menarche by age 
16 years) or secondary (cessation of 
menses in an adolescent who had 
previously menstruated). While 
primary amenorrhea is usually due to 
anatomic or genetic causes, 
secondary amenorrhea can be due to 
a variety of etiologies such as stress, 
excessive exercise, and eating 
disorders. 
The Musculoskeletal System
Evaluations for scoliosis and screening for participation in sports (pp. 902–905) 
remain common components of examination in adolescents. Other segments of 
the musculoskeletal examination are the same as for adults.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
902 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Assessing for Scoliosis. First, 
examine the patient standing assessing 
symmetry of shoulders, scapula, and 
hips. Then have the child bend for-
ward with the knees straight and 
head hanging straight down between 
extended arms (Adams forward bend 
test). Next, evaluate any asymmetry in 
positioning. Scoliosis in a young child 
is unusual and abnormal; mild scolio-
sis in an older child is not uncommon. 
Scoliosis appears as an asymmetrical 
rise in the thoracic region (as shown in 
Fig. 18-102) or lumbar region, or 
both.
If you detect scoliosis use a scoliome-
ter to test for the degree of scoliosis. 
Have the teen bend forward again as 
described above. Place the scoliometer over the spine at a point of maximum 
prominence making sure that the spine is parallel to the ﬂoor at that point, as 
shown in Figure 18-102. If needed, move the scoliometer up and down the spine 
to ﬁnd the point of maximal prominence. An angle greater than 7° on the scoli-
ometer is a reason for concern and often used as a threshold for referral to a 
specialist. Of note, the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of both the Adams forward bend 
test and scoliometer vary greatly according to the skill and experience of the 
examiner.
You can also use a plumb line, a string 
with a weight attached, to assess sym-
metry of the back (Fig. 18-103). Place 
the top of the plumb line at C7 and 
have the child stand straight. The 
plumb line should extend to the glu-
teal crease (not shown here).
Scoliosis is more common among chil-
dren and adolescents with neurologic 
or musculoskeletal abnormalities.
The remainder of the musculoskeletal 
examination is similar to that for adults, 
except for the sports preparticipation 
screening examination described 
below.
Apparent scoliosis, including an 
abnormal plumb line test, can be 
caused by a leg-length discrepancy (see 
p. 886).
F I G U R E  1 8 - 1 0 2 .  Measure and 
record scoliosis with a scoliometer.
F I G U R E  1 8 - 1 0 3 .  Measuring 
scoliosis with a plumb line.
Several types of scoliosis may present 
during childhood. Idiopathic scoliosis 
(75% of cases), seen mostly in girls, is 
usually detected in early adolescence. 
As seen in the girl in Figure 18-102, 
the right hemithorax is generally 
prominent. Other causes include 
neuromuscular and congenital. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
903
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The Sports Preparticipation Physical Evaluation. More than 25 million 
children and adolescents in the United States and several other countries par-
ticipate in organized sports and often require “medical clearance.” Start the eval-
uation with a thorough medical history focusing on cardiovascular risk factors, 
prior surgeries, prior injuries, other medical problems, and a family history. In 
fact, a complete history is the most sensitive and speciﬁc part of the evaluation 
for detection of risk factors or abnormalities that would preclude participation 
in sports. The preparticipation physical evaluation is often one of the few times 
a healthy adolescent will see a clinical professional, so it is important to include 
some screening questions and anticipatory guidance (see the discussion in 
Health Promotion and Counseling). Finally, perform a general physical examina-
tion, with special attention to the heart and lungs and a vision and hearing 
screening. Include a focused, thorough musculoskeletal examination, looking for 
weakness, limited range of motion, and evidence of previous injury.
A 2-minute preparticipation screening musculoskeletal examination shown 
below has been recommended.67,68
Important risk factors for sudden car-
diovascular death during sports 
include episodes of dizziness or palpita-
tions, prior syncope (particularly if asso-
ciated with exercise), or family history 
of sudden death or cardiomyopathy in 
young or middle-aged relatives. 
During the preparticipation sports 
physical examination, assess carefully 
for cardiac murmurs and wheezing in 
the lungs. Also, if the adolescent has 
had head injuries or a concussion,66 
perform a careful, focused neurologic 
examination.67,68
Screening Musculoskeletal Examination  
for Sports
Position and Instruction to 
Patient
Step 1: Stand straight, facing forward.
Step 2: Move neck in all directions.
      
      
(continued )
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Common Abnormalities from  
Prior Injury
Step 1: Asymmetry, swelling of joints
Step 2: Loss of range of motion
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
904 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Screening Musculoskeletal Examination  
for Sports (continued )
Position and Instruction to 
Patient
Step 3: Shrug shoulders against resis-
tance.
Step 4: Hold arms out to the side 
against resistance.
Step 5: Hold arms out to side with 
elbows bent 90°; raise and lower 
arms.
Step 6: Hold arms out, completely 
bend, and straighten elbows.
(continued )
Step 3: Weakness of shoulder, neck, or 
trapezius muscles
Step 4: Loss of strength of deltoid 
muscle
Step 5: Loss of external rotation and 
injury of glenohumeral joint
Step 6: Reduced range of motion of 
elbow
Common Abnormalities from  
Prior Injury
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
905
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Screening Musculoskeletal Examination  
for Sports (continued )
Position and Instruction to 
Patient
Step 7: Hold arms down, bend elbows 
90°, and pronate and supinate fore-
arms.
Step 8: Make a ﬁst, clench, and then 
spread ﬁngers.
Step 9: Squat and duck-walk for four 
steps forward.
Step 10: Stand straight with arms at 
sides, facing back.
Step 11: Bend forward with knees 
straight and touch toes.
Step 12: Stand on heels and rise to the 
toes.
Step 9: Inability to fully flex knees 
and difficulty standing up from 
prior knee or ankle injury
Step 10: Asymmetry from scoliosis, 
leg-length discrepancy, or weak-
ness from injury
Step 7: Reduced range of motion 
from injury to forearm, elbow, or 
wrist
Step 8: Protruding knuckle, reduced 
range of motion of fingers from 
prior sprain or fracture
Step 11: Asymmetry from scoliosis 
and twisting of back from low back 
pain
Step 12: Wasting of calf muscles 
from ankle or Achilles tendon injury
Common Abnormalities from  
Prior Injury
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
906 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
The Nervous System
The neurologic examination of the adolescent and the adult is the same. Assess 
the adolescent’s developmental achievement according to age-speciﬁc milestones, 
as described on pp. 890–891.
Recording Your Findings
Initially, you may use sentences to describe your ﬁndings; later you will use 
phrases. The style here contains phrases appropriate for most write-ups. As you 
read through this write-up, you will note some atypical ﬁndings. Try to test 
yourself. See if you can interpret these ﬁndings in the context of all you have 
learned about the examination of children. You will also note the modiﬁcations 
necessary to accommodate reports from the small child’s parent, rather than from 
the child. If you are using electronic clinical records, make sure your write-up 
includes sufﬁcient detail and text to adequately summarize your ﬁndings.
Recording the Examination: The Pediatric Patient
3/4/2016
Brian is an active, 26-month-old boy accompanied by his mother who is concerned 
about his development and behavior.
Referral. None
Source and Reliability. Mother (Mom), reliable.
Chief Complaint: Slow development and diﬃcult behavior.
Present Illness: Brian appears to be developing more slowly than his older sister 
did. He uses only single words and simple phrases, rarely combines words, and 
appears frustrated with not being able to communicate. People understand less 
than one quarter of his speech. Physical development seems normal: he can throw 
a ball, kick, scribble, and dress himself well. He has had no head trauma, chronic 
illnesses, seizures, or regression in his milestones.
Brian’s mom is also concerned about his behavior. Brian is extremely stubborn, 
frequently has tantrums, gets angry easily (especially with his older sister), throws 
objects, bites, and physically strikes others when he doesn’t get his way. His 
behavior seems worse around his mother who reports that he is “ﬁne” at his child 
care center. He moves from one activity to another with an inability to sit still to 
read or play a game. Of note, he is sometimes aﬀectionate and cuddly. He does 
make eye contact and plays normally with toys. He has no unusual movements.
Brian is an extremely picky eater who eats a large quantity of junk food and little 
else. He will not eat fruits or vegetables and drinks enormous quantities of juice and 
soda. His mother has tried everything to get him to eat healthy food, to no avail.
The family has been under substantial stress during the past year because 
Brian’s father has been unemployed. Although Brian now has Medicaid insurance, 
the parents are uninsured.
Brian’s sleep is considered normal.
Medications. One multivitamin daily.
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
907
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
Recording the Examination:  
The Pediatric Patient (continued )
Past History
Pregnancy. Uneventful. Mom reduced tobacco intake to a half-pack a day and 
drank alcohol at times. She denies use of other drugs or any infections.
Newborn Period. Born vaginally at 40 weeks; left the hospital in 2 days. Birth 
weight 2.5 kg (5 lb, 8 oz). Mom does not know why Brian was small at birth.
Illnesses. Only minor illnesses; no hospitalizations.
Accidents. Required sutures last year for a facial laceration secondary to a fall on 
the road. He did not lose consciousness and had no sequelae.
Preventive Care. Brian has had regular preventive check-ups. At the last appoint-
ment 6 months ago, his regular physician said that Brian was a bit behind on some 
developmental milestones and suggested a child care center that he knew was 
excellent, as well as increased parental attention to reading, speaking, playing, 
and stimulation. Immunizations are up to date. His lead level was elevated mildly 
last year and Mom reports that he had “low blood.” His physician recommended 
iron supplements and foods high in iron, but Brian really won’t eat these foods.
Family History
Strong family history of diabetes (two grandparents, none with diabetes as 
children) and hypertension. No family history of childhood developmental, 
psychiatric, or chronic illnesses.
Developmental History: Sat up at 6 months, crawled at 9 months, and walked at 
13 months. First words (“mama” and “car”) said at approximately 1 year.
Personal and Social History: Parents are married and live with the two children in 
a rented apartment. Dad has not had a steady job for 1 year, but has worked inter-
mittently in construction. Mom works as a waitress part-time while Brian is in 
child care.
Mom had depression during Brian’s ﬁrst year and attended some counseling 
sessions but stopped because she could not pay for them or medications. She gets 
support from her mother who lives 30 minutes away, and many friends, some of 
whom babysit occasionally.
Despite substantial family stress, Mom describes a loving and intact family. 
They try to eat dinner together daily, limit television, read to both children 
(although Brian won’t sit still), and go to the nearby park regularly to play.
Environmental Exposures. Both parents smoke, although generally outside the 
house.
Safety. Mom reports this as a major concern: she can barely leave Brian out of 
her sight without him getting into something. She fears he will run under a car; 
the family is thinking of fencing in their small yard. Brian sits in his car seat most 
of the time; smoke detectors work in the home. Dad’s guns are locked; medica-
tions are in a cabinet in the parents’ bedroom.
Review of Systems
General. No major illnesses.
Skin. Dry and itchy. Last year he was prescribed hydrocortisone for it.
Head, Eyes, Ears, Nose, and Throat (HEENT). Head: No trauma. Eyes: Vision ﬁne. 
Ears: Multiple infections in the past year. Frequently ignores parents’ requests; 
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
908 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
Recording the Examination:  
The Pediatric Patient (continued )
they can’t tell if this is purposeful or if he can’t hear well. Nose: Often runny; Mom 
wonders about allergies. Mouth: No dentist visit yet. Brushes teeth sometimes (a 
frequent source of dispute).
Neck. No lumps. Glands in neck seem large.
Respiratory. Frequent cough and whistle in chest. Mom cannot identify trigger; it 
tends to go away. He can run around all day without seeming to get tired.
Cardiovascular. No known heart disease. He had a murmur when younger, but it 
went away.
Gastrointestinal. Appetite and eating habits described above. Regular bowel 
movements. He is in the process of toilet training and wears pull-ups at night, but 
not at child care.
Urinary. Good stream. No prior urinary tract infections.
Genital. Normal.
Musculoskeletal. He is “all boy” and never gets tired. Minor bumps and bruises 
occasionally.
Neurologic. Walks and runs well; seems coordinated for age. No stiﬀness, sei-
zures, or fainting. Mom says his memory seems great, but his attention span is 
poor.
Psychiatric. Generally seems happy. Cries easily; bounces back and forth from 
 trying to be independent to needing cuddling and comforting.
Physical Examination
Brian is an active and energetic toddler. He plays with the reﬂex hammer, pretend-
ing it is a truck. He appears closely bonded with his mother, looking at her occa-
sionally for comfort. She seems concerned that Brian will break something. His 
clothes are clean.
Vital Signs. Ht 90 cm (90th percentile). Wt 16 kg (>95th percentile). BMI 19.8 
(>95th percentile). Head circumference 50 cm (75th percentile). BP 108/58. Heart 
rate 90 beats per minute and regular. Respiratory rate 30/minute; varies with 
activity. Temperature (ear) 37.5°C. Obviously no pain.
Skin. Normal except for bruises on the anterior aspects of his legs, and patchy, dry 
skin over external surface of elbows.
HEENT. Head: Normocephalic; no lesions. Eyes: Diﬃcult to examine because he 
won’t sit still. Symmetric with normal extraocular movements. Pupils 4 to 5 mm, 
and symmetrically reactive to light. Discs diﬃcult to visualize; no hemorrhages 
noted. Ears: Normal pinna; no external abnormalities. Normal external canals and 
tympanic membranes (TMs). Nose: Normal nares; septum midline. Mouth: Several 
darkened teeth (inside surface of upper incisors). One clear cavity on upper right 
incisor. Tongue normal. Cobblestoning of posterior pharynx; no exudates. Tonsils 
large but adequate gap (1.5 cm) between them. No allergic shiners.
Neck. Supple, midline trachea, no thyroid palpable.
Lymph Nodes. Easily palpable (1.5 to 2 cm), ﬁrm, mobile anterior cervical lymph 
nodes bilaterally. Small (0.5 cm) nodes in inguinal canal bilaterally. All lymph 
nodes mobile and nontender.
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
909
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
Recording the Examination:  
The Pediatric Patient (continued )
Lungs. Good expansion. No tachypnea or dyspnea. Congestion audible, but seems 
to be upper airway (louder near mouth, symmetric). No rhonchi, rales, or wheezes. 
Clear to auscultation.
Cardiovascular. PMI in 4th or 5th interspace and midsternal line. Normal S1 and S2. 
No murmurs or abnormal heart sounds. Normal femoral pulses; dorsalis pedis 
pulses palpable bilaterally.
Breasts. Normal, with some fat under both.
Abdomen. Protuberant but soft; no masses or tenderness. Liver span 2 cm below 
right costal margin (RCM) and not tender. Spleen and kidneys not palpable.
Genitalia. Tanner I circumcised penis; no pubic hair, lesions, or discharge. Testes 
descended, diﬃcult to palpate because of active cremasteric reﬂex. Normal scro-
tum both sides.
Musculoskeletal. Normal range of motion of upper and lower extremities and all 
joints. Spine straight. Gait normal.
Neurologic. Mental Status: Happy, cooperative, active child. Developmental: Gross 
motor—Jumps and throws objects. Fine motor—Imitates vertical line. Language—
Does not combine words; single words only, three to four noted during examination. 
Personal–social—Washes face, brushes teeth, and puts on shirt. Overall—Normal, 
except for language, which appears delayed. Cranial Nerves: Intact, although several 
diﬃcult to elicit. Cerebellar: Normal gait; good balance. Deep tendon reﬂexes (DTRs): 
Normal and symmetric throughout with downgoing toes. Sensory: Deferred.
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
910 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
910 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 18-1  Abnormalities in Heart Rhythm and  
Blood Pressure
Supraventricular Tachycardia
QRS
T
Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (PSVT) is the most common dysrhythmia in children. Some infants with SVT look well 
or may be somewhat pale with tachypnea but have a heart rate of ≥240 beats per minute. Others are ill and in cardiovascular 
collapse. P waves have different morphology or are not seen.
SVT in infants is usually sustained, requiring clinical therapy for conversion to a normal rate and rhythm. In older children, it is 
more likely to be truly paroxysmal, with episodes of varying duration and frequency.
Hypertension in Childhood—A Typical Example
90
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Age (Years)
Boys Systolic Blood Pressure 95% Percentile
Systolic 5%
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
120
150
Systolic Blood Pressure
95
100
105
110
115
125
130
135
140
145
Systolic 50%
Systolic 95%
Patient
Hypertension can start in childhood.35,36 Although elevated blood pressure in young children is more likely to have a renal, 
cardiac, or endocrine cause, older children and adolescents with hypertension are most likely to have primary or essential 
hypertension.
This child developed hypertension, and it “tracked” into adulthood. Children tend to remain in the same percentile for blood 
pressure as they grow. This tracking of blood pressure continues into adulthood, supporting the concept that adult essential 
hypertension often begins during childhood.
The consequences of untreated hypertension can be severe and include cardiac, renal, and visual sequelae.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
911
Table 18-2  Common Skin Rashes and Skin Findings  
in Newborns and Infants
Erythema Toxicum
These common yellow or white pustules 
are surrounded by a red base.
Neonatal Acne
Red pustules and papules are most 
prominent over the cheeks and nose of 
some normal newborns.
Seborrhea
The salmon red, scaly eruption often 
involves the face, neck, axilla, diaper 
area, and behind the ears.
Neuroﬁbromatosis
Characteristic features include more than 
5 café-au-lait spots and axillary freckling. 
Later ﬁndings include neuroﬁbromas and 
Lisch nodules (not shown).
Atopic Dermatitis (Eczema)
Erythema, scaling, dry skin, and intense itching characterize this condition.
Candidal Diaper Dermatitis
This bright red rash involves the 
intertriginous folds, with small “satellite 
lesions” along the edges.
Contact Diaper Dermatitis
This irritant rash is secondary to diarrhea 
or irritation and is noted along contact 
areas (here, the area touching the diaper).
Impetigo
This infection is due to bacteria and can 
appear bullous or crusty and yellowed 
with some pus.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
912 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
912 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 18-3  Warts, Lesions That Resemble Warts, and 
Other Raised Lesions
Verruca Vulgaris
Dry, rough warts on hands
Verruca Plana
Small, ﬂat warts
Plantar Warts
Tender warts on feet
Molluscum Contagiosum
Dome-shaped, ﬂeshy lesions
Adolescent Acne
Acne in adolescents involves open comedones (blackheads) and closed comedones 
(whiteheads) shown at the left, and inﬂamed pustules (right).
Bites
Intensely pruritic, red, distinct papules 
characterize these lesions.
Tinea Capitis
Scaling, crusting, and hair loss are seen in 
the scalp, along with a painful plaque 
(kerion) and occipital lymph node (arrow).
Urticaria (Hives)
This pruritic, allergic sensitivity reaction 
changes shape quickly.
Scabies
Intensely itchy papules and vesicles, 
sometimes burrows, most often on 
extremities
Tinea Corporis
This annular lesion has central clearing 
and papules along the border.
Pityriasis Rosea
Oval lesions on trunk, in older children, often 
in a Christmas tree pattern, sometimes a 
herald patch (a large patch that appears ﬁrst)
Source of Bites, Tinea Capitis, and Tinea Corporis photos—Goodheart HA. Photoguide of Common Skin Disorders. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 1999.
Table 18-4 Common Skin Lesions During Childhood
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
913
Table 18-5 Abnormalities of the Head
Cephalohematoma
Although not present at birth, cephalohematomas appear within the 
ﬁrst 24 hours from subperiosteal hemorrhage involving the outer 
table of one of the cranial bones. The swelling, shown at the arrow, 
does not extend across a suture though it is occasionally bilateral 
following a difﬁcult birth. The swelling is initially soft, then develops 
a raised bony margin within a few days from calcium deposits at the 
edge of the periosteum. It tends to resolve within several weeks.
Hydrocephalus
In hydrocephaly, the anterior fontanelle is bulging and the eyes may 
be deviated downward revealing the upper scleras and creating the 
setting sun sign, as shown on the left. The setting sun sign is also seen 
brieﬂy in some normal newborns. (From Zitelli BJ, Davis HW. Atlas 
of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis, 3rd ed. St. Louis: Mosby–Year Book, 
1997. Courtesy of Dr. Albert Briglan, Children’s Hospital of 
Pittsburgh.)
Trigonocephaly
(metopic)
Brachycephaly
(coronal, metopic)
Frontal plagiocephaly
(unilateral coronal)
Occipital plagiocephaly
(unilateral lambdoid)
Scaphocephaly
(sagittal)
Anterior
Posterior
     Normal
Craniosynostosis
Craniosynostosis is a condition of premature closure of one or more 
sutures of the skull. This results in an abnormal growth and shape of 
the skull because growth will occur across sutures that are not 
affected but not across sutures that are affected.
The ﬁgures demonstrate different skull shapes associated with the 
various types of craniosynostosis. The prematurely closed suture line is 
noted by the absence of a suture line in each ﬁgure. Scaphocephaly and 
frontal plagiocephaly are the most common forms of craniosynostosis. 
The blue shading shows areas of maximal ﬂattening. The red arrows 
show the direction of continued growth across the sutures, which is 
normal.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
914 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
914 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 18-6 Diagnostic Facies in Infancy and Childhood
Fetal Alcohol Syndrome
Babies born to women with chronic alcoholism are at increased 
risk for growth deﬁciency, microcephaly, and intellectual 
disability. Facial characteristics include short palpebral ﬁssures, 
a wide and ﬂattened philtrum (the vertical groove in the 
midline of the upper lip), and thin lips.
Congenital Hypothyroidism
The child with congenital hypothyroidism (cretinism) has 
coarse facial features, a low-set hair line, sparse eyebrows, and 
an enlarged tongue. Associated features include a hoarse cry, 
umbilical hernia, dry and cold extremities, myxedema, 
mottled skin, and intellectual disability. Most infants with 
congenital hypothyroidism have no physical stigmata; this has 
led to screening of all newborns in the United States and most 
other developed countries for congenital hypothyroidism.
Congenital Syphilis
In utero infection by Treponema pallidum usually occurs after 
the 16th week of gestation and affects virtually all fetal organs. 
If it is not treated, 25% of infected babies die before birth and 
another 30% shortly thereafter. Signs of illness appear in 
survivors within the ﬁrst month of life. Facial stigmata often 
include bulging of the frontal bones and nasal bridge 
depression (saddle nose), both from periostitis; rhinitis from 
weeping nasal mucosal lesions (snufﬂes); and a circumoral rash. 
Mucocutaneous inﬂammation and ﬁssuring of the mouth and 
lips (rhagades), not shown here, may also occur as stigmata of 
congenital syphilis, as may craniotabes tibial periostitis (saber 
shins) and dental dysplasia (Hutchinson teeth—see p. 296).
Facial Nerve Palsy
Peripheral (lower motor neuron) paralysis of the facial nerve 
may be from (1) an injury to the nerve from pressure during 
labor and birth, (2) inﬂammation of the middle ear branch of 
the nerve during episodes of acute or chronic otitis media, or 
(3) unknown causes (Bell palsy). The nasolabial fold on the 
affected left side is ﬂattened, and the eye does not close. This 
is accentuated during crying, as shown here. Full recovery 
occurs in ≥90% of those affected.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
915
Down Syndrome
The child with Down syndrome (trisomy 21) usually has a 
small, rounded head, a ﬂattened nasal bridge, oblique palpebral 
ﬁssures, prominent epicanthal folds, small, low-set, shell-like 
ears, and a relatively large tongue. Associated features include 
generalized hypotonia, transverse palmar creases (simian lines), 
shortening and incurving of the ﬁfth ﬁngers (clinodactyly), 
Brushﬁeld spots (see p. 916), and mild to moderate cognitive 
impairment.
Battered Child Syndrome
The child who has been physically abused (battered) may 
have old and fresh bruises on the head and face. Other stigmata 
include bruises in areas (axilla and groin) not usually subject 
to injury rather than the bony prominences; x-ray evidence of 
fractures of the skull, ribs, and long bones in various stages of 
healing; and skin lesions that are morphologically similar to 
implements used to inﬂict trauma (hand, belt buckle, strap, 
rope, coat hanger, or lighted cigarette). Of note, while many 
normal children have bruises on bony prominences, abused 
children are more likely to have bruises on protected areas.
Perennial Allergic Rhinitis
The child suffering from perennial allergic rhinitis has an open 
mouth (cannot breathe through the nose) and edema and 
discoloration of the lower orbitopalpebral grooves (“allergic 
shiners”). Such a child is often seen to push the nose upward 
and backward with a hand (“allergic salute”) and to grimace 
(wrinkle the nose and mouth) to relieve nasal itching and 
obstruction.
Hyperthyroidism
    
Thyrotoxicosis (Graves disease) occurs in approximately 2 per 
1,000 children younger than 10 years. Affected children exhibit 
tachycardia, hypermetabolism, and accelerated linear growth. 
Facial characteristics shown in this 6-year-old girl are “staring” 
eyes (not true exophthalmos, which is rare in children) and an 
enlarged thyroid gland (goiter).
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
916 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
916 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 18-7 Abnormalities of the Eyes, Ears, and Mouth
Brushﬁeld Spots
These abnormal speckling spots on the iris suggest Down 
syndrome.
Strabismus
Strabismus, or misalignment of the eyes, can lead to visual 
impairment. Esotropia, shown here, is an inward deviation.
A
    B
    C
Otitis Media
Otitis media is one of the most common conditions in young children. The spectrum of otitis media is shown here. A: Typical 
acute otitis media with a red, distorted, bulging tympanic membrane in a highly symptomatic child. B: Acute otitis media with 
bullae formation and ﬂuid visible behind the tympanic membrane. C: Otitis media with effusion, showing a yellowish ﬂuid 
behind a retracted and thickened tympanic membrane. Often you can no longer visualize the normal landmarks such as the 
light reﬂex and handle of the malleus.
Oral Candidiasis (“Thrush”)
This infection is common in infants. The white plaques do not 
rub off.
Herpetic Stomatitis
Tender ulcerations on the oral mucosa are surrounded by 
erythema.
Source of photos: Otitis Media—Courtesy of Alejandro Hoberman, Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
917
Table 18-8 Abnormalities of the Teeth, Pharynx, and Neck
Nursing-Bottle Caries
Erosion of Teeth
Dental Caries
Dental caries is a major global health and pediatric 
problem. White spots on the teeth often reﬂect early 
caries. The photographs to the left show different 
characteristics of caries.
Staining of the Teeth
Various causes can lead to staining of the teeth of children, including intrinsic stains 
such as tetracycline (left) or extrinsic stains such as poor oral hygiene (not shown). 
Extrinsic stains can be removed.
Streptococcal Pharyngitis  
(“Strep Throat”)
This common childhood infection has a classic 
presentation of erythema of the posterior pharynx 
and palatal petechiae. A foul-smelling exudate is 
also commonly noted.
Lymphadenopathy
Enlarged and tender cervical lymph nodes are common in children. The most likely 
causes are viral and bacterial infections. Lymph node enlargement can be bilateral, as 
shown in the ﬁgure to the left.
Sources of photos: Dental Caries and Staining of the Teeth—Courtesy of American Academy of Pediatrics.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
918 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
918 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 18-9 Cyanosis in Children
It is important to recognize cyanosis. The best location to examine is the mucous membranes. Cyanosis is a “raspberry” color, 
whereas normal mucous membranes should have a “strawberry” color. Try to identify the cyanosis in these photographs before 
reading the captions.
Generalized Cyanosis
This baby has total anomalous pulmonary venous return and 
an oxygen saturation level of 80%.
Perioral Cyanosis
This baby has mild cyanosis above the lips, but the mucous 
membranes remain pink.
Bluish Lips, Giving Appearance of Cyanosis
Normal pigment deposition in the vermilion border of the lips 
gives them a bluish hue, but the mucous membranes are pink.
Acrocyanosis
This commonly appears on the feet and hands of babies 
shortly after birth. This infant is a 32-week-old newborn.
Source of photos (except Generalized Cyanosis): Fletcher M. Physical Diagnosis in Neonatology. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven; 1998.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
919
Table 18-10 Congenital Heart Murmurs
Some heart murmurs reﬂect underlying heart disease. If you understand their physiologic causes, you will more readily be able 
to identify and distinguish them from innocent heart murmurs. Obstructive lesions result when blood ﬂows through under-sized 
valves. Because this problem does not depend on the drop in pulmonary vascular resistance following birth, these murmurs are 
audible at birth. Defects with left-to-right shunts, on the other hand, depend on the drop in pulmonary vascular resistance that 
occurs shortly after birth. High-pressured shunts such as ventricular septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus, and persistent 
truncus arteriosus are not heard until 1 wk or more after birth. Low-pressured left-to-right shunts, such as atrial septal defects, 
may not be heard until age 1 yr or more. Many children with congenital cardiac defects have combinations of defects or 
variations of abnormalities, so ﬁndings on cardiac examination may not follow these classic patterns. This table shows a limited 
selection of the more common murmurs, starting with murmurs that appear in the newborn period.
Congenital Defect and Mechanism
Characteristics of the Murmur
Associated Findings
Pulmonary Valve Stenosis
Usually a normal valve annulus with 
fusion of some or most of the valve 
leaﬂets, restricting ﬂow across the valve
Mild
S1
A2
P2
Severe
S1
A2
P2
Location. Upper left sternal border
Radiation. In mild degrees of stenosis, 
the murmur may be heard over the 
course of the pulmonary arteries in the 
lung ﬁelds.
Intensity. Increases in intensity and 
duration as the degree of obstruction 
increases
Quality. Ejection, peaking later in systole 
as the obstruction increases
Usually a prominent ejection click in 
early systole
Pulmonary component of the second 
sound at the base (P2) becomes delayed 
and softer, disappearing as obstruction 
increases. Inspiration may increase 
murmur; expiration may increase click.
Growth is usually normal.
Newborns with severe stenosis may  
be cyanotic from right-to-left atrial 
shunting and rapidly develop heart 
failure as the ductus arteriosus closes.
Aortic Valve Stenosis
Usually a bicuspid valve with progressive 
obstruction, but may occur as a result  
of a dysplastic valve or damage from 
rheumatic fever or degenerative disease
S1
A2
P2
Location. Midsternum, upper right 
sternal border
Radiation. To the carotid arteries and 
suprasternal notch; may also be a thrill
Intensity. Varies, louder with increasingly 
severe obstruction
Quality. An ejection, often harsh, 
systolic murmur
May be an associated ejection click
The aortic closure sound may be 
increased in intensity. There may be a 
diastolic murmur of aortic valve 
regurgitation (not shown in the 
diagram). Newborns with severe 
stenosis may have weak or absent pulses 
and severe heart failure. May not be 
audible until adulthood even though 
the valve is congenitally abnormal
Tetralogy of Fallot
Complex defect with ventricular septal 
defect, infundibular and usually valvular 
right ventricular outﬂow obstruction, 
malrotation of the aorta, and right-to-left 
shunting at ventricular septal level
With Pulmonic Stenosis
With Pulmonic Atresia
S1
A2
S1
General. Variable cyanosis, increasing 
with activity
Location. Mid-to-upper left sternal 
border. If pulmonary atresia, the 
continuous murmur of ductus 
arteriosus ﬂow at upper left sternal 
border or in the back.
Radiation. Little, to upper left sternal 
border, occasionally to lung ﬁelds
Intensity. Usually grade III–IV
Quality. Systolic ejection murmur
Normal pulses
The pulmonary closure sound is usually 
not heard. May have abrupt 
hypercyanotic spells with sudden 
increase in cyanosis, air hunger, altered 
level of awareness
Failure to gain weight with persistent and 
increasingly severe cyanosis
Long-term persistence of cyanosis accom-
panied by clubbing of ﬁngers and toes
Persistent hypoxemia leads to polycythe-
mia, which will accentuate the cyanosis.
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
920 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
920 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 18-10 Congenital Heart Murmurs (Continued )
Transposition of the Great Arteries
A severe defect with failure of rotation of 
the great vessels, leaving the aorta to arise 
from the right ventricle and the 
pulmonary artery from the left ventricle
General. Intense generalized cyanosis
Location. No characteristic murmur. If 
present, it may reﬂect an associated defect 
such as ventricular septal defect (VSD).
Radiation and Quality. Depends on 
associated abnormalities
Single loud second sound of the 
anterior aortic valve
Frequent rapid development of heart 
failure
Frequent associated defects as described 
at the left
Ventricular Septal Defect
Blood going from a high-pressure left 
ventricle through a defect in the septum 
to the lower-pressure right ventricle 
creates turbulence, usually throughout 
systole.
Small to Moderate
S1
A2 P2
Small to
moderate
Location. Lower left sternal border
Radiation. Little
Intensity. Variable, only partially 
determined by the size of the shunt. 
Small shunts with a high-pressure 
gradient may have very loud murmurs. 
Large defects with elevated pulmonary 
vascular resistance may have no 
murmur. Grade II–IV/VI with a thrill if 
grade IV/VI or higher.
Quality. Pansystolic, usually harsh, may 
obscure S1 and S2 if loud enough
With large shunts, there may be a low-
pitched middiastolic murmur of relative 
mitral stenosis at the apex.
As pulmonary artery pressure increases, 
the pulmonic component of the second 
sounds at the base increases in intensity. 
When pulmonary artery pressure equals 
aortic pressure there may be no murmur 
and P2 will be very loud.
In low-volume shunts, growth is 
normal.
In larger shunts, heart failure may occur 
by 6–8 wks; poor weight gain, poor 
feeding.
Associated defects are frequent.
Patent Ductus Arteriosus
Continuous ﬂow from aorta to 
pulmonary artery throughout the cardiac 
cycle when ductus arteriosus does not 
close after birth
Small to Moderate
S1
S1
S2
Location. Upper left sternal border and 
to left
Radiation. Sometimes to the back
Intensity. Varies depending on size of  
the shunt, usually grade II–III/VI.
Quality. A rather hollow, sometimes 
machinery-like murmur that is 
continuous throughout the cardiac 
cycle, although occasionally almost 
inaudible in late diastole, uninterrupted 
by the heart sounds, louder in systole
Full to bounding pulses
Noticed at birth in the premature infant 
who may have bounding pulses, a 
hyperdynamic precordium, and an 
atypical murmur
Noticed later in the full-term infant as 
pulmonary vascular resistance falls
May develop heart failure at 4–6 wks if 
large shunt
Poor weight gain related to size of shunt
Pulmonary hypertension affects 
murmur as above.
Atrial Septal Defect
Left-to-right shunt through an opening in 
the atrial septum, possible at various levels
S1
A2 P2
Location. Upper left sternal border
Radiation. To the back
Intensity. Variable, usually grade II–III/VI
Quality. Ejection but without the harsh 
quality
Widely split second sounds throughout 
all phases of respiration, normal 
intensity
Usually not heard until after age of 1 yr
Gradual decrease in weight gain as 
shunt increases
Decreased exercise tolerance, subtle, not 
dramatic
Heart failure is rare.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
921
Table 18-11 Physical Signs of Sexual Abuse
Possible Indications
1. Marked and immediate dilatation of the anus in knee–chest position, with no constipation, stool in the vault, or neurologic 
disorders
2. Hymenal notch or cleft that extends >50% of the inferior hymenal rim (conﬁrmed in knee–chest position)
3. Condyloma acuminata in a child older than 3 yrs
4. Bruising, abrasions, lacerations, or bite marks of labia or perihymenal tissue
5. Herpes of the anogenital area beyond the neonatal period
6. Purulent or malodorous vaginal discharge in a young girl (culture and view all discharges under a microscope for evidence of 
a sexually transmitted infection)
Strong Indications
1. Lacerations, ecchymoses, and newly healed scars of the hymen or the posterior fourchette
2. No hymenal tissue from 3 o’clock to 9 o’clock (conﬁrmed in various positions)
3. Healed hymenal transections especially between 3 and 9 o’clock (complete cleft)
4. Perianal lacerations extending to external sphincter
A child with concerning physical signs must be evaluated by a sexual abuse expert for a complete history and sexual 
abuse examination.
Any physical sign must be evaluated in light of the entire history, other parts of the physical examination, and laboratory data.
A
Acute hemorrhage and ecchymoses of 
tissues (10-mo-old)
B
Erythema and superﬁcial abrasions to 
the labia minora (5-yr-old)
C
Healed interruption of hymenal 
membrane at 9 o’clock (4-yr-old)
D
Narrowed posterior ring continuous with 
ﬂoor of vagina (12-yr-old)
E
Copious vaginal discharge and erythema 
(9-yr-old)
F
Extensive condylomata around the anus 
(2-yr-old)
Source: Reece R, Ludwig S, eds. Child Abuse Medical Diagnosis and Management, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2001.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
922 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
922 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 18-12 The Male Genitourinary System
Hypospadias
Hypospadias is the most common congenital penile 
abnormality. The urethral meatus opens abnormally on the 
ventral surface of the penis. One form is shown above; more 
severe forms involve openings on the lower shaft or scrotum.
Undescended Testicle
You should distinguish between undescended testes, shown 
above, (with testes in the inguinal canals—see arrows), from 
highly retractile testes from an active cremasteric reﬂex.
Sources of photos: Hypospadias—Courtesy of Warren Snodgrass, MD, UT–Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas; Undescended Testicle—Fletcher M. Physical 
Diagnosis in Neonatology. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven; 1998. 
Flat feet or pes planus from laxity of the 
soft tissue structures of the foot
Inversion of the foot (varus)
Metatarsus adductus in a child. The 
forefoot is adducted and not inverted.
A
              B
Pronation in a toddler. A: When viewed from behind, the hindfoot is everted. B: When viewed from the front, the forefoot is 
everted and abducted.
Table 18-13  Common Musculoskeletal Findings  
in Young Children
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
923
Table 18-14  The Power of Prevention:  
Vaccine-Preventable Diseases
This table shows photographs of children with vaccine-preventable diseases. Childhood vaccines have been named the single most 
important clinical intervention in the world in terms of inﬂuence on public health. Because of vaccinations, we hope you will never 
see many of these conditions, but you should be able to identify them. Try to identify the diseases before reading the captions.
Polio
The deformed leg of this child is from 
polio
Measles
Characteristic rash of measles, in the 
presence of a child who also has coryza, 
conjunctivitis, fever, and this diffuse rash
Rubella
Rubella rash on a child’s back
Tetanus
Rigid newborn with neonatal tetanus
Haemophilus Inﬂuenzae
Type b
Buccal cellulitis from this invasive 
bacterial disease
Varicella
An infant with a severe form of varicella
Meningitis
Nuchal rigidity
Pertussis
Paroxysmal cough with a “whoop” at 
the end
Cervical Cancer
Largely prevented through vaccination 
with human papillomavirus vaccine
Sequelae of Human Papillomavirus
Sources of photos: Polio—Courtesy of World Health Organization; Haemophilus inﬂuenzae—Courtesy of American Academy of Pediatrics; Varicella—Courtesy of 
Barbara Watson, MD, Albert Einstein Medical Center and Division of Disease Control, Philadelphia Department of Health; Tetanus—Courtesy of Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention. Pertussis—Courtesy of the Immunization Action Coalition.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
924 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
References
 1. Carey WB. Developmental-Behavioral Pediatrics. 4th ed. Philadelphia, 
PA: Saunders/Elsevier; 2009.
 2. Levine MD, Carey WB, Crocker AC. Developmental-Behavioral 
Pediatrics. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 1999.
 3. Clark EM. Well-Child Care: A Bright Futures Pocket Guide For Pediatric 
Providers. 1st ed. Washington, DC: Georgetown University, 2008.
 4. American Academy of Pediatrics. Bright Futures. Available at https://
brightfutures.aap.org/Pages/default.aspx. Accessed June 2, 2015.
 5. United States Department of Health and Human Services. U.S. Pre-
ventive Services Task Force (USPSTF). Available at http://www.
ahrq.gov/professionals/clinicians-providers/guidelines-recom-
mendations/guide/. Accessed June 2, 2015.
 6. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Immunization Sched-
ules. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/index.
html. Accessed June 2, 2015.
 7. American Academy of Pediatrics. Immunization. Available at 
http://www2.aap.org/immunization/izschedule.html. Accessed 
June 2, 2015.
 8. Hagan JF, Shaw JS, Duncan PM. Bright Futures: Guidelines For 
Health Supervision Of Infants, Children, And Adolescents. 3rd ed. Elk 
Grove Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2008.
 9. Casey BM, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ. The continuing value of the 
Apgar score for the assessment of newborn infants. N Engl J Med. 
2001;344(7):467.
 10. Ballard JL, Khoury JC, Wedig K. Ballard scoring system for deter-
mining gestational age in weeks. J Pediatr. 1991;119:417.
 11. Brazelton TB. Working with families: opportunities for early inter-
vention. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1995;42(1):1.
 12. Johnson CP, Blasco PA. Infant growth and development. Pediatr 
Rev. 1997;18(7):224.
 13. Colson ER, Dworkin PH. Toddler development. Pediatr Rev. 1997; 
18(8):255.
 14. Copelan J. Normal speech and development. Pediatr Rev. 1995;18:91.
 15. American Academy of Pediatrics. Developmental surveillance and 
screening of infants and young children. Pediatrics. 2001;108(1):192.
 16. Grummer-Strawn LM, Reinold C, Krebs NF, et al. Use of World 
Health Organization and CDC growth charts for children aged 
0–59 months in the United States. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2010;59:1.
 17. Wright CM, Williams AF, Elliman D, et al. Using the new UK-
WHO growth charts. BMJ. 2010;340:c1140.
 18. Fong CT. Clinical diagnosis of genetic diseases. Pediatr Ann. 1993; 
22(5):277.
 19. Hyvarinen L. Assessment of visually impaired infants. Ophthalmol 
Clin North Am. 1994;7:219.
 20. Lees MH. Cyanosis of the newborn infant: recognition and clinical 
evaluation. J Pediatr. 1970;77:484.
 21. Frank JE, Jacobe KM. Evaluation and management of heart mur-
murs in children. American Fam Physician. 2011;84:793.
 22. Gessner IH. What makes a heart murmur innocent? Pediatr Ann. 
1997;26(2):82.
 23. Wierwille L. Pediatric heart murmurs: evaluation and management 
in primary care. J Nurse Pract. 2011;36:22–8;quiz 8.
 24. Callahan CW Jr, Alpert B. Simultaneous percussion auscultation 
technique for the determination of liver span. Arch Pediatr Adolesc 
Med. 1994;148(8):873.
 25. Reiff MI, Osborn LM. Clinical estimation of liver size in newborn 
infants. Pediatrics. 1983;71:46.
 26. Burger BJ, Burger JD, Bos CF, et al. Neonatal screening and stag-
gered early treatment for congenital dislocation or dysplasia of the 
hip. Lancet. 1990;336(8730):1549.
 27. American Academy of Pediatrics. Clinical practice guideline: early 
detection of developmental dysplasia of the hip. Committee on 
Quality Improvement, Subcommittee on Developmental Dysplasia 
of the Hip. Pediatrics. 2000;105:896.
 28. Zafeiriou DI. Primitive reﬂexes and postural reactions in the neu-
rodevelopmental examination. Pediatr Neurol. 2004;31(1):1.
 29. Schott JM, Rossor MN. The grasp and other primitive reﬂexes. 
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2003;74(5):558.
 30. Luiz DM, Foxcroft CD, Stewart R. The construct validity of the Grifﬁths 
Scales of Mental Development. Child Care Health Dev. 2001;27:73.
 31. Aylward GP. Developmental screening and assessment: what are we 
thinking? J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2009;30:169.
 32. Sheldrick RC, Merchant S, Perrin EC. Identiﬁcation of develop-
mental-behavioral problems in primary care: a systematic review. 
Pediatrics. 2011;128:356.
 33. Newacheck PW, Strickland B, Shonkoff JP, et al. An epidemiologic 
proﬁle of children with special health care needs. Pediatrics. 1998; 
102:117.
 34. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, et al. Prevalence of obesity and 
trends in body mass index among US children and adolescents, 
1999–2010. JAMA. 2012;307:483.
 35. Ingelﬁnger JR. The child or adolescent with elevated blood pres-
sure. N Engl J Med. 2014;370:2316.
 36. National High Blood Pressure Education Program Working Group 
on High Blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents. The Fourth 
Report on the Diagnosis, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood 
Pressure in Children and Adolescents. Pediatrics. 2004;114:555.
 37. Lurbe, Empar, et al. “Management of high blood pressure in chil-
dren and adolescents: recommendations of the European Society of 
Hypertension.” Journal of Hypertension 2009;27.9:1719–1742.
 38. Falkner, Bonita, Empar Lurbe, and Franz Schaefer. “High blood 
pressure in children: clinical and health policy implications.” The 
Journal of Clinical Hypertension 2010;12.4:261–276.
 39. Fleming S, Thompson M, Stevens R, et al. Normal ranges of heart 
rate and respiratory rate in children from birth to 18 years of age: 
a systematic review of observational studies. Lancet. 2011;377:1011.
 40. Shamis DI. Collecting the “facts”: vision assessment techniques: 
perils and pitfalls. Am Orthop J. 1996;46:7.
 41. Rothman R, Owens T, Simel DL. Does this child have acute otitis 
media? JAMA. 2003;290:1633.
 42. Blomgren K, Pitkaranta A. Current challenges in diagnosis of acute 
otitis media. Intl J Ped Otorhinolaryngol. 2005;69(3):295.
 43. Coker TR, Chan LS, Newberry SJ, et al. Diagnosis, microbial epi-
demiology, and antibiotic treatment of acute otitis media in chil-
dren: a systematic review. JAMA. 2010;304:2161.
 44. Pirozzo S, Papinczak T, Glasziou P. Whispered voice test for screen-
ing for hearing impairment in adults and children: systematic 
review. BMJ. 2003;327(7421):967.
 45. Wolf G, Anderhuber W, Kuhn F. Development of the paranasal 
sinuses in children: implications for paranasal sinus surgery. Ann 
Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 1993;102(9):705.
 46. Tinanoff N, Reisine S. Update on early childhood caries since the 
Surgeon General’s Report. Acad Pediatr. 2009;9:396.
 47. Lunt RC, Law DB. A review of the chronology of eruption of decid-
uous teeth. J Am Dent Assoc. 1974;89:872.
 48. Ebell MH, Smith MA, Barry HC, et al. Does this patient have strep 
throat? JAMA. 2000;284:2912.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  18 |
 
Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence 
925
REFERENCES
 49. Moorman JE, Zahran H, Truman BI, et al. Current asthma preva-
lence—United States, 2006–2008. MMWR Surveill Summ. 2011; 
60(Suppl):84.
 50. Naylor C. Physical Examination of the Liver. JAMA. 1994;271(23): 
1859–1865. doi:10.1001/jama.1994.03510470063036.
 51. Ashcraft KW. Consultation with the specialist: acute abdominal 
pain. Pediatr Rev. 2000;21:363.
 52. Hymel KP, Jenny C. Child sexual abuse. Pediatr Rev. 1996; 
17(7):236–249; quiz, 249.
 53. Maniglio R. The impact of child sexual abuse on the course of 
bipolar disorder: a systematic review. Bipolar Disord. 2013;15:341.
 54. Stoltenborgh M, van Ijzendoorn MH, Euser EM, et al. A global 
perspective on child sexual abuse: meta-analysis of prevalence 
around the world. Child Maltreat. 2011;16:79.
 55. Scherl S. Common lower extremity problems in children. Pediatr 
Rev. 2004;25:43.
 56. Bruce RW. Torsional and angular deformities. Pediatr Clin North 
Am. 1996;43:867.
 57. Committee on Practice and Ambulatory Medicine. Use of chaper-
ones during the physical examination of the pediatric patient. Pedi-
atrics. 2011;127:991.
 58. American Medical Association. Guidelines for Adolescent Preven-
tive Services (GAPS). Available at http://www.ama-assn.org/ama/
upload/mm/39/gapsmono.pdf. Accessed February 19, 2008.
 59. Elster AB, Kuznets MJ. AMA Guidelines for Adolescent Preventive 
Services (GAPS): Recommendations and Rationale. Baltimore, MD: 
Williams & Wilkins; 1993.
 60. Herman-Giddens ME, Slora EJ, Wasserman RC, et al. Secondary 
sexual characteristics and menses in young girls seen in ofﬁce prac-
tice: a study from the Pediatric Research in Ofﬁce Settings Net-
work. Pediatrics. 1997;99(4):505.
 61. Biro FM, Galvez MP, Greenspan LC, et al. Pubertal assessment 
method and baseline characteristics in a mixed longitudinal study 
of girls. Pediatrics. 2010;126(3):e583–e590.
 62. Biro FM, Greenspan LC, Galvez MP, et al. Onset of breast develop-
ment in a longitudinal cohort. Pediatrics. 2013;132:1019.
 63. Oefﬁnger KC, Fontham EH, Etzioni R, et al. Breast Cancer 
Screening for Women at Average Risk: 2015 Guideline Update 
From the American Cancer Society. JAMA. 2015;314(15):1599–
1614.
 64. ACOG Committee on Adolescent Health Care. ACOG Committee. 
Opinion no. 350, November 2006: Breast concerns in the adoles-
cent. Obstet Gynecol. 2006;108(5):1329.
 65. Herman-Giddens ME, Steffes J, Harris D, et al. Secondary sexual 
characteristics in boys: data from the Pediatric Research in Ofﬁce 
Settings Network. Pediatrics. 2012;130:e1058.
 66. McCrory P, Meeuwisse WH, Aubry M, et al. Consensus statement on 
concussion in sport: the 4th International Conference on Concussion 
in Sport held in Zurich, November 2012. Brit J Sports Med. 2013; 
47:250.
 67. Metzl JD. Preparticipation examination of the adolescent athlete: 
part 1. Pediatr Rev. 2001;22(6):119.
 68. Metzl JD. Preparticipation examination of the adolescent athlete: 
part 2. Pediatr Rev. 2001;22(7):227.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  19 |
 
The Pregnant Woman 
927
C H A P T E R
19
The Pregnant Woman
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate 
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com
This chapter presents the history and physical examination of the healthy preg-
nant woman. Many of the techniques of examination are similar to those of the 
nonpregnant woman; however, the clinician must distinguish the changes of 
pregnancy from abnormal ﬁndings. This chapter reviews common anatomic and 
physiologic changes as they evolve throughout pregnancy, elements of the health 
history speciﬁc to the pregnant woman, recommendations for prenatal health 
promotion and counseling, and physical examination techniques speciﬁc to 
pregnancy (Figs. 19-1 to 19-3).
F I G U R E  1 9 - 1 .  Support a healthy 
pregnancy.
F I G U R E  1 9 - 2 .  Sharing and 
discovering.
F I G U R E  1 9 - 3 .  Support a healthy 
delivery.
Anatomy and Physiology
Physiologic Hormonal Changes
The hormonal changes of pregnancy alter many of the body systems. Because 
these normal but complex variations result in visible changes in anatomy, in this 
chapter, the physiologic changes of pregnancy precede the discussion of anat-
omy and are brieﬂy summarized here.
■ Estrogen promotes endometrial growth that supports the early embryo. It 
appears to stimulate marked enlargement of the pituitary gland (by up to 
135%) and increased prolactin output from its anterior lobe, which readies 
breast tissue for lactation.1 Estrogen also contributes to the hypercoagulable 
state that puts pregnant women at four to ﬁve times higher risk for throm-
boembolic events, primarily in the venous system.2
■ Progesterone levels increase throughout pregnancy, leading to increased tidal 
volume and alveolar minute ventilation, though respiratory rate remains 
constant; respiratory alkalosis and subjective shortness of breath result from 
these changes.3 Lower esophageal sphincter tone resulting from rising levels 
of estradiol and progesterone contributes to gastroesophageal reﬂux. Proges-
terone relaxes tone in the ureters and bladder, causing hydronephrosis (in 
the right ureter more than the left) and an increased risk of bacteriuria.1
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
928 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
■ Human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) has ﬁve variant subtypes. Two are pro-
duced by the placenta and support progesterone synthesis in the corpus 
luteum, stabilizing the endometrium and effectively preventing loss of the 
early embryo to menstruation. Serum and urine pregnancy assays test pri-
marily for the two pregnancy-related HCG variants; three isoforms are pro-
duced by different cancers and the pituitary gland.4
■ Placental growth hormone inﬂuences fetal growth and the development of pre-
eclampsia.1 Placental growth hormone and other hormones have been impli-
cated in insulin resistance after midpregnancy and in gestational diabetes, 
which carries a lifetime risk of progressing to type 2 diabetes of up to 60%.5,6
■ Thyroid function changes include an increase in thyroid-binding globulin due 
to rising levels of estrogen and stimulation of thyroid-stimulating hormone 
(TSH) receptors by HCG. This results in a slight increase, usually in the 
normal range, in serum concentrations of free T3 and T4, while serum TSH 
concentrations appropriately decrease. This transient apparent “hyperthy-
roidism” should be considered physiologic.7
■ Relaxin is secreted by the corpus luteum and placenta and is involved in the 
remodeling of reproductive tract connective tissue to facilitate delivery, in-
creased renal hemodynamics, and increased serum osmolality. Despite its 
name, relaxin does not affect peripheral joint laxity during pregnancy. Weight 
gain, especially around the gravid uterus, and shifts in the center of gravity 
contribute to lumbar lordosis and other musculoskeletal strain.
■ Erythropoietin increases during pregnancy, which raises erythrocyte mass. 
Plasma volume increases to a greater extent, causing relative hemodilution 
and physiologic anemia, which can protect against blood loss during birth. 
Cardiac output increases but systemic vascular resistance decreases, result-
ing in a net fall in blood pressure, especially during the second trimester and 
returning to normal by the third trimester.
■ Basal metabolic rate increases 15% to 20% during pregnancy, increasing daily 
energy demands by an estimated 85, 285, and 475 kcal/d in the ﬁrst, second, 
and third trimesters, respectively.1
Anatomic Changes
Changes in the breasts, abdomen, and urogenital tract are the most visible signs of 
pregnancy. Review the anatomy and physiology of these body systems in Chapter 10, 
Breasts and Axillae; Chapter 11, Abdomen; and Chapter 14, Female Genitalia.
Breasts. The breasts become moderately enlarged due to hormonal 
stimulation that causes increased vascularity and glandular hyperplasia. By the 
third month of gestation, the breasts become more nodular. The nipples become 
larger and more erectile, with darker areolae and more pronounced Montgomery 
glands. The venous pattern over the breasts becomes visibly more prominent as 
pregnancy progresses. In the second and third trimesters, some women secrete 
colostrum, a thick, yellowish, nutrient-rich precursor to milk. Breast tenderness 
may make them more sensitive during examination.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  19 |
 
The Pregnant Woman 
929
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Uterus. Muscle cell hypertrophy, increases in ﬁbrous and elastic tissue, and 
development of blood vessels and lymphatics all contribute to growth of the uterus. 
The uterus increases in weight from ∼70 g at conception to almost 1,100 g at 
delivery, when it accommodates from 5 to 20 L of ﬂuid.1 In the ﬁrst trimester, the 
uterus is conﬁned to the pelvis and shaped like an inverted pear; it may retain its 
prior anteverted (forward-leaning), retroverted (backward-leaning), or retroﬂexed 
(backward-bent) position. By 12 to 14 weeks, the gravid uterus becomes externally 
palpable as it expands into a globular shape beyond the pelvic brim.
Beginning in the second trimester, the enlarging fetus pushes the uterus into an 
anteverted position that encroaches into the space usually occupied by the blad-
der, triggering frequent voiding. The intestines are displaced laterally and superi-
orly. The uterus stretches its own supporting ligaments, causing “round ligament 
pain” in the lower quadrants. Often, slight dextrorotation to accommodate the 
rectosigmoid structures on the left side of the pelvis leads to greater discomfort 
on the right side as well as increased right-sided hydronephrosis.1 Growth pat-
terns of the gravid uterus are shown in Figure 19-4. Sagittal depictions of the 
gravid abdomen during each trimester appear in Figures 19-5 to 19-7.
36 wks
32 wks
28 wks
24 wks
20 wks
16 wks
12–14 wks
F I G U R E  1 9 - 4 .  Growth patterns of 
the uterine fundus by weeks of pregnancy.
F I G U R E  1 9 - 5 .  First trimester.
F I G U R E  1 9 - 6 .  Second trimester.
F I G U R E  1 9 - 7 .  Third trimester.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
930 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Vagina. Increased vascularity throughout the pelvis gives the vagina a bluish 
color, known as Chadwick sign. The vaginal walls appear deeply rugated due to 
thicker mucosa, loosening of connective tissue, and hypertrophy of smooth 
muscle cells. Normal vaginal secretions may become thick, white, and more 
profuse, known as leukorrhea of pregnancy. Increased glycogen stores in the 
vaginal epithelium give rise to a proliferation of Lactobacillus acidophilus, which 
lowers the vaginal pH. This acidiﬁcation protects against some vaginal infections, 
but at the same time, increased glycogen may contribute to higher rates of vaginal 
candidiasis.
Cervix. At ∼1 month after conception, 
the cervix softens and also turns bluish or 
cyanotic in color, reﬂecting the increased 
vascularity, edema, and glandular hyperplasia 
throughout the cervix.1 Hegar sign is the 
palpable softening of the cervical isthmus, 
the portion of the uterus that narrows into 
the cervix, illustrated in Figure 19-8. This 
cervical remodeling involves rearrangement 
of the cervical connective tissue that decreases 
collagen concentration and facilitates dila-
tation during delivery. Copious cervical sec-
retions ﬁll the cervical canal soon after 
conception with a tenacious mucus plug that 
protects the uterine environment from 
outside pathogens and is expelled as bloody 
show at delivery.
Adnexae. Early in pregnancy, the corpus luteum, which is the ovarian follicle 
that has discharged its ovum, may be prominent enough to be felt on the affected 
ovary as a small nodule; this disappears by 
midpregnancy.
External Abdomen. As the skin 
over the abdomen stretches to ac com-
modate the fetus, purplish striae gravidarum 
or “stretch marks” and a linea nigra, a 
brownish black pigmented vertical stripe 
along the midline skin, may appear 
(Fig. 19-9). As tension on the abdominal 
wall increases with advancing pregnancy, 
the rectus abdominis muscles may separate 
at the midline, called diastasis recti. If 
diastasis is severe, especially in multiparous 
women, only a layer of skin, fascia, and 
peritoneum may cover the anterior uterine 
wall, and fetal parts may be palpable 
through this muscular gap.
Softened
isthmus
F I G U R E  1 9 - 8 .  Hegar sign.
F I G U R E  1 9 - 9 .  Striae and linea 
nigra.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  19 |
 
The Pregnant Woman 
931
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Common Concerns During Pregnancy and Their Explanations
Common Concerns
Trimester
Explanation
Missed periods 
 (amenorrhea)
All
High levels of estrogen, progesterone, and HCG build up the endometrium and pre-
vent menses, causing missed periods which are often the ﬁrst noticeable sign of 
pregnancy.
Heartburn
All
Progesterone relaxes the lower esophageal sphincter, allowing gastric contents to 
reﬂux into the esophagus. The gravid uterus also exerts physical pressure against 
the stomach, contributing to reﬂux symptoms.1
Urinary frequency
All
Increases in blood volume and ﬁltration rate through the kidneys result in increased 
urine production, while pressure from the gravid uterus reduces potential space for 
the bladder. Dysuria or suprapubic pain should be investigated for urinary tract 
infection.
Vaginal discharge
All
Asymptomatic milky white discharge, leukorrhea, results from increased secretions 
from vaginal and cervical epithelium due to vasocongestion and hormonal changes. 
Any foul-smelling or pruritic discharge should be investigated.
Constipation
All
Constipation results from slowed gastrointestinal transit due to hormonal changes, 
dehydration from nausea and vomiting, and the supplemental iron in prenatal 
 vitamins.
Hemorrhoids
All
Hemorrhoids may be caused by constipation, decreased venous return from increas-
ing pressure in the pelvis, compression by fetal parts, and changes in activity level 
during pregnancy.
Backache
All
Hormonally induced relaxation of the pelvic ligaments contributes to musculoskeletal 
aches. Lordosis required to balance the gravid uterus contributes to lower back 
strain. Breast enlargement may contribute to upper backaches.
Nausea and/or vomiting
First
This is poorly understood but appears to reﬂect hormonal changes, slowed gastrointesti-
nal peristalsis, alterations in smell and taste, and sociocultural factors. Hyperemesis 
gravidarum is vomiting with weight loss of >5% of prepregnancy weight.
Breast tenderness/ 
tingling
First
Pregnancy hormones stimulate the growth of breast tissue, which causes swelling and 
possible aching, tenderness, and tingling. Increased blood ﬂow can make delicate 
veins more visible beneath the skin.
Fatigue
First/Third
Fatigue is related to the rapid change in energy requirements, sedative eﬀects of pro-
gesterone, changes in body mechanics due to the gravid uterus, and sleep distur-
bance. Many women report increased energy and well-being during the second 
trimester.
Lower abdominal pain
Second
Rapid growth in the second trimester causes tension and stretching of the round liga-
ments that support the uterus, causing sharp or cramping pain with movement or 
position change.
Abdominal striae
Second or 
third
Stretching of the skin and tearing of the collagen in the dermis contribute to thin, 
 usually pink, bands, or striae gravidarum (stretch marks). These may persist or fade 
over time after delivery.
Contractions
Third
Irregular and unpredictable uterine contractions (Braxton Hicks contractions) are rarely 
associated with labor. Contractions that become regular or painful should be evalu-
ated for onset of labor.
Loss of mucus plug
Third
Passage of the mucus plug is common during labor but may occur prior to the onset of 
contractions. As long as there are no regular contractions, bleeding, or loss of ﬂuid, 
loss of the mucus plug is unlikely to trigger the onset of labor.
Edema
Third
Decreased venous return, obstruction of lymphatic ﬂow, and reduced plasma colloid 
oncotic pressure commonly cause lower extremity edema. However, sudden severe 
edema and hypertension may signal preeclampsia.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
932 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Prenatal care focuses on optimizing health and minimizing risk for the mother 
and fetus. The goals of the initial prenatal visit are to deﬁne the health status 
of the mother and fetus, conﬁrm the pregnancy and estimate gestational age, 
develop a plan for continuing care, and counsel the mother about her expecta-
tions and concerns. During subsequent visits, you should assess any interim 
changes in the health status of the mother and fetus, review speciﬁc physical 
examination ﬁndings related to the pregnancy, and provide counseling and 
timely preventive screenings.
Initial Prenatal History. Initial prenatal visits are best timed early in 
pregnancy, but may occur at later in gestation; tailor your history to where it falls 
during the mother’s gestational cycle.
Conﬁrmation of Pregnancy. Ask about conﬁrmation of pregnancy: Has 
the patient had a conﬁrmatory urine pregnancy test, and when? When was her 
last menstrual period (LMP)? Has she had an ultrasound to establish dates? 
Explain that serum pregnancy tests are rarely required to conﬁrm pregnancy.
Symptoms of Pregnancy. Has the patient had missed periods, breast 
tenderness, nausea or vomiting, fatigue, or urinary frequency?
Concerns and Attitudes Toward Pregnancy. Ask how the patient feels 
about the pregnancy. Is she excited, concerned, or scared? Was the pregnancy 
planned and desired? If not, does she plan to complete the pregnancy to term, 
terminate, or consider adoption? Is a partner, father of the baby, or other family 
support network involved? As you elicit her viewpoints, use open-ended ques-
tions and be ﬂexible and nonjudgmental. Respect diverse family structures, such 
as extended family support, single motherhood, or pregnancy conceived by 
sperm donation with or without a partner of either gender. Support the patient’s 
The Health History
Common Concerns
● Initial prenatal history
● Conﬁrmation of pregnancy
● Symptoms of pregnancy
● Concerns and attitudes toward the pregnancy
● Current health and past clinical history
● Past obstetric history
● Risk factors for maternal and fetal health
● Family history of patient and father of the newborn
● Plans for breastfeeding
● Plans for postpartum contraception
● Determining gestational age and expected date of delivery
See the table on “Common Concerns 
During Pregnancy and Their Explana-
tions” for a list of normal as well as 
concerning symptoms, p. 931.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  19 |
 
The Pregnant Woman 
933
THE HEALTH HISTORY
choices when unexpected admissions arise, such as a pregnancy resulting from 
a coerced sexual act, or the wish to end the pregnancy.
Current Health and Past Cli nical 
History. Explore any past or present 
clinical conditions (Fig. 19-10). Pay 
particular attention to conditions that 
affect pregnancy, such as abdominal sur-
geries, hypertension, diabetes, cardiac 
disorders including childhood surgery 
for congenital heart disease, asthma, 
hypercoagulability states from lupus 
anticoagulant or anticardiolipin anti-
bodies, mental health disorders such as 
postpartum depression, human immu-
nodeﬁciency virus (HIV), sexually trans-
mitted infections (STIs), abnormal Pap smears, and exposure to die thylstilbestrol 
(DES) in utero.
Past Obstetric History. How many prior pregnancies has the patient 
had? How many were term deliveries, preterm deliveries, spontaneous and ter-
minated pregnancies, and how many were live births? Were there any complica-
tions from diabetes, hypertension, preeclampsia, intrauterine growth restriction, 
or preterm labor? Were there any complications during labor and delivery such 
as large babies (fetal macrosomia), fetal distress, or emergency interventions? 
Were deliveries by vaginal delivery, assisted delivery (vacuum or forceps), or 
cesarean section?
Risk Factors for Maternal and Fetal Health. Does she use tobacco, 
alcohol, or illicit drugs? What about medications, over-the-counter drugs, or 
herbal preparations? Does she have any toxic exposures at work, at home, or in 
other settings? Is her nutritional intake adequate, or is she at risk from obesity? 
Does she have an adequate social support network and source of income? Are 
there unusual sources of stress at home or work? Is there any history of physical 
abuse or domestic violence?
Family History. Ask about the genetic and family history of the patient 
and her partner and/or father. What are the ethnic backgrounds of the patient 
and father? Is there any family history of genetic diseases such as sickle cell ane-
mia, cystic ﬁbrosis, or muscular dystrophy, among others? Have babies in the 
family had any congenital problems?
Plans for Breastfeeding. Breastfeeding protects the baby against a vari-
ety of infectious and noninfectious conditions, and exerts a protective effect on 
the mother against breast cancer and other conditions.8–10 Education during 
pregnancy and clinician encouragement increase the subsequent rate and dura-
tion of maternal breastfeeding.
Plans for Postpartum Contraception. Initiate this discussion early, 
as postpartum contraception reduces the risk of unintended pregnancy and 
F I G U R E  1 9 - 1 0 .  Explore the health 
history.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
934 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
shortened interpregnancy intervals, which are linked to increases in adverse 
pregnancy outcomes.11,12 Plans for contraception will depend on the patient’s 
preferences, clinical history, and decision about breastfeeding.
Determining Gestational Age and Expected Date of Delivery. 
Accurate dating is best done early and contributes to appropriate management 
of the pregnancy. Dating establishes the timeframe for reassuring the patient 
about normal progress, establishing paternity, timing screening tests, tracking 
fetal growth, and effectively triaging preterm and postdated labor.
Determining Gestational Age and the  
Expected Date of Delivery
● Gestational age. To establish gestational age, count the number of weeks and 
days from the ﬁrst day of the LMP. Counting this menstrual age from the 
LMP, although biologically distinct from date of conception, is the standard 
means of calculating fetal age, yielding an average pregnancy length of  
40 weeks. If the actual date of conception is known (as with in vitro fertiliza-
tion), a conception age which is 2 weeks less than the menstrual age can be 
used to calculate menstrual age (i.e., a corrected or adjusted LMP dating) to 
establish dating.
● Expected date of delivery (EDD). The EDD is 40 weeks from the ﬁrst date of the 
LMP. Using the Naegele rule, the EDD can be estimated by taking the LMP, 
adding 7 days, subtracting 3 months, and adding 1 year.
● Tools for calculations. Pregnancy wheels and online calculators are commonly 
used to calculate the EDD. However, pregnancy wheels vary widely in quality 
and accuracy, and are often produced as commercial marketing tools. Online 
calculators may be more reliable, but should be checked for accuracy before 
routine use.
● Limitations on pregnancy dating. Patient recall of the LMP is highly variable. 
Even when this date is accurate, the LMP can be aﬀected by hormonal contra-
ceptives, menstrual irregularities, or variations in ovulation that result in 
atypical cycle lengths. LMP dating should be checked against physical exami-
nation markers such as fundal height, and any wide discrepancies should be 
clariﬁed by ultrasound evaluation. In clinical practice, dating by ultrasound is 
widespread, regardless of the certainty of the LMP, even though this approach 
is not currently endorsed by national guidelines.
Concluding the Initial Visit. As you conclude the visit, reaffirm 
your commitment to the woman’s health and her concerns during pregnancy. 
Review your findings, discuss any tests or screenings that are needed, and 
ask if she has further questions. Reinforce the need for regular prenatal care 
and review the timing of future visits. Record your findings in the prenatal 
record.
Subsequent Prenatal Visits. Though the optimal number of prenatal 
appointments has not been well  established, obstetric visits traditionally 
follow a set schedule: monthly until 28 gestational weeks, then biweekly until 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  19 |
 
The Pregnant Woman 
935
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
36 weeks, then weekly until delivery.13 Update and document the history at 
every visit, especially fetal movement felt by the patient, contractions, leakage 
of ﬂuid, and vaginal bleeding. The physical examination ﬁndings at every visit 
should include vital signs (especially blood pressure and weight), fundal 
height, veriﬁcation of fetal heart rate (FHR), and determination of fetal position 
and activity, as described in Techniques of Examination to follow. At each visit, 
the urine should be tested for infection and protein.
Health Promotion and 
Counseling: Evidence and 
Recommendations
Nutrition. Evaluate the nutritional status of the pregnant patient during the 
ﬁrst prenatal visit. Assess inadequate nutrition as well as obesity.
■ Take a diet history. What does the patient typically eat for each meal? How 
often does she eat? Does she have nausea that limits her eating? Does she 
have any history of conditions that affect food intake like diabetes, eating 
disorders, or past bariatric surgery?
■ Review the body mass index (BMI) and laboratory ﬁndings. Measure the height 
and weight, then calculate the BMI; note that later in pregnancy, the BMI 
reﬂects the gravid uterus. The hematocrit is a screen for anemia, which may 
reﬂect nutritional deﬁciency, underlying clinical issues, or the expected 
 hemodilution later in pregnancy.
■ Recommend a prenatal multivitamin. Daily prenatal supplements should in-
clude 400 μg of folic acid, 600 International Units of vitamin D, 27 mg of 
iron, and at least 1,000 mg of calcium.14 If not present in the prenatal vita-
mins, recommend 150 to 290 μg of daily iodine in pregnant and breast-
feeding women as iodine deﬁciency is widespread.15 Patients should be 
advised that excess amounts of fat-soluble vitamins like vitamins A, D, E, 
and K can cause toxicity.
Important Topics for Health Promotion  
and Counseling
● Nutrition
● Weight gain
● Immunizations
● Exercise
● Substance abuse
● Intimate partner violence
● Prenatal laboratory screening
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
936 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
■ Caution the patient about foods to avoid. Pregnant women are especially vulner-
able to listeriosis. To help prevent listeriosis, the American College of Obste-
tricians and Gynecologists (ACOG)14 encourages pregnant patients to avoid:
■ Unpasteurized milk and foods made with unpasteurized milk
■ Raw and undercooked seafood, eggs, and meat
■ Refrigerated paté, meat spreads, and smoked salmon
■ Hot dogs, luncheon meats, and cold cuts unless served steaming hot
■ Regarding ﬁsh and shellﬁsh, some nutrients like omega-3 fatty acids and de-
hydroepiandrostenedione (DHEA) may enhance fetal brain development. 
For pregnant and breastfeeding women, ACOG recommends two servings a 
week of selected ﬁsh and shellﬁsh. Intake should include 8 to 12 ounces a 
week of ﬁsh lower in mercury such as salmon, shrimp, pollock, tuna (light 
canned), tilapia, catﬁsh, and cod. White tuna consumption should be 
limited to 6 ounces a week. Pregnant women should avoid ﬁsh higher in 
mercury like tileﬁsh, shark, swordﬁsh, and king mackerel.16,17
■ Make a nutritional plan. Review goals for weight gain that are tailored to the 
patient’s BMI, as shown below. Weight gain recommendations are incorpo-
rated into the Pregnancy Weight Gain Calculator and Super Tracker at the 
user-friendly ChooseMyPlate.gov website (http://www.choosemyplate.
gov/pregnancy-weight-gain-calculator). This calculator displays the daily 
recommended intake of each of the ﬁve food groups for each trimester.18 
Calculations of these amounts are based on the woman’s height, prepreg-
nancy weight, due date, and levels of weekly exercise. Small frequent meals 
may help with mild nausea. Consider a team-based approach involving dieti-
cians or behavioral health specialists in complex cases such as gestational 
diabetes or eating disorders.
Weight Gain. Weight gain should be closely monitored during pregnancy 
as poor birth outcomes are associated with both excess and inadequate weight 
gain. Ideally, patients should begin pregnancy with a BMI as close to the normal 
range as possible. Women with a normal BMI should gain 25 to 35 pounds 
during pregnancy. In 2013, ACOG afﬁrmed the revised 2009 weight gain 
recommendations by the National Institute of Medicine, shown below.19,20
Weigh the patient at each visit and plot the results on a graph so that they are 
easy for you and the patient to review and discuss.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  19 |
 
The Pregnant Woman 
937
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Immunizations. Given the persistent increase in pertussis infection in the 
United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Advisory 
Committee on Immunization Practices and ACOG recommend that Tdap be 
administered during each pregnancy, ideally at 27 to 36 weeks of gestation, 
regardless of the prior immunization history.21 Caretakers in direct contact 
with the infant should also receive Tdap. Inactivated inﬂuenza vaccination is 
indicated in any trimester during the inﬂuenza season.22
The following vaccines are safe during pregnancy: pneumococcal, meningococ-
cal, and hepatitis B. Hepatitis A and B, meningococcal polysaccharide and con-
jugate, and pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccines can be given, if indicated.23 
The following vaccines are not safe during pregnancy: measles/mumps/rubella, 
polio, and varicella. All women should have rubella titers drawn during preg-
nancy and be immunized after birth if found to be nonimmune.
Check Rh(D) and antibody typing at the ﬁrst prenatal visit, at 28 weeks, and at 
delivery. Anti-D immunoglobulin should be given to all Rh-negative women at 
28 weeks’ gestation and again within 3 days of delivery to prevent sensitization 
if the infant is Rh-D positive.24,25
Exercise. Physical activity during pregnancy has a number of psychological 
beneﬁts and reduces risk of excessive gestational weight gain, gestational 
diabetes, preeclampsia, preterm birth, varicose veins, and deep vein thrombosis 
(DVT).26 It may reduce the length of labor and complications during delivery. 
In contrast, excess activity is associated with low birth weight, so educating 
your patients about recommended guidelines is important, especially because 
evidence suggests that physical activity levels in pregnant U.S. women are 
relatively low.27
Recommendations for Total and Rate  
of Weight Gain During Pregnancy, by 
Prepregnancy BMI, 2009
Prepregnancy  
BMIa
Total Weight 
Gain  
(Range in lbs)
Rates of Weight Gainb 
2nd and 3rd Trimesters 
lbs/wk 
Mean Range
Underweight, or <18.5
28–40
 
1 
1.0–1.3
Normal weight, or 18.5–24.9
25–35
 
1 
0.8–1.0
Overweight, or 25.0–29.9
15–25
 
0.6 
0.5–0.7
Obese, or ≥30.0
11–20
 
0.5 
0.4–0.6
aTo calculate BMI, go to Calculate Your Body Mass Index, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 
at http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/educational/lose_wt/BMI/bmicalc.htm.
bCalculations assume a 1.1–4.4 lbs weight gain in the ﬁrst trimester.
Reprinted with permission from Rasmussen KM, Yaktine AL (eds.) and Institute of Medicine. Com-
mittee to Re-examine IOM Pregnancy Weight Guidelines. Weight Gain During Pregnancy: Re-examining 
the Guidelines. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2009. Available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/books/NBK32799/table/summary.t1/?report = objectonly. Accessed September 4, 2015.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
938 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
ACOG recommends that pregnant women should engage in ≥30 minutes of 
moderate exercise on most days of the week unless there are contraindica-
tions.28 Women initiating exercise during pregnancy should be cautious and 
consider programs developed speciﬁcally for pregnant women. Water-based 
exercises can temporarily help alleviate musculoskeletal aches, but immer-
sion in hot water should be avoided. After the ﬁrst trimester, women should 
avoid exercise in the supine position, which compresses the inferior vena 
cava and can cause dizziness and decreased placental blood ﬂow. Because the 
center of gravity shifts in the third trimester, advise against exercises that 
cause loss of balance. Contact sports or activities that risk abdominal trauma 
are contraindicated throughout pregnancy. Pregnant women also should 
avoid overheating, dehydration, and any exertion that causes notable fatigue 
or discomfort.
Substance Abuse. Abstinence from substances of abuse is a top 
priority goal during pregnancy. Provide universal screening, which can 
uncover subtle issues and help you address these topics in a neutral and 
constructive manner. Incarceration, confrontation, and criminalization of 
substance abuse have all been shown to worsen outcomes of pregnancy for 
women and their children.
■ Tobacco. Tobacco use is implicated in 13% to 19% of all low–birth weight 
babies and many other poor pregnancy outcomes, including a twofold risk 
of placenta previa, placental abruption, and preterm labor.29,30 Risk of 
spontaneous abortion, fetal death, and fetal digit anomalies is also increased. 
Cessation is the goal, but any decrease in use is favorable.
■ Alcohol. Fetal alcohol syndrome, the neurodevelopmental sequela of alco-
hol exposure during fetal development, is the leading cause of preventable 
mental retardation in the United States. No safe dose of alcohol has been 
established. ACOG strongly recommends that women abstain throughout 
pregnancy.31 To promote abstinence, make use of the numerous ACOG and 
CDC resources, professional counseling, inpatient treatment, and Alcoholics 
Anonymous.
■ Illicit drugs. Illegal drugs have signiﬁcant detrimental effects on fetal develop-
ment; pregnant women with addiction should be referred for treatment 
immediately and screened for HIV and hepatitis C infection.
■ Abuse of prescription drugs. Ask about the unusual use of narcotics, stimu-
lants, benzodiazepines, and other commonly abused prescription drugs.
■ Herbal and unregulated supplements. Herbal supplements during pregnancy 
have been poorly studied and can harm the developing fetus. Unregulated 
supplements or vitamins, especially if formulated outside the United States, 
may contain lead and other toxins. Review and discuss any intake of supple-
ments and consider pregnancy toxicology, for example, through  MothertoBaby 
.org, to determine speciﬁc risks related to the timing of  ingestion and the 
 extent of fetal exposure.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  19 |
 
The Pregnant Woman 
939
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Intimate Partner Violence. Pregnancy is a time of increased risk from 
intimate partner violence. Pre-existing patterns of abuse may intensify from 
verbal to physical abuse or from mild to severe physical abuse. Up to one in ﬁve 
women experiences some form of abuse during pregnancy, which has been 
associated with delayed prenatal care, low infant birth weight, or even murder 
of the mother and fetus.32
ACOG recommends universal screening of all women for domestic violence 
without regard to socioeconomic status, including pregnant women at the ﬁrst 
prenatal visit and at least once each trimester.32 For a direct nonjudgmental 
approach, ACOG recommends the statement and simple questions listed below.
ACOG Screening Approach for Intimate  
Partner Violence
Initial Statement: “Because violence is so common in many women’s lives and 
because there is help available for women being abused, I now ask every patient 
about domestic violence.”
Screening Questions:
1. “Within the past year—or since you have been pregnant—have you been hit, 
slapped, kicked, or otherwise physically hurt by someone?”
2. “Are you in a relationship with a person who threatens or physically hurts you?”
3. “Has anyone forced you to have sexual activities that made you feel uncom-
fortable?”
Source: American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Screening tools–domestic violence. 
Available at http://www.acog.org/About-ACOG/ACOG-Departments/Violence-Against-Women/
Screening-Tools–Domestic-Violence. Accessed September 2, 2015.
Watch for nonverbal clues of abuse such as frequent last-minute appointment 
changes, unusual behavior during visits, partners who refuse to leave the patient 
alone during the visit, and bruises or other injuries. It may take several visits for 
the patient to admit to abuse due to fear about safety and reprisal.
Once the patient acknowledges abuse, ask about the best way for you to help her. 
She may set limits on sharing information. Accept her decisions about how to 
handle her situation safely, with the caveat that if children are involved, you may 
be required to report harmful behaviors to the authorities. Maintain an updated 
list of shelters, counseling centers, hotline numbers, and other trusted local 
referrals. Plan future appointments at more frequent intervals. Finally, complete 
as thorough a physical examination as the patient permits, and document all 
injuries on a body diagram.
National Domestic Violence Hotline
● Website: www.thehotline.org
● 1–800–799-SAFE (7233)
● TTY for hearing impaired: 1–800–787–3224
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
940 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Prenatal Laboratory Screenings. The standard prenatal screening 
panel includes blood type and Rh, antibody screen, complete blood count—
especially hematocrit and platelet count, rubella titer, syphilis test, hepatitis B 
surface antigen, HIV test, STI screen for gonorrhea and chlamydia, and urinalysis 
with culture. Scheduled screenings include an oral glucose tolerance test for 
gestational diabetes around 24 to 28 weeks and a rectovaginal swab for group B 
streptococcus between 35 and 37 weeks.
Because obesity is associated with insulin resistance, the obese pregnant patient 
is at increased risk of both gestational diabetes and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Both 
ACOG and the American Diabetes Association recommend testing for glucose 
tolerance in the ﬁrst trimester for obese pregnant patients.33
If indicated, pursue additional tests related to the mother’s risk factors, such as 
screening for aneuploidy, Tay–Sachs disease, or other genetic diseases, and 
amniocentesis.
Techniques of Examination
As you begin the examination, be responsive to the patient’s comfort and privacy, as 
well as her individual and cultural sensitivities. During the initial visit, take the his-
tory while she is clothed. If partners or children are present, ask if she wants them 
to stay during the physical examination. If she has never had a pelvic examination, 
take the time to explain what is involved and seek her cooperation with each step. 
Concerns about modesty should be balanced against the need for a complete exam-
ination. Patients who have experienced sexual assault may resist the pelvic examina-
tion. This reluctance can also stem from personal or cultural boundaries which 
should be explored and understood. To ease examination of the breasts and abdo-
men, ask the patient to gown with the opening in front. Make sure that the equip-
ment and examining tables accommodate pregnant patients who are obese.
Positioning
In early pregnancy, the patient can be examined in the supine position. In later 
trimesters, the patient should adopt the semisitting position with the knees bent 
(Fig. 19-11). This position is more comfortable and reduces the weight of the 
gravid uterus on the descending aorta and inferior vena cava. The pregnant 
F I G U R E  1 9 - 1 1 .
Adopt the semisitting position.
Compression interferes with venous 
return from the lower extremities and 
pelvic vessels, causing the patient to 
feel dizzy and faint, the supine hypo-
tensive syndrome.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  19 |
 
The Pregnant Woman 
941
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
woman should avoid lying supine for long periods. Most portions of the exami-
nation (except the pelvic examination) should be done in the sitting or left-side-
lying position.
During the examination, encourage the patient to sit upright if she feels light-
headed; make sure she takes her time if she needs to stand up. She may need to 
empty her bladder, especially before the pelvic examination. Complete your 
examination relatively quickly.
Examining Equipment
Make your touch and hand motions comforting as you examine the pregnant 
woman. Warm your hands and use ﬁrm yet gentle palpation rather than abrupt 
pressure or kneading. When possible, keep your ﬁngers ﬂattened together in 
smooth continuous contact with the skin on the abdominal surface. The palmar 
surfaces of your ﬁngertips are the most sensitive.
Before beginning the examination, gather the equipment listed below.
Equipment for Examining the Pregnant Woman
● Gynecologic speculum and lubrication: Due to vaginal wall relaxation during 
pregnancy, a larger-than-usual speculum may be needed in multiparous 
patients.
● Sampling materials: Because of the increased vascularity of vaginal and cervi-
cal structures, the cervical brush may cause bleeding that interferes with Pap 
smear samples, so the “broom” 
sampling device is preferred dur-
ing pregnancy. Use additional 
swabs as needed to screen for 
STIs, group B strep, and wet 
mount preparations.
● Tape measure: A plastic or paper 
tape measure is used to assess the 
size of the uterus after 20 gesta-
tional weeks.
● Doppler FHR monitor and gel: A 
“Doppler” or “Doptone” is a hand-
held device used to assess FHR 
after 10 weeks of gestation when 
applied externally to the gravid 
belly.
Handheld Doppler monitor.
General Inspection
Assess the general health, emotional state, nutritional status, and neuromuscular 
coordination of the patient as she walks into the room and moves onto the exam-
ining table.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
942 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Height, Weight, and Vital Signs
Measure the height and weight. Calculate the BMI with standard tables, using 19 
to 25 as normal for the prepregnant state.
Measure the blood pressure at every visit. Blood pressure parameters in pregnancy 
follow the recommendations of the Eighth Joint National Committee (JNC8) 
(see p. 130).34 Baseline prepregnancy readings are important for determining the 
patient’s usual range. In the second trimester, blood pressure normally drops 
below the nonpregnant state.
Hypertensive disorders affect 5% to 10% of all pregnancies, so all elevations in 
blood pressure must be closely monitored. Hypertension can be both an inde-
pendent diagnosis and a marker of preeclampsia syndrome. This syndrome is 
“a pregnancy-speciﬁc syndrome that can affect virtually every organ system.”35 
ACOG issued new recommendations on hypertension in pregnancy in 2013 that 
no longer depend on proteinuria, recognizing that preeclampsia cannot only be 
lethal for the mother and fetus, but doubles the risk of later-life cardiovascular 
disease. Preeclampsia increases cardiovascular disease risk eight- to ninefold in 
women with preeclampsia giving birth before 34 weeks’ gestation.34
Weight loss due to nausea and vomiting 
that exceeds 5% of prepregnancy weight 
is considered excessive, representing 
hyperemesis gravidarum, and can lead to 
adverse pregnancy outcomes.
Chronic hypertension is SBP >140 or 
DBP >90 that predates pregnancy. 
Chronic hypertension affects almost 
2% of U.S. births.35
Head and Neck
Face the seated patient and inspect the head and neck, paying particular atten-
tion to the following features:
■ Face. Irregular brownish patches around the forehead, cheeks, nose, and jaw 
are known as chloasma or melasma, the “mask of pregnancy,” a normal skin 
ﬁnding during pregnancy.
■ Hair. Hair may become dry, oily, or sparse during pregnancy; mild hirsutism 
on the face, abdomen, and extremities is also common.
Facial edema after 20 gestational 
weeks is suspicious for preeclampsia 
and should be investigated.
Localized patches of hair loss should 
not be attributed to pregnancy (though 
postpartum hair loss is common).
Gestational hypertension is systolic blood 
pressure (SBP) >140 mm Hg or diastolic 
blood pressure (DBP) >90 mm Hg first 
documented after 20 weeks, without 
proteinuria or preeclampsia, that 
resolves by 12 weeks postpartum.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Deﬁnition of Preeclampsia
Preeclampsia is SBP ≥140 or DBP ≥90 after 20 weeks on two occasions at least  
4 hours apart in a woman with previously normal BP or BP ≥160/110 conﬁrmed 
within minutes and proteinuria ≥300 mg/24 hours, protein:creatinine ≥0.3, or 
dipstick 1+;
OR 
new onset hypertension without proteinuria and any of the following: thrombo-
cytopenia (platelets <100,000/μL), impaired liver function (liver transaminase 
levels more than twice normal), new renal insuﬃciency (creatinine >1.1 mg/dL or 
doubles in the absence of renal disease), pulmonary edema, or new onset  cerebral 
or visual symptoms.34
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  19 |
 
The Pregnant Woman 
943
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Eyes. Assess the conjunctivae and sclera for signs of pallor and jaundice.
■ Nose. Inspect the mucus membranes and septum. Nasal congestion and nose 
bleeds are more common during pregnancy.
■ Mouth. Examine the teeth and gums. Gingival enlargement with bleeding is 
common during pregnancy.
■ Thyroid gland. Modest symmetric enlargement caused by glandular hyperpla-
sia and increased vascularity is normal on inspection and palpation.1
Thorax and Lungs
Count the respiratory rate, which should remain normal throughout pregnancy.
Inspect the thorax for contours and breathing patterns.
Percuss to observe diaphragmatic elevation that may be seen as early as the ﬁrst 
trimester.
Auscultate for clear breath sounds without wheezes, rales, or rhonchi.
Heart
Palpate the apical impulse, which may be rotated upward and to the left toward 
the fourth intercostal space by the enlarging uterus.
Auscultate the heart. Listen for a venous hum or a continuous mammary soufﬂe 
(pronounced soo-ﬂ) often found during pregnancy due to increased blood ﬂow 
through normal vessels. The mammary soufﬂe is commonly heard during late 
pregnancy or lactation, is strongest in the second or third intercostal space at the 
sternal border, and is typically both systolic and diastolic, though only the sys-
tolic component may be audible.
Auscultate for murmurs.
Breasts
The breast examination is similar to that of a nonpregnant woman but with some 
notable differences.
Anemia may cause conjunctival pallor.
Erosions and perforations of the nasal 
septum may represent use of intranasal 
cocaine.
Dental problems are associated with 
poor pregnancy outcomes, so initiate 
prompt dental referrals for tooth and 
gum pain or infections.
Thyroid enlargement, goiters, and 
nodules are abnormal and require 
investigation.
Dyspnea accompanied by increased 
respiratory rate, cough, rales, or respi-
ratory distress point to possible infec-
tion, asthma, pulmonary embolus, or 
peripartum cardiomyopathy.
See also Chapter 9, Cardiovascular 
System, pp. 343–417.
Assess dyspnea and signs of heart fail-
ure for possible peripartum cardiomy-
opathy, particularly in the late stages 
of pregnancy.
Murmurs may signal anemia. Investi-
gate any diastolic murmur.
See also Chapter 10, Breasts and 
 Axillae, pp. 419–447.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
944 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Inspect the breasts and nipples for symmetry and color. Normal changes include 
a marked venous pattern, darkened nipples and areolae, and prominent Mont-
gomery glands.
Palpate for masses and axillary lymph nodes. Normal breasts may be tender and 
nodular during pregnancy.
Compress each nipple between your thumb and index ﬁnger; colostrum may 
express from the nipples during later trimesters. Reassure the patient that this is 
normal and that she may also experience “let down,” a spontaneous mild leakage 
often accompanied by a cramping sensation in the breast during a hot shower or 
orgasm in the third trimester.
Abdomen
For the abdominal examination, help the patient move into a semisitting posi-
tion with knees ﬂexed, as shown on pp. 947–950.
Inspect the abdomen for striae, scars, size, shape, and contour. Purplish striae and 
a linea nigra are normal in pregnancy.
Palpate the abdomen for:
■ Organs and masses. The mass of the gravid uterus is expected.
■ Fetal movement. The examiner can usually feel movements externally after 
24 gestational weeks; the mother can usually feel these by 18 to 24 weeks. 
The maternal sensation of fetal movement is traditionally known as 
“quickening.”
■ Uterine contractility. Irregular uterine contractions occur as early as 12 weeks 
and may be triggered by external palpation during the third trimester. During 
contractions, the abdomen feels tense or ﬁrm to the examiner, obscuring the 
palpation of fetal parts; after the contraction, the palpating ﬁngers sense the 
relaxation of the uterine muscle.
■ Measure the fundal height if gestational age is >20 weeks, when the fundus 
should reach the umbilicus. With a plastic or paper tape measure, locate the 
pubic symphysis and place the “zero” end of the tape measure where you can 
ﬁrmly feel that bone (Fig. 19-12). Then extend the tape measure to the very 
top of uterine fundus and note the number of centimeters measured. Though 
subject to error between 16 and 36 weeks, measurement in centimeters 
Inverted nipples need attention at  
the time of birth if breastfeeding is 
planned. 
Pathologic masses may be difficult to 
isolate, but warrant immediate atten-
tion. Severe focal tenderness with ery-
thema in mastitis requires immediate 
treatment.
Bloody or purulent discharge should 
not be attributed to pregnancy.
Cesarean scars on the abdomen may 
not match the orientation of the scar 
on the uterus, which is important 
when evaluating whether vaginal 
delivery is appropriate after cesarean 
section.
If fetal movement is not felt after 
24 weeks, consider a miscalculation  
of gestational age, fetal death or 
severe morbidity, or false pregnancy. 
 Confirm fetal health and gestational 
age with an ultrasound.
Before 37 weeks, regular uterine con-
tractions with or without pain and 
bleeding are abnormal, suggesting 
preterm labor.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  19 |
 
The Pregnant Woman 
945
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
should roughly equal the number of weeks of gestation. This low-technology, 
widely used technique may underdetect newborns who are small for gesta-
tional age.36–38
F I G U R E  1 9 - 1 2 .  Measure fundal height.
■ Auscultate the fetal heart tones. The Doppler fetal rate monitor (“Doppler” or 
“Doptone”) is the standard instrument for measuring FHR, which is nor-
mally audible as early as 10 to 12 weeks’ gestation. Detection of the FHR 
may be slightly delayed in obese patients.
■ Location. From 10 to 18 weeks’ gestation, the FHR is located along the 
midline of the lower abdomen. After that time, the FHR is best heard over 
the back or chest and depends on fetal position; the Leopold maneuvers 
can help identify the position. (See pp. 947–948.)
■ Rate. The FHR ranges between 110 and 160 beats per minute (BPM). A 
heart rate of 60 to 90 BPM is usually maternal, but an adequate FHR 
should be conﬁrmed.
■ Rhythm. FHR should vary 10 to 15 BPM from second to second, especially 
later in the pregnancy. After 32 to 34 weeks, the FHR should become 
more variable and increased with fetal activity. This subtlety can be difﬁ-
cult to assess with a Doppler but can be tracked with an FHR monitor if 
any questions arise.
Genitalia
For this portion of the examination, the patient will need to be supine with her 
feet placed in stirrups. Assemble the needed equipment in advance and mini-
mize the time she spends in this position to avert dizziness and hypotension 
from uterine compression of the major abdominal vessels.
If fundal height is 4 cm greater than 
expected, consider multiple gesta-
tion, a large fetus, extra amniotic 
fluid, or uterine leiomyoma. If fundal 
height is 4 cm smaller than expected, 
consider low-level amniotic fluid, 
missed abortion, intrauterine growth 
retardation, or fetal anomaly. These 
conditions should be investigated by 
ultrasound.
Inaudible fetal heart tones may indi-
cate fewer weeks of gestation than 
expected, fetal demise, false preg-
nancy, or observer error; inability to 
locate the FHR should always be 
investigated with formal ultrasound.
After 24 weeks, auscultation of more 
than one FHR in different locations 
with varying rates suggests multiple 
gestation.
Sustained dips in FHR, or “decelera-
tions,” have a wide differential diagno-
sis but always warrant investigation, 
at least by formal FHR monitoring.
Lack of beat-to-beat variability is 
 difficult to discern with a handheld 
Doppler, so this finding warrants 
 formal FHR monitoring.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
946 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
External Genitalia. Inspect the external genitalia. Relaxation of the vaginal 
introitus and enlargement of the labia and clitoris are normal changes of 
pregnancy. In multiparous women, scars from perineal lacerations or episiotomy 
incisions may be present.
Inspect for labial varicosities, cystoceles, rectoceles, and any lesions or sores.
Palpate the Bartholin and Skene glands for tenderness and cysts.
Internal Genitalia. Prepare for both a speculum and bimanual examination.
Speculum Examination. Relaxation of the perineal and vulvar structures 
during pregnancy may minimize, but not eliminate, discomfort from the specu-
lum examination. The increased vascularity of vaginal and cervical structures 
promotes friability, so insert and open the speculum gently to prevent tissue 
trauma and bleeding. During the third trimester, perform this examination only 
when necessary as descent of the fetal parts into the pelvis can make the exami-
nation very uncomfortable.
■ Inspect the cervix for color, shape, and closure. Typically, the external os in a 
nulliparous cervix appears as a circular dot, and in a parous cervix more like 
an arc or “smile.” A parous cervix may also look irregular due to healed lac-
erations from prior deliveries. The inner portion of the cervix everts slightly 
during pregnancy, called ectropion, and appears as a glandular friable darker 
pink or red area inside the os. Perform a Pap smear if indicated, and collect 
other vaginal specimens such as STI cultures, wet mount samples, or group 
B strep swabs as appropriate.
■ Inspect the vaginal walls as you withdraw the speculum. Check for color, re-
laxation, rugae, and discharge. Normal ﬁndings include bluish color, deep 
rugae, and increased milky white discharge, or leukorrhea.
Bimanual Examination. Performing the bimanual examination is often 
easier during pregnancy due to pelvic ﬂoor relaxation. Avoiding sensitive ure-
thral structures, insert two lubricated ﬁngers into the introitus, palmar side 
down, with slight pressure downward on the perineum. Maintaining downward 
pressure on the perineum, gently turn the ﬁngers palmar side up.
■ Cervix. Because of softening during pregnancy, or Hegar sign, the cervix may 
be difﬁcult to identify. If there are nabothian cysts or healed lacerations from 
prior deliveries, the cervix may feel irregular. 
Labial varicosities that arise during 
pregnancy can become tortuous and 
painful. Cystoceles and rectoceles 
may be pronounced due to the mus-
cle relaxation of pregnancy. Lesions 
and sores occur with herpes simplex 
infection.
See also Chapter 14, Female Genitalia, 
pp. 565–606.
A pink cervix suggests a nonpregnant 
state. Cervical erosion, erythema, dis-
charge, or irritation suggests cervicitis, 
and warrants investigation for STIs.
Investigate abnormal vaginal 
 discharges for possible candida or 
bacterial vaginosis, which can affect 
pregnancy outcome.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  19 |
 
The Pregnant Woman 
947
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
 
To estimate the cervical length, palpate the lateral surface of the cervical tip to 
the lateral fornix. Prior to 34 to 36 weeks’ gestation, the cervix should retain 
its initial length of 3 cm or greater.
 
Palpate the cervical os. This may be easier if the patient moves her heels as 
close to her buttocks as possible, which shortens the vagina, and places her 
closed ﬁsts under her buttocks to tip the pelvis upward, which makes pos-
terior cervices easier to palpate. The external os may be open to admit a ﬁn-
gertip in multiparous women. The internal os, the narrow passage between 
the endocervical canal and the uterine cavity, should be closed until late 
pregnancy, regardless of parity. The internal os may only be palpable by 
reaching behind or past the fetal parts.
 
As with the speculum examination, in late pregnancy, examine the cervix 
only when necessary because palpation is very uncomfortable. Warn patients 
that it may cause cramping and pressure.
■ Uterus. With your internal ﬁngers placed at either side of the cervix and the 
external hand on the patient’s abdomen, use the internal ﬁngers to gently lift 
the uterus upward toward the abdominal hand. Capture the fundal portion 
of the uterus between your two hands and assess the uterine size, keeping in 
mind the contours of the gravid uterus at various gestational intervals, de-
picted in Figure 19-8. Palpate for shape, consistency, and position.
■ Adnexa. Palpate the right and left adnexa. The corpus luteum may be palpable 
as a small nodule on the affected ovary during the ﬁrst weeks after concep-
tion. After the ﬁrst trimester, adnexal masses become difﬁcult to feel.
■ Pelvic ﬂoor. Evaluate pelvic ﬂoor strength as you withdraw your examining 
ﬁngers.
Anus
Inspect for external hemorrhoids. If present, note their size, location, and any 
evidence of thrombosis.
Rectum and Rectovaginal Septum
The rectal examination is not standard in prenatal care unless there are concern-
ing symptoms like rectal bleeding or masses or conditions that compromise the 
rectovaginal septum. Rectal examination may help you assess the size of a ret-
roverted or retroﬂexed uterus, but transvaginal ultrasound provides superior 
information.
Cervical opening or shortening 
(effacement) prior to 37 weeks may 
indicate preterm labor.
An irregularly shaped uterus suggests 
uterine leiomyomata, or fibroids, or a 
bicornuate uterus, one with two dis-
tinct cavities separated by a septum.
Adnexal tenderness or masses early in 
gestation require ultrasound evalua-
tion to rule out ectopic pregnancy. 
Acute pelvic inflammatory disease is 
rare in pregnancy, especially after the 
first trimester, because the adnexae 
are sealed by the gravid uterus and 
mucus plug.
Hemorrhoids often become engorged 
late in pregnancy; they may be  painful, 
bleed, or thrombose.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
948 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Extremities
Ask the woman to resume sitting or to lie on her left side. Inspect the legs for 
varicose veins.
Palpate the extremities for edema in the pretibial, ankle, and pedal distributions, 
which are rated on a 0 to 4+ scale. Physiologic edema is common in advanced 
pregnancy, during hot weather, and in women who stand for long periods of time 
due to decreased venous return from the lower extremities.
Elicit the knee and ankle deep tendon reﬂexes.
Special Techniques
Leopold Maneuvers. Leopold maneuvers are used to determine the fetal 
position in the maternal abdomen beginning in the second trimester; accuracy 
is greatest after 36 weeks’ gestation.41 Although less accurate for assessing fetal 
growth,42 these examination ﬁndings help determine readiness for vaginal 
delivery by assessing:
■ The upper and lower fetal pole, namely, the proximal and distal fetal parts
■ The maternal side where the fetal back is located
■ The descent of the presenting part into the maternal pelvis
■ The extent of ﬂexion of the fetal head
■ The estimated size and weight of the fetus (an advanced skill that will not be 
addressed further here)
Varicose veins may begin or worsen 
during pregnancy.
See Chapter 12, Peripheral Vascular Sys-
tem, for grades of edema, pp. 525–526. 
Unilateral severe edema with calf ten-
derness warrants prompt evaluation 
for DVT. Hand or facial edema after  
20 gestational weeks is nonspecific 
for eclampsia, but should be  
investigated.39,40
Hyperreflexia may signal cortical 
 irritability from eclampsia, but  
clinical accuracy is variable.
Common deviations include breech 
presentation (when parts other than 
the head, such as buttocks or foot, 
present at the maternal pelvis), and 
lack of engagement of the presenting 
part in the maternal pelvis at term. If 
discovered prior to term, breech pre-
sentations may sometimes be cor-
rected by rotational maneuvers.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  19 |
 
The Pregnant Woman 
949
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
First Maneuver (Upper 
Fetal Pole). Stand at the wom-
an’s side, facing her head. Pal-
pate the uppermost part of 
gravid uterus gently, with the 
ﬁngertips together, to determine 
what fetal part is located at the 
fundus, which is the “upper fetal 
pole” (Fig. 19-13).
Second Maneuver (Sides 
of the Maternal Abdomen). 
Place one hand on each side of 
the woman’s abdomen, captur-
ing the fetal body between them 
(Fig. 19-14). Steady the uterus 
with one hand and palpate the 
fetus with the other, looking for 
the back on one side and extrem-
ities on the other.
F I G U R E  1 9 - 1 3 .  Palpate upper fetal pole.
The fetal buttocks are usually at the 
upper fetal pole; they feel firm but 
irregular, and less globular than the 
head. The fetal head feels firm, round, 
and smooth. Occasionally, neither 
part is easily palpated at the fundus, 
as when the fetus is in a transverse lie.
F I G U R E  1 9 - 1 4 .  Palpate fetal back and 
extremities.
By 32 weeks’ gestation, the fetal back 
has a smooth, firm surface as long or 
longer than the examiner’s hand. The 
fetal arms and legs feel like irregular 
bumps. The fetus may kick if awake 
and active.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
950 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Third Maneuver (Lower 
Fetal Pole and Descent into 
Pelvis). Face the woman’s feet. 
Place the ﬂat palmar surfaces of 
the ﬁngertips on the fetal pole 
just above the pubic symphysis 
(Fig. 19-15). Palpate the pre-
senting fetal part for texture and 
ﬁrmness to distinguish the head 
from the buttock. Judge the 
descent, or engagement, of the 
presenting part into the maternal 
pelvis. Alternatively, use the 
Pawlik grip by grasping the 
lower fetal pole with the thumb 
and ﬁngers of one hand to assess 
the presenting part and descent 
into pelvis; however, this tech-
nique tends to be uncomfortable 
to the gravid patient.
Fourth Maneuver (Flexion 
of the Fetal Head). This mane-
uver assesses the flexion or 
extension of the fetal head, pre-
suming that the fetal head is the 
presenting part in the pelvis. Still 
facing the woman’s feet, with 
your hands positioned on either 
side of the gravid uterus, identify 
the fetal front and back sides 
(Fig. 19-16). Using one hand at 
a time, slide your ﬁngers down 
each side of the fetal body until 
you reach the “cephalic promi-
nence,” that is, where the fetal 
brow or occiput juts out.
F I G U R E  1 9 - 1 5 .  Palpate lower fetal pole.
Again, the fetal head feels very firm 
and globular; the buttocks feel firm 
but irregular, and less globular than 
the head. In a vertex or cephalic pre-
sentation, the fetal head is the pre-
senting part. If the most distal part of 
the lower fetal pole cannot be pal-
pated, it is usually engaged in the pel-
vis. If you can depress the tissues over 
the maternal bladder without touch-
ing the fetus, the presenting part is 
proximal to your fingers.
F I G U R E  1 9 - 1 6 .  Palpate for the cephalic 
prominence.
If the cephalic prominence juts out 
along the line of the fetal back, the 
head is extended. If the cephalic 
prominence juts out along the line  
of the fetal anterior side, the head is 
flexed. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  19 |
 
The Pregnant Woman 
951
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
Like many specialties, obstetrics utilizes a very speciﬁc vocabulary, which cannot 
be fully covered in this textbook.
■ Pregnant women are described in terms of number of pregnancies (gravida) 
and labors (para) they have experienced. Parity is further broken down into 
term deliveries, preterm deliveries, abortions (spontaneous abortions and 
terminated pregnancies), and living children, which yields the mnemonic 
“TPAL” when listed in that order.
■ This is expressed in “Gs and Ps”; for example, a woman who has had two 
prior children and is pregnant with her third pregnancy would be referred 
to simply as “G3P2.” A woman with two spontaneous losses prior to 
20 weeks’ gestation, three living children who were delivered at term, and 
a current pregnancy, would be referred to as “G6P3023.” This shorthand 
allows obstetricians to track large amounts of data succinctly.
■ One common error is to assign a multiple pregnancy, for example, twins, as 
a count of two for either gravity or parity. In practice, each pregnancy re-
ceives only one count in any of the categories regardless of the number of 
fetuses, except for living children, when all are counted. So, for a ﬁrst preg-
nancy with twins delivered at term, the correct designation is G1P1002.
Typically, the presentation of a pregnant patient follows a standard order: age, 
Gs and Ps, weeks of gestation, means of determining gestational age (ultrasound 
vs. LMP), followed by chief complaint, chief pregnancy complications, then 
important history and examination ﬁndings. Two sample presentations are 
given below.
Recording Your Findings
Recording the Physical Examination—The 
Pregnant Woman
“32-year-old G3P1102 at 18 weeks’ gestation by LMP presents to establish 
prenatal care. Pregnancy complicated by closely spaced pregnancies, prior 
preterm birth for preeclampsia, and prior cesarean delivery. Patient reports 
fetal movement; denies contractions, vaginal bleeding, and leakage of 
fluids. On external exam, low-transverse cesarean scar is evident; fundus is 
palpable just below umbilicus. On internal exam, cervix is open to fingertip 
at the external os but closed at the internal os; cervix is 3 cm long; uterus 
enlarged to size consistent with 18-week gestation. Speculum exam shows 
leukorrhea with positive Chadwick sign. FHR by Doppler is between 140 and 
145 BPM.”
These findings describe the examina-
tion of a healthy pregnant woman at 
18 weeks’ gestation.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
952 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
Recording the Physical Examination—The 
Pregnant Woman (continued )
OR
“21-year-old G1P0 at 33 weeks’ gestation as determined by 19-week ultrasound 
presents with chief complaint of decreased fetal movement. Pregnancy com-
plicated by poor compliance and homelessness. Patient reports minimal fetal 
movement over the last 24 hours; denies contractions, vaginal bleeding, and 
leakage of ﬂuids. On external exam, nontender gravid abdomen with no scars 
is noted; fundus is measured at 32 cm; fetus is vertex but not engaged in pelvis 
by Leopold maneuvers. On internal exam, cervix is closed, thick, and high; 
speculum exam shows thin gray discharge with clue cells on wet mount. FHT by 
Doppler are between 155 and 160 BPM.”
These findings describe the examina-
tion of a more complex presentation 
of a pregnant woman at 33 weeks’ 
gestation.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  19 |
 
The Pregnant Woman 
953
REFERENCES
References
 1. Cunningham FG, Leveno KL, Bloom SL, et al (eds.). Ch 2, Maternal 
anatomy, and Chapter 4, Maternal physiology, in Williams Obstetrics. 
24th ed. New York: McGraw Hill, Medical Publishers Division; 2014.
 2. James A; Committee on Practice Bulletins—Obstetrics. Practice 
bulletin no. 123: thromboembolism in pregnancy. Obstet Gynec. 
2011;118:718.
 3. McCormack MC, Wise RA. Respiratory physiology in pregnancy. 
Respir Med. 2009;1:1. Available at http://www.libreriauniverso.it/
pdf/9781934115121.pdf. Accessed August 30, 2015.
 4. Cole LA. The hCG assay or pregnancy test. Clin Chem Lab Med. 
2012;50:617.
 5. Noctor E, Dunne FP. Type 2 diabetes after gestational diabetes: The 
inﬂuence of changing diagnostic criteria. World J Diabetes. 2015; 
6:234.
 6. Kim C, Newton KM, Knopp RH. Gestational diabetes and the inci-
dence of type II diabetes: a systematic review. Diabetes Care. 
2002;25:1862.
 7. Patton PE, Samuels MH, Trinidad R, et al. Controversies in the 
management of hypothyroidism during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 
Surv. 2014;69:346.
 8. Lord SJ, Bernstein L, Johnson KA, et al. Breast cancer risk and 
hormone receptor status in older women by parity, age of ﬁrst 
birth, and breastfeeding: a case-control study. Cancer Epidemiol 
 Biomarkers Prev. 2008;17:1723.
 9. Ursin G, Bernstein L, Lord SJ, et al. Reproductive factors and sub-
types of breast cancer deﬁned by hormone receptor and histology. 
Br J Cancer. 2005;93:364.
 10. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Final Evidence Summary: 
Breastfeeding: Counseling. August 2014. Update in progress for 
2016. Available at http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/
Page/Document/final-evidence-summary10/breastfeeding- 
counseling. Accessed August 31, 2015.
 11. DeFranco EA, Ehrlich S, Muglia LJ. Inﬂuence of interpregnancy 
interval on birth timing. BJOG. 2014;121;1633.
 12. Thiel de Bocanegra H, Chang R, Howell M, et al. Interpregnancy 
intervals: impact of postpartum contraceptive effectiveness and 
coverage. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2014;210;311.e1.
 13. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, American 
Academy of Pediatrics. Guidelines for Perinatal Care. 7th ed. Available 
at http://www.acog.org/About-ACOG/ACOG-Departments/Breast-
feeding/ACOG-Clinical-Guidelines. Accessed August 31, 2015.
 14. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Frequently 
asked questions–FAQ001. Nutrition during pregnancy, April 
2015. Available at http://www.acog.org/Patients/FAQs/Nutrition-
During-Pregnancy. Accessed August 31, 2015.
 15. American Academy of Pediatrics. Pregnant and breastfeeding 
women may be deﬁcient in iodine; AAP recommends supple-
ments. May 26, 2014. https://www.aap.org/en-us/about-the-aap/
aap-press-room/Pages/Pregnant-and-Breastfeeding-Women-May-
Be-.aspx. Accessed August 29, 2015.
 16. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. ACOG Prac-
tice Advisory: seafood consumption during pregnancy, June 10, 
2014. Available at http://www.acog.org/About-ACOG/News-
Room/Practice-Advisories/ACOG-Practice-Advisory-Seafood-
Consumption-During-Pregnancy. Accessed August 31, 2015.
 17. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Fish: what pregnant women 
and parents should know. Draft updated advice by FDA and EPA, 
June 2014. Updated February 24, 2015. Available at http://sales.
acog.org/eBook-Guidelines-for-Perinatal-Care-Seventh-Edition-
P729.aspx. Accessed August 31, 2015.
 18. U.S. Department of Agriculture. Pregnancy Weight Gain Calculator. 
ChooseMyPlate.gov. Available at http://www.choosemyplate.gov/
pregnancy-weight-gain-calculator. Accessed September 1, 2015.
 19. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. ACOG 
Committee Opinion No. 548. Weight gain during pregnancy. 
Obstet Gynecol. 2013;121:210.
 20. Rasmussen KM, Yaktine AL (eds.) and Institute of Medicine. Com-
mittee to Reexamine IOM Pregnancy Weight Guidelines. Weight Gain 
During Pregnancy: Re-Examining The Guidelines. Washington, DC: 
National Academies Press; 2009. Available at http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK32813/. Accessed September 1, 2015.
 21. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Update on 
immunization and pregnancy: tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis 
vaccination. ACOG Committee Opinion, No. 566. Obstet Gynecol. 
2013;121:1411.
 22. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Inﬂuenza 
vaccination during pregnancy. Committee Opinion No. 608. Sep-
tember 2014. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecolo-
gists. Obstet Gynecol. 2014;124:648. Available at http://www.acog.
org/Resources-And-Publications/Committee-Opinions/ 
Committee-on-Obstetric-Practice/Inﬂuenza-Vaccination-During-
Pregnancy. Accessed September 1, 2015.
 23. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Immunization and 
pregnancy. March 2013. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/
pubs/downloads/f_preg_chart.pdf. Accessed September 1, 2015.
 24. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. ACOG Prac-
tice Bulletin No. 75. Management of alloimmunization during 
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol. 2006;108:457.
 25. American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology. ACOG Practice 
Bulletin No. 4. Prevention of Rh D alloimmunization, May 1999 
(replaces educational bulletin Number 147, October 1990). Clini-
cal management guidelines for obstetrician-gynecologists. Int J 
Gynaecol Obstet. 1999;66:63.
 26. Evenson KR, Barakat R, Brown WJ, et al. Guidelines for Physical 
Activity during Pregnancy: Comparisons From Around the World. 
Am J Lifestyle Med. 2014;8:102.
 27. Evenson KR, Wen F. National trends in self-reported physical activ-
ity and sedentary behaviors among pregnant women: NHANES 
1999–2006. Prev Med. 2010;50:123.
 28. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Exercise 
during pregnancy and the postpartum period. ACOG Committee 
Opinion No. 267. Obstet Gynecol. 2002;99:171.
 29. Cunningham FG, Leveno KL, Bloom SL, et al (eds.). Chapter 9, 
Prenatal care, in Williams Obstetrics. 24th ed. New York: McGraw 
Hill, Medical Publishers Division; 2014.
 30. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Smoking 
cessation during pregnancy. Committee Opinion No. 471, Novem-
ber 2010, Reafﬁrmed 2013. Obstet Gynecol. 2010;116:1241.
 31. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. At risk drinking 
and alcohol dependence: obstetric and gynecologic implications. 
Committee Opinion No. 496. August 2011, reafﬁrmed 2013. Avail-
able at http://www.acog.org/-/media/Committee-Opinions/Commit-
tee-on-Health-Care-for-Underserved-Women/co496.pdf?dmc= 
1&ts=20150902T1326596732. Accessed September 2, 2015.
 32. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Committee 
opinion No. 518. Intimate partner violence. Obstet Gynecol. 
2012;119:412. Available at http://www.acog.org/Resources- 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
954 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
And-Publications/Committee-Opinions/Committee-on-Health-
Care-for-Underserved-Women/Intimate-Partner-Violence. 
Accessed September 4, 2015.
 33. Gilmandyar D, Zozzaro-Smith P, Thornburg L. Complications and 
challenges in management of the obese expectant mother. Expert 
Rev Obstet Gynecol. 2012;7:585.
 34. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists; Task Force 
on Hypertension in Pregnancy. Hypertension in pregnancy. Report 
of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ Task 
Force on Hypertension in Pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol. 2013;122:1122.
 35. Cunningham FG, Leveno KL, Bloom SL, et al (eds.). Chapter 40, 
Hypertensive disorders, and Chapter 50, Chronic hypertension, in 
 Williams Obstetrics. 24th ed. New York: McGraw Hill, Medical Pub-
lishers Division; 2014.
 36. Pay AS, Wiik J, Backe B, et al. Symphysis-fundus height measure-
ment to predict small-for-gestational-age status at birth: a system-
atic review. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2015;15:22.
 37. White LJ, Lee SJ, Stepniewska K, et al. Estimation of gestational age 
from fundal height: a solution for resource-poor settings. J R Soc 
Interface. 2012;9:503.
 38. Neilson JP. Symphysis-fundal height measurement in pregnancy. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2000;(2):CD000944.
 39. Powe CE, Levine RJ, Karumanchi SA. Preeclampsia, a disease of 
the maternal endothelium: the role of antiangiogenic factors and 
implications for later cardiovascular disease. Circulation. 2011;123: 
2856.
 40. Chen CW, Jaffe IZ, Karumanchi SA. Pre-eclampsia and cardiovas-
cular disease. Cardiovasc Res. 2014;101:579.
 41. Kirkham C, Harris S, Grzybowski S. Evidence-based prenatal care: 
part I. General prenatal care and counseling issues. Am Fam Physician. 
2005;71:1307.
 42. Goetzinger KR, Odibo AO, Shanks AL, et al. Clinical accuracy of 
estimated fetal weight in term pregnancies in a teaching hospital. 
J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2014;27:89.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
955
C H A P T E R
20
The Older Adult
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate 
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 4: Head-to-Toe Assessment: Older Adult)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com
Older Americans now number more than 43 million people and are expected 
to reach 80 million by 2040, over 20% of the population.1,2 Americans are liv-
ing longer than previous generations: life span at birth is currently 81 years for 
women and 76 years for men. The population over age 85 years is projected to 
more than double from 6 million in 2013 to over 14 million in 2040.3 Hence, 
the “demographic imperative” to societies worldwide is to maximize not only 
life span but also “health span,” so that older adults maintain full function as 
long as possible, enjoying rich and active lives in their homes and communities 
(Fig. 20-1).
Although statistics group aging by decades, aging is hardly chronologic, mea-
sured by time in years, but encompasses a wealth of wisdom and lived experi-
ence in addition to the complex interplay of health and illness. The aging 
population is highly heterogeneous—in disposition, social networks, level of 
physical activity, and biology. Frailty is one of society’s common myths about 
aging; more than 95% of Americans older than 65 years live in the community, 
and only 5% reside in institutional facilities.4 For those over age 85 years, only 
10% live in institutional facilities.
Self-reported health status and functional status supersede disability as measures 
of healthy aging. In 2009, 76% rated their health as good to excellent, and there 
has been a decline in the percentage of older adults reporting functional limita-
tions, from 49% in 1990 to 41% in 2010, even though up to 56% report at least 
one chronic condition.5 However, recent trends suggest that obesity may increase 
future levels of disability, especially in African American and Hispanic adults 
aged 60 to 69 years. Now, 38% of adults 65 years and above are obese, compared 
to 22% in the 1988 to 1994 period. Studies show that successful aging is not 
strictly clinical, but rests on variables such as positive cognition and mental 
health, physical activity, and social networks.6 Terminology about aging is in 
ﬂux. This chapter uses the term “older adult” and at times “senior.” Because evi-
dence about these designations is lacking, take the time to ﬁnd out which term 
your patients prefer.
F I G U R E  2 0 - 1 .  Enriching the 
“health span.”
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
956 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE OLDER ADULT
Promoting healthy aging leads to interactive goals in clinical care—“an 
informed activated patient interacting with a prepared proactive team, result-
ing in high-quality satisfying encounters and improved outcomes” and a dis-
tinct set of clinical attitudes and skills.7–9 Experts recommend “goal-oriented 
patient care” that is patient-centered, deﬁned as “respectful of and responsive 
to individual patient preferences, needs, and values, and ensuring that patient 
values guide all clinical decisions.”10 For older adults, this means focusing on 
the patient’s “individual health goals within or across a variety of dimensions 
(e.g., symptoms; physical functional status, including mobility; and social and 
role functions) and determin[ing] how these goals are being met.”11 This 
approach individualizes decision-making and allows patients to express pref-
erences about which “health states are important to them and their relative 
priority,” for example, choosing better symptom control over a longer life span. 
Goal-oriented care moves beyond “preventive and disease-speciﬁc care pro-
cesses . . . and condition-speciﬁc indicators” like targets for HgA1C or blood 
pressure.
New paradigms also highlight the importance of shifting assessment to geriatric 
syndromes that fall outside traditional disease models but are strongly linked to 
activities of daily living (ADLs). These syndromes are present in almost 50% of 
older adults.12 Managing these conditions—cognitive impairment, falls, incon-
tinence, low body mass index (BMI), dizziness, impaired vision and hearing—
presents both opportunities and challenges: the focus on healthy or “successful” 
aging; the need to understand and mobilize family, social, and community sup-
ports; the importance of skills directed to functional assessment, “the sixth vital 
sign”; and the opportunities for promoting the older adult’s long-term health 
and safety.
The Geriatric Approach for Primary Care
 1. Learn to quickly identify frail elderly patients; they are most vulnerable 
to adverse outcomes and most beneﬁt from a holistic geriatric approach.
 2. Look for common geriatric syndromes, including falls, delirium/cognitive 
impairment, functional dependence, and urinary incontinence in every 
patient.
 3. Learn about eﬃcient assessment tools for geriatrics and geriatric syn-
dromes and teach clinical staﬀ to administer them when possible.
 4. Be familiar with community resources, such as fall prevention programs, 
PACE programs, and senior centers.
 5. Take into account a patient’s goals, life expectancy, and functional status 
before considering any test or procedure.
 6. Review advanced directives and goals of care periodically.
 7. Be knowledgeable about the Beers Criteria (see p. 972) use them to identify 
potentially inappropriate medications in the elderly and inform periodic 
comprehensive medication review.
 8. Adopt an evidence-based approach to health screening, especially in the 
frail elderly.
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
957
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Primary aging reﬂects changes in physiologic reserves over time that are inde-
pendent of changes from disease. Physiologic changes are especially apt to 
appear during periods of stress, such as exposure to ﬂuctuating temperatures, 
dehydration, or even shock. In aging, decreased cutaneous vasoconstriction 
and sweat production can impair responses to heat; declines in thirst may 
delay recovery from dehydration; and the physiologic drops in maximum car-
diac output, left ventricular ﬁlling, and maximum heart rate may impair the 
response to shock.
At the same time, the aging population displays marked heterogeneity. Investiga-
tors have identiﬁed vast differences in how people age and have distinguished 
“usual” aging, with its complex of diseases and impairments, from “optimal” 
aging. Optimal aging occurs in those people who escape debilitating disease 
entirely and maintain healthy lives late into their 80s and 90s. Studies of cente-
narians show that genes account for 20% to 30% of their probability of living to 
age 100 years. Importantly, healthy lifestyles also account for 20% to 30%.13,14
These ﬁndings provide evidence for clinicians to promote modiﬁable lifestyle 
choices like optimal nutrition, strength training, and exercise and to promote 
optimal function for older adults that delay the depletion of physiologic reserves 
and the onset of frailty.
Vital Signs
Blood Pressure. In Western societies, systolic blood pressure tends to rise 
with aging (Fig. 20-2). The aorta and large arteries stiffen and become athero-
sclerotic. As the aorta becomes less distensible, a given stroke volume causes a 
greater rise in systolic blood pressure; systolic hypertension with a widened pulse 
pressure (PP) often ensues. Diastolic blood pressure (DBP) stops rising at approx-
imately the sixth decade. At the other extreme, many older adults develop ortho-
static (postural) hypotension—a sudden drop in blood pressure when rising to a 
standing position.
Anatomy and Physiology
The Geriatric Approach for Primary Care (continued )
 9. Watch carefully for mood disorders in the frail elderly and consider using 
geriatric-speciﬁc screening tools, such as the ﬁve-item Geriatric Depression 
Scale.
10. Provide caregiver support when possible.
Source: Carlson C, Merel SE, Yukawa M. Geriatric syndromes and geriatric assessment for the gener-
alist. Med Clin N Am. 2015:99:263; Adapted from American Geriatrics Society 2012 Beers Criteria 
Update Expert Panel. American Geriatrics Society updated Beers criteria for potentially inappropri-
ate medication use in older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2012;60:616; and Hoyl MT, Alessi CA, Harker JO, 
et al. Development and testing of a ﬁve-item version of the geriatric depression scale. J Am Geriatr 
Soc. 1999;47:873.
See Table 17-3, Syncope and Similar 
Disorders, pp. 778–779.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
958 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
F I G U R E  2 0 - 2 .  Systolic blood pressure increases with age.
Heart Rate and Rhythm. In older adults, resting heart rate remains 
unchanged, but there are declines in the pacemaker cells of the sinoatrial node and 
the maximal heart rate, which affect the response to exercise and physiologic stress.15 
Older adults are more likely to have abnormal heart rhythms such as atrial or ven-
tricular ectopy. Asymptomatic rhythm changes are generally benign. However, some 
rhythm changes cause syncope, which is a temporary loss of consciousness.
Respiratory Rate and Temperature. Respiratory rate and temperature 
are unchanged, but changes in temperature regulation lead to a susceptibility to 
hypothermia.
Skin, Nails, and Hair. With age, the skin wrinkles, becomes lax, and loses 
turgor. The dermis is less vascular, causing lighter skin to look paler and more 
opaque. Skin on the backs of the hands and forearms appears thin, fragile, loose, 
and transparent. There may be purple patches or macules, termed actinic purpura, 
that fade over time. These spots and patches come from blood that has leaked 
through poorly supported capillaries and spread within the dermis (Fig. 20-3).
Male-pattern alopecia
Actinic keratoses
Actinic keratoses 
Leukoplakia
Seborrheic
keratoses
Nummular
eczema
Nummular
eczema
Stasis ulcers
F I G U R E  2 0 - 3 .  Skin and hair changes in older adults.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
959
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Nails lose luster with age and may yellow and thicken, especially on the 
toes.
Hair undergoes a series of changes. Scalp hair loses its pigment, changing hair 
color to gray. Hair loss on the scalp is genetically determined. As early as 
20 years, a man’s hairline may start to recede at the temples and then at the 
vertex. In women, hair loss follows a similar but less severe pattern. In both 
sexes, the number of scalp hairs decreases in a generalized pattern, and the 
diameter of each hair gets smaller. There is also normal hair loss elsewhere on 
the body—the trunk, pubic areas, axillae, and limbs. Women over 55 years 
may develop coarse facial hairs on the chin and upper lip.
Many of these changes are more common in lighter-skinned patients and may 
not apply to patients with darker skin tones. For example, Native American men 
have relatively little facial and body hair compared with lighter-skinned men and 
should be evaluated according to their own norms.
Head and Neck
Eyes and Visual Acuity. The eyes, ears, and mouth show more visible 
changes of aging. The fat that surrounds and cushions the eyes within the 
bony orbit may atrophy, making the eyeballs appear to recede. The skin of 
the eyelids becomes wrinkled and may hang in looser folds. Fat may push 
the fascia of the eyelids forward, creating soft bulges, especially in the lower 
lids and the inner third of the upper lids. Because of fewer lacrimal secre-
tions, older patients may complain of dry eyes. The corneas lose some of 
their luster.
The pupils become smaller, making it more difﬁcult to examine the ocular fundi. 
The pupils may also become slightly irregular but should continue to respond to 
light and show the near reaction (see pp. 235–236).
Visual acuity remains fairly constant between ages 20 and 50 years. It dimin-
ishes gradually until approximately 70 years and then more rapidly. Never-
theless, most older adults retain good to adequate vision (20/20 to 20/70 as 
measured by standard charts). Near vision, however, begins to blur notice-
ably for virtually everyone. From childhood on, the lens gradually loses its 
elasticity, with progressive loss of accommodation and the ability to focus on 
nearby objects. Ensuing presbyopia usually becomes noticeable during the 
ﬁfth decade.
Aging increases the risk of developing cataracts, glaucoma, and macular 
degeneration. Thickening and yellowing of the lens impairs the passage of 
light to the retina, requiring more light for reading and doing fine work. 
Cataracts affect 10% of patients in their 60s and over 30% in their 80s. 
Because the lens continues to expand with aging, it may push the iris for-
ward, narrowing the angle between iris and cornea and increasing the risk 
of narrow-angle glaucoma.
Hearing. Hearing acuity usually declines with age. Early losses, which start 
in young adulthood, involve primarily the high-pitched sounds beyond the 
See Chapter 7, Head and Neck,  
pp. 215–302.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
960 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
range of human speech and have relatively little functional signiﬁcance. Gradu-
ally, loss extends to sounds in the middle and lower ranges. When a person fails 
to hear the higher tones of words but still hears lower tones, words sound dis-
torted and difﬁcult to understand, especially in noisy environments. Hearing loss 
associated with aging, known as presbycusis, becomes increasingly evident, usu-
ally after age 50 years.
Mouth, Teeth, and Lymph Nodes. With aging, there are decreased sal-
ivary secretions and loss of taste; medications and various diseases can exacer-
bate these changes. Decreased olfaction and increased sensitivity to bitterness 
and saltiness also affect taste. Teeth may wear down, become abraded, or fall out 
due to dental caries or periodontal disease. In patients without teeth, the lower 
portion of the face looks small and sunken, with accentuated “purse-string” 
wrinkles radiating from the mouth. Overclosure of the mouth may lead to mac-
eration of the skin at the corners, or angular cheilitis. The bony ridges of the jaws 
that once surrounded the tooth sockets are gradually resorbed, especially in the 
lower jaw.
With aging, the cervical lymph nodes become less palpable. In contrast, the 
submandibular glands become easier to feel.
Thorax and Lungs. As people age, they lose lung capacity during exercise.16 
The chest wall becomes stiffer and harder to move, respiratory muscles may 
weaken, and the lungs lose some of their elastic recoil. Lung mass and the surface 
area for gas exchange decline, and residual volume increases as the alveoli enlarge. 
An increase in closing volumes of small airways predisposes to atelectasis and risk 
of pneumonia. Diaphragmatic strength declines. The speed of breathing out with 
maximal effort gradually diminishes, and coughing becomes less effective. There 
is a decrease in arterial pO2, but the O2 saturation normally remains above 90%.
Skeletal changes can accentuate the dorsal curve of the thoracic spine. Osteopo-
rotic vertebral collapse produces kyphosis, which increases the anteroposterior 
diameter of the chest. However, the resulting “barrel chest” has little effect on 
function.
Cardiovascular System. A number of changes occur in the neck vessels, 
cardiac output, heart sounds, and murmurs.
Neck Vessels. Lengthening and tortuosity of the aorta and its branches 
occasionally result in kinking or buckling of the carotid artery low in the neck, 
especially on the right. The resulting pulsatile mass, occurring chieﬂy in 
women with hypertension, may be mistaken for a carotid aneurysm—a true 
dilatation of the artery. A tortuous aorta occasionally raises the pressure in the 
jugular veins on the left side of the neck by impairing their drainage within the 
thorax.
In older adults, systolic bruits heard in the middle or upper portions of the 
carotid arteries indicate stenosis from atherosclerotic plaque. Cervical bruits in 
younger people are usually innocent.
See Chapter 7, The Head and Neck, 
pp. 215–302.
Review the effects of aging on blood 
pressure and heart rate described on 
p. 355.
See discussion of carotid bruits in 
Chapter 9, pp. 381–382.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
961
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Cardiac Output. Myocardial contraction is less responsive to stimulation 
from β-adrenergic catecholamines. There is a modest drop in resting heart rate, 
but a signiﬁcant drop in the maximum heart rate during exercise. Although heart 
rate drops, stroke volume increases, so cardiac output is maintained. Diastolic 
dysfunction arises from decreased early diastolic ﬁlling and greater dependence 
on atrial contraction. There is increased myocardial stiffness, notably in the left 
ventricle, which also hypertrophies.
Risk of heart failure increases with loss of atrial contraction and onset of atrial 
ﬁbrillation due to decreased ventricular ﬁlling.
Extra Heart Sounds—S3 and S4. A physiologic third heart sound, com-
monly heard in children and young adults, may persist as late as age 40 years, 
especially in women. After age 40 years, however, an S3 strongly suggests 
heart failure from volume overload of the left ventricle in conditions like 
heart failure and valvular heart disease (e.g., mitral regurgitation). In con-
trast, a fourth heart sound is seldom heard in young adults other than well-
conditioned athletes. An S4 can be heard in otherwise healthy older people, 
but often suggests decreased ventricular compliance and impaired ventricu-
lar ﬁlling.
Cardiac Murmurs. Middle-aged and older adults commonly have a 
systolic aortic murmur. This murmur is detected in approximately one third of 
people at age 60 years, and in more than half of those reaching 85 years. With 
aging, ﬁbrotic changes thicken the bases of the aortic cusps. Calciﬁcation 
follows, resulting in audible vibrations. Turbulence produced by blood ﬂow 
into a dilated aorta may further augment this murmur. In most older adults, 
the process of ﬁbrosis and calciﬁcation, known as aortic sclerosis, does not 
impede blood ﬂow. In some, the aortic valve leaﬂets become calciﬁed and 
immobile, resulting in aortic stenosis and outﬂow obstruction. A brisk carotid 
upstroke can help distinguish aortic sclerosis from aortic stenosis, which has 
a delayed carotid upstroke, but clinically distinguishing these conditions 
is difﬁcult. Both carry increased risk for cardiovascular morbidity and 
mortality.
Similar changes alter the mitral valve, but usually about one decade later than 
the aortic valve. Calciﬁcation of the mitral valve annulus, or valve ring, impedes 
normal valve closure during systole, causing the systolic murmur of mitral regur-
gitation. This change in the conﬁguration of the valve may become pathologic as 
volume overload increases in the left ventricle.
Peripheral Vascular System. The peripheral arteries tend to 
lengthen, become tortuous, and feel harder and less resilient. There is 
increased arterial stiffness and decreased endothelial function.16 The trophic 
changes of the skin, nails, and hair discussed earlier occur independently, 
although they may accompany arterial disease. Although arterial and venous 
disorders, especially atherosclerosis, are more common in older adults, these 
are not normal changes of aging. Loss of arterial pulsations is not typical and 
demands careful evaluation. Abdominal or back pain in older adults raises the 
important concern of possible abdominal aortic aneurysm, especially in male 
See Table 9-8, Extra Heart Sounds in 
Diastole, p. 407. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
962 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
smokers over age 65 years. Rarely, after age 50 years but especially after age 
70 years, the temporal arteries may develop giant cell, or temporal, arteritis, 
leading to loss of vision in 15% of patients and headache and jaw claudication.
Breasts and Axillae. The normal adult female breast is soft but may be 
granular, nodular, or lumpy. This uneven texture represents physiologic 
nodularity, palpable throughout or only in parts of the breasts. With aging, the 
female breasts tend to get smaller, more ﬂaccid, and more pendulous as glandular 
tissue atrophies and is replaced by fat. The ducts surrounding the nipple may 
become more palpable as ﬁrm stringy strands. Axillary hair diminishes. Males 
may develop gynecomastia or increased breast fullness due to obesity and 
hormonal changes.
Abdomen. During the middle and later years, the abdominal muscles tend 
to weaken, there is decreased activity of lipoprotein lipase, and fat may accumulate 
in the lower abdomen and near the hips even when the weight is stable. These 
changes often produce a softer, more protruding, abdomen which patients may 
interpret as ﬂuid or evidence of disease. The change in abdominal fat distribution 
increases the risk of cardiovascular disease.
Aging can blunt the manifestations of acute abdominal disease. Pain may be 
less severe, fever is often less pronounced, and signs of peritoneal inﬂamma-
tion, such as guarding and rebound tenderness, may be diminished or even 
absent.
Male and Female Genitalia; Prostate. As men age, sexual interest 
appears to remain intact, although frequency of intercourse appears to decline 
after age 75 years. Several physiologic changes accompany decreasing 
testosterone levels.16 Erections become more dependent on tactile stimulation 
and less responsive to erotic cues. The penis decreases in size, and the testicles 
drop lower in the scrotum. Protracted illnesses, more than aging, lead to 
decreased testicular size. Pubic hair may decrease and become gray. Erectile 
dysfunction, or the inability to maintain an erection, affects approximately 
50% of older men. Vascular causes are the most common, from both 
atherosclerotic arterial occlusive disease and corpora cavernosa venous leak. 
Chronic diseases such as diabetes, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and smoking, 
as well as medication side effects, all contribute to the prevalence of erectile 
dysfunction.
In women, ovarian function usually starts to decline during the ﬁfth decade; on 
average, menstrual periods cease between age 45 and 52 years. As estrogen 
stimulation falls, many women experience hot ﬂashes, sometimes for up to 
5 years. Symptoms range from ﬂushing, sweating, and palpitations to chills and 
anxiety. Sleep disruption and mood changes are common. Women may report 
vaginal dryness, urge incontinence, or dyspareunia. Several vulvovaginal 
changes occur: Pubic hair becomes sparse as well as gray, and the labia and cli-
toris become smaller. The vagina narrows and shortens, and the vaginal mucosa 
becomes thin, pale, and dry, with loss of lubrication. The uterus and ovaries 
diminish in size. Within 10 years after menopause, the ovaries are usually no 
See Chapter 11, The Abdomen,  
pp. 449–507.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
963
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
longer palpable. The suspensory ligaments of the adnexa, uterus, and bladder 
may also relax. Sexuality and sexual interest are often unchanged, particularly 
when women are untroubled by partner issues, partner loss, or unusual work or 
life stress.17
The prevalence of urinary incontinence increases with age, related to decreased 
innervation and contractility of the detrusor muscle and loss of bladder capacity, 
urinary ﬂow rate, and the ability to inhibit voiding. In men, there is androgen-
dependent proliferation of prostate epithelial and stromal tissue, termed benign 
prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), that begins in the third decade, continues to the 
seventh decade, then appears to plateau. Only half of men will have clinically 
signiﬁcant enlargement, and of those, only half will report symptoms such as 
urinary hesitancy, dribbling, and incomplete emptying. These symptoms can 
often be traced to other causes like coexisting disease, use of medications, and 
lower urinary tract abnormalities.18
Musculoskeletal System. Both men and women lose cortical and 
trabecular bone mass throughout adulthood; men more slowly, and women 
more rapidly after menopause, which leads to increased risk of fracture. 
Calcium resorption from bone, rather than diet, increases with aging as 
parathyroid hormone levels rise. Subtle losses in height begin soon after 
maturity; signiﬁcant shortening is obvious by old age. Most loss of height 
occurs in the trunk and reﬂects thinning of the intervertebral discs and 
shortening or even collapse of the vertebral bodies from osteoporosis, leading 
to kyphosis and an increase in the anteroposterior diameter of the chest. 
Added ﬂexion at the knees and hips also contributes to shortened stature. 
These changes cause the limbs of an elderly person to look long in proportion 
to the trunk.
With aging, there is a 30% to 50% decline in muscle mass in relation to body 
weight in both men and women, and ligaments lose some of their tensile strength. 
Range of motion diminishes, in part due to osteoarthritis. Sarcopenia is the loss 
of lean body mass and strength with aging.19 The causes of muscle loss are mul-
tifactorial, including inﬂammatory and endocrine changes as well as sedentary 
lifestyle. There is substantial evidence that strength training in older adults can 
slow or reverse this process (Fig. 20-4).
Nervous System. Aging affects all aspects of the nervous system, from 
mental status to motor and sensory function and reﬂexes. Brain volume, cortical 
brain cells, and intrinsic regional connecting networks decrease, and both micro-
anatomical and biochemical changes have been identiﬁed.20 Nevertheless, most 
older adults maintain their self-esteem and adapt well to their changing capaci-
ties and circumstances.
Mental Status. Although older adults generally perform well on mental 
status examinations, they may display selected impairments, especially at 
advanced ages. Many older people complain about memory problems. This is 
usually from “benign forgetfulness,” which can occur at any age. This term refers 
to difﬁculty recalling the names of people or objects or details of speciﬁc events. 
F I G U R E  2 0 - 4 .  Exercise 
improves strength and bone mass.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
964 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Identifying this common phenomenon can allay fear of Alzheimer disease. Older 
adults also retrieve and process data more slowly and take longer to learn new 
information. Their motor responses may slow and their ability to perform com-
plex tasks may diminish.
Frequently, the clinician must try to distinguish these age-related changes from 
manifestations of mental disorders that are prevalent in older adults like depres-
sion and dementia. Diagnosis can be difﬁcult because both mood disturbances 
and cognitive changes can alter the patient’s ability to recognize or report 
symptoms. Older patients are also more susceptible to delirium, a temporary 
state of confusion that may be the ﬁrst clue to infection, problems with medica-
tions, or impending dementia. It is important to recognize these conditions 
promptly to delay functional decline. Recall that sensory and motor ﬁndings 
in older patients that are physiologic, such as the changes in hearing; vision; 
extraocular movements; and pupillary size, shape, and reactivity, are abnormal 
in younger adults.
Motor System. Changes in the motor system are common. Older adults 
move and react with less speed and agility and skeletal muscles decrease in bulk. 
The hands of an older patient often look thin and bony due to atrophy of the 
interosseous muscles that leaves concavities or grooves. Muscle wasting tends to 
appear ﬁrst between the thumb and the hand (ﬁrst and second metacarpals), 
then affects the other metacarpals (see pp. 741–742). It may also ﬂatten the the-
nar and hypothenar eminences of the palms. Arm and leg muscles can show 
signs of atrophy, exaggerating the apparent size of adjacent joints. Muscle 
strength, though diminished, is relatively well maintained.
Occasionally, older adults develop a benign essential tremor in the head, jaw, 
lips, or hands that may be confused with parkinsonism. Unlike parkinsonian 
tremors, however, benign tremors are slightly faster and disappear at rest, and 
there is no associated muscle rigidity.
Position and Vibratory Sense; Reﬂexes. Aging can also affect vibratory 
and position sense and reﬂexes. Older adults frequently lose some or all vibra-
tion sense in the feet and ankles (but not in the ﬁngers or over the shins). Less 
commonly, position sense may diminish or disappear. The gag reﬂex may be 
decreased or absent. Abdominal reﬂexes may diminish or disappear. Ankle 
reﬂexes may be symmetrically decreased or absent, even when reinforced. 
Less commonly, knee reﬂexes are similarly affected. Partly because of muscu-
loskeletal changes in the feet, the plantar responses become less obvious and 
more difﬁcult to interpret. If there are associated abnormal neurologic ﬁnd-
ings, or if atrophy and reﬂex changes are asymmetric, search for an explana-
tion other than aging.
Older adults experience the death of loved ones and friends, retirement from 
valued employment, diminution in income, and often growing social isola-
tion in addition to physiologic changes and decreased physical capacity. 
Including the impact of these signiﬁcant life events in the assessment of 
See Chapter 17, The Nervous System, 
Table 17-5, Tremors and Involuntary 
Movement, pp. 782–783. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Review Chapter 5, Behavior and Men-
tal Status, The Mental Status Examina-
tion, pp. 147–171, and Table 20-2, 
Delirium and Dementia, p. 1001. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
965
THE HEALTH HISTORY
The Health History
Approach to the Patient
As you interview older adults, you will need to modify your usual approach to 
obtaining the Health History. As with all patients, your demeanor should convey 
respect, patience, and cultural awareness. Be sure to address older patients by an 
appropriate title and their last name.
Approach to the Older Adult Patient
● Adjusting the oﬃce environment
● Shaping the content and pace of the visit
● Eliciting symptoms
● Addressing the cultural dimensions of aging
Adjusting the Office Environ-
ment. First, take the time to adjust 
the environment of the ofﬁce, hospital, 
or nursing home to put your patient at 
ease. Recall the physiologic changes in 
temperature regulation, and make sure 
that the ofﬁce is neither too cool nor 
too warm. Bright lighting helps com-
pensate for changes in lens proteins 
and allows the older patient to see your 
facial expressions and gestures more 
clearly. Face the patient directly, sitting at eye level (Fig. 20-5). Avoid focusing 
on personal electronic devices or turning away from the patient to search the 
electronic clinical record.
More than 50% of older adults have hearing deﬁcits, especially for higher fre-
quency tones, so choose a quiet room that is free of distractions or noise. Turn 
off the radio or television before you start the conversation. If appropriate, con-
sider using a “pocket talker,” a small portable microphone and speaker that 
ampliﬁes your voice and connects to an earpiece inserted by the patient. Speak 
in low tones, and make sure the patient is using glasses, hearing aids, and den-
tures to assist with communication. Patients with quadriceps weakness beneﬁt 
from chairs with higher seating and a wide stool with a handrail leading up to 
the examining table.
Shaping the Content and Pace of the Visit. With older adults, 
rethink the traditional format of the visit. Older patients often measure their lives 
in terms of years left rather than years lived. They may reminisce about the past 
F I G U R E  2 0 - 5 .  Face the patient at 
eye level.
mood and affect and addressing these issues may improve the patient’s qual-
ity of life.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
966 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
and previous experiences. By listening to these life reviews, you gain important 
insights that help you understand and support them as they work through 
painful feelings or recapture joys and accomplishments.
At the same time, it is important to weigh the need to assess complex problems 
against the patient’s endurance and possible fatigue. To expand time for listening 
to the patient but prevent exhaustion, make ample use of brief and well- 
validated screening tools,21,22 information from home visits and the clinical 
record, and reports from family members, caregivers, and allied health disci-
plines. Consider dividing the initial assessment into two visits. Two or more 
shorter visits may be more productive to allow more time to respond to questions 
since explanations may be slow and lengthy.
Eliciting Symptoms from the Older Adult. Eliciting the history calls 
for an astute clinician: patients may accidentally or intentionally underreport 
symptoms; the presentation of acute illnesses may differ from younger patients; 
common symptoms may mask a geriatric syndrome; or patients may have 
cognitive impairment.
Underreporting. Older patients tend to give more positive ratings to their 
overall health than younger adults, even when affected by disease and disability. 
Some are reluctant to report their symptoms. Some are afraid or embarrassed; oth-
ers try to avoid clinical expenses or the discomforts of diagnosis and treatment. Still 
others overlook their symptoms, thinking they are merely part of aging, or they 
may simply forget about them.
To minimize delayed diagnosis and treatment, ask direct questions, use the 
well-validated geriatric screening tools, and consult with family members and 
caregivers.
Atypical Presentations of Illness. Acute illnesses present differently 
in older adults. Older patients with infections are less likely to have fever. Older 
patients having a myocardial infarction are less likely to report chest pain; symp-
toms of atypical or no chest pain, shortness of breath, palpitations, syncope, and 
confusion are more common.23 Older patients with hyperthyroidism and hypo-
thyroidism have fewer symptoms and signs. One third of older adults with hyper-
thyroidism present with fatigue, weight loss, and tachycardia in lieu of the classic 
features of heat intolerance, sweating, and hyperreﬂexia.24 Up to 35% present 
with atrial ﬁbrillation. Hyperthyroidism increases the risk of osteoporosis, and, 
in affected women, the risk of hip and vertebral fractures increases threefold. In 
older adults, hypothyroidism is most commonly caused by autoimmune thyroid-
itis (Hashimoto thyroiditis); fatigue, weakness, constipation, dry skin, and cold 
intolerance are often attributed to other conditions, medication side effects, 
or aging.
Geriatric Syndromes. Managing an increasing number of interrelated 
conditions calls for recognizing the symptom clusters of different geriatric syn-
dromes. A geriatric syndrome is “a multifactorial condition that involves the inter-
action between identiﬁable situation-speciﬁc stressors and underlying age-related 
risk factors, resulting in damage across multiple organ systems,” as shown in 
See the “10-Minute Geriatric Screener,” 
p. 986. 
In older adults the prevalence of 
hyperthyroidism is 0.5%–4% and of 
hypothyroidism, ∼10% in men and 
16% in women.24
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
967
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Shared Risk Factors
Increased age
Cognitive impairment
Functional impairment
Impaired mobility
Geriatric Syndromes
Incontinence
Falls
Pressure Ulcers
Delirium
Functional decline
Poor Outcomes
Dependence
Disability
Instituionalization
Death
Frailty
F I G U R E  2 0 - 6 .  Geriatric syndromes.
Experts state that “evaluating functional status, frailty, and other geriatric syn-
dromes while simultaneously addressing individual disease processes is at the 
heart of geriatric approach to primary care.” It is especially important to recog-
nize these syndromes because symptoms may cluster in patterns unfamiliar to 
the patient.28
Cognitive Impairment. A number of parameters affects assessment of 
health status; however, evidence suggests that self-report continues to be reliable 
in older adults, especially for prevalence of chronic conditions.30–34 When com-
pared with healthy peers, older adults with mild cognitive impairment provide 
sufﬁcient history to reveal concurrent disorders. Use simple sentences with 
prompts to elicit necessary information. For patients with more severe impair-
ments, conﬁrm key symptoms with family members or caregivers in the patient’s 
presence and with his or her consent. To avoid invalid assumptions, explore how 
older patients view themselves and their situations. Listen for their priorities and 
coping skills. These insights strengthen your partnerships with both patients and 
families as you evolve plans for care and treatment.
These syndromes have been found in 
more than half of adults over age  
65 years, in contrast to the conven-
tional search in younger patients for a 
“single unifying diagnosis.”29
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Tips for Communicating Effectively  
with Older Adults
● Provide a well-lit, moderately warm setting with minimal background noise, 
chairs with arms, and access to the examining table.
● Face the patient and speak in low tones; make sure the patient is using 
glasses, hearing devices, and dentures, if needed.
● Adjust the pace and content of the interview to the stamina of the patient; 
consider two visits for initial evaluations.
● Allow time for open-ended questions and reminiscing; include family and 
caregivers when indicated, especially if the patient has cognitive impairment.
● Make use of screening instruments, the clinical record, and reports from allied 
disciplines.
Figure 20-6.12 These syndromes are strongly linked to functional decline. 
Examples include dizziness25–27 as well as functional impairment, frailty, delirium, 
depression, cognitive impairment, falls, and urinary incontinence.
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
968 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Addressing Cultural Dimensions of Aging. Knowledge and skills 
about the cultural dimensions of aging are the cornerstone to improving health 
care for the rapidly growing number of older adults of diverse ethnic backgrounds. 
In fact, the demographic imperative for older adults can be called the ethnogeriatric 
imperative, “because by mid-century more than one in three older Americans is 
projected to be from one of the four populations designated as ‘minority,’”35 as 
shown in Figure 20-7.
0
10
5
15
25
1995
2030
2050
30
20
Am. Indian
Hispanic
Asian/PI
Projected Percentage of Minority Age Groups 65 and Older
African Am.
F I G U R E  2 0 - 7 .  Projected percentage of minority age groups 65 years and older. 
Source: Yeo G. How will the U.S. healthcare system meet the challenge of the ethnogeriatric imperative? J Am Geriatr Soc. 
2009;57:1278.
Geriatric Diversity—Now and in 2050
● Hispanic Americans over age 65 years will increase from 2.7 million in 2010, or 
6.9% of older adults, to 17.5 million in 2050, or 19.8% of the older population.5
● African American older adults will increase from 3.4 million (8.5%) to 10.5 mil-
lion in 2050 (11.9%).
● Asian Americans and other ethnic groups, although smaller in number cur-
rently, will increase from 1.4 million to 7.5 million, or from 3.4% to 8.5%.
● Non-Hispanic whites will increase from 32.2 million to 58.5 million in 2050, but 
will drop as a percentage of the older population from 80% to 58.5%.
Source: Federal Interagency Forum on Aging Related Statistics. Older Americans 2012, Key Indica-
tors of Well Being. Indicator 2, Racial and Ethnic Composition, p. 86. Federal Interagency Forum on 
Aging-Related Statistics. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Oﬃce. June 2012. Available at 
http://agingstats.gov/agingstatsdotnet/Main_Site/Data/2012_Documents/Docs/EntireChartbook.
pdf. Accessed August 11, 2015.
Tips for Communicating Effectively  
with Older Adults (continued )
● Carefully assess symptoms, especially fatigue, loss of appetite, dizziness, 
weight loss, and pain, for clues to underlying disorders and geriatric  
syndromes. Make sure written instructions are in large print and easy to read.
● Always give the patient an updated medication that includes the name of the 
medication, dosage instructions, and why the medication is being prescribed.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
969
THE HEALTH HISTORY
The changing demographics of aging only hint at how older adults of different 
ethnicities experience suffering, illness, and decisions about their health care. 
Culture and socioeconomic attributes affect the epidemiology of illness and 
mental health, the process of acculturation in families, individual concerns about 
aging, choices about healers and when to pursue symptoms, the potential for 
misdiagnosis, and disparities in health outcomes.36 Culture shapes beliefs about 
the entire spectrum of aging: work and retirement, perceptions of health and 
illness, the utility of medications, use of health care proxies, and preferences 
about dying, to name just a few.
The CDC Health Disparities and Inequalities Report–United States, 2013 
“highlights health disparities and inequalities across a wide range of diseases, 
behavioral risk factors, environmental exposures, social determinants, and 
health care access by sex, race and ethnicity, income, education, disability 
status, and other social characteristics.”37,38 Aging racial/ethnic minority pop-
ulations have poorer health outcomes in cardiovascular disease, diabetes, can-
cer, asthma, and human immunodeﬁciency virus/acquired immunodeﬁciency 
syndrome as well as shorter life spans.39 Despite advances in ethnogeriat-
rics,40–42 information on racial and ethnic disparities in later life regarding 
chronic disease, ADLs, and self-rated health status remains “limited and 
inconsistent,” and guidelines for providing individualized culturally appro-
priate care are sparse.38
Improving competence in care for diverse older populations is a critical step 
in improving health outcomes. The ETHIC(S) mnemonic helps clinicians 
escape the pitfalls of group-labeling by expanding individual history taking 
to include Explanation, Treatment, Healers, Negotiate, Intervention, Collabo-
rate, and Spirituality.43 Nonetheless, this model may miss important informa-
tion about cultural identity, social supports, and views about health care.44 
Experts recommend letting patients establish their cultural identity by explor-
ing four key areas during the interview: the individual’s cultural identity; cul-
tural explanations of the individual’s illness; cultural factors related to the 
psychosocial environment and levels of function; and cultural elements in the 
clinician–patient relationship. Test your “ethnogeriatric IQ” at the Stanford 
Geriatrics Education Center website and explore the Stanford curriculum in 
ethnogeriatrics.45,46 Learn to convey respect to older adults through culturally 
speciﬁc nonverbal communication. Direct eye contact or handshaking, for 
example, may not be culturally appropriate. Identify critical life experiences 
from the country of origin or migration history that affect the patient’s outlook 
and psyche. Ask about family decision making, spiritual advisors, and tradi-
tional healers and practices.
The Ofﬁce of Minority Health in the Department of Health and Human Services 
has developed Think Cultural Health, a resource center to improve quality of care 
through cultural and linguistic competencies and continuing education pro-
grams.41
See Table 20-1, Interviewing Older 
Adults: Enhancing Culturally 
Appropriate Care, p. 1000.
See Chapter 3, Demonstrating 
Cultural Humility—A Changing 
Paradigm, pp. 82–86. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
970 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Cultural values particularly affect decisions about the end of life. Elders, fam-
ily, and even an extended community group may make these decisions with 
or for the older patient. Such group decision making is quite different from 
the focus on individual autonomy and informed consent featured in contem-
porary health care settings. Eliciting the stresses of migration and accultura-
tion, using translators effectively, enlisting “patient navigators” from the family 
and community, and accessing culturally validated assessment tools like the 
Geriatric Depression Scale will help you provide empathic care of older adults.
SPECIAL AREAS OF CONCERN WHEN 
ASSESSING COMMON SYMPTOMS
Symptoms in the older adult can have many meanings and interconnections, 
as seen with the geriatric syndromes. Explore the full dimensions of these 
symptoms as you would with all patients, and for older adults, place symp-
toms in the context of your overall functional assessment of the ADLs. Several 
topics warrant special attention as you gather the health history. Approach 
these areas with extra thoroughness and sensitivity, always with the goal of 
helping your older patients to maintain their optimal level of function and 
well-being.
Activities of Daily Living. The daily activities of older adults, especially 
those with chronic illness, provide an important baseline for future evaluations. 
First, ask about how well the patient performs the ADLs, which consist of six 
basic self-care abilities. Then, move on to higher level functions, the instrumental 
activities of daily living (IADLs). Can the patient perform these activities 
independently, does he or she need some help, or is the patient entirely dependent 
on others?
Start with open-ended questions like “Tell me about your typical day” or “Tell me 
about your day yesterday.” Then probe for more detail . . . “You got up at 8 AM? 
How is it getting out of bed?… What did you do next?” Ask if activity levels have 
changed, who is available for help, and what helpers or caregivers actually do. 
Remember that assessing the patient’s safety is a clinical priority.
See Functional Assessment and the 
10-Minute Geriatric Screener, pp. 985 
and 986.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
See Chapter 3, Interviewing and the 
Health History, on working with 
translators, pp. 90–91. 
Common Concerns
● Activities of Daily Living
● Instrumental activities of daily living
● Medications
● Acute and persistent pain
● Smoking and alcohol
● Nutrition
● Frailty
● Advance directives and palliative care
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
971
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Activities of Daily Living and  
Instrumental Activities of Daily Living
Activities of Daily  
Living (ADLs)
Instrumental Activities  
of Daily Living (IADLs)
Bathing
Dressing
Toileting
Transferring
Continence
Feeding
Using the telephone
Shopping
Preparing food
Housekeeping
Laundry
Transportation
Taking medicine
Managing money
Medications. The magnitude of adverse drug events leading to hospitalization 
and poor patient outcomes underscores the importance of a thorough 
medication history. Adults over age 65 years receive approximately 30% of all 
prescriptions. Approximately 85% of adults over age 65 years have at least one 
of six chronic conditions—arthritis, current asthma, cancer, cardiovascular 
disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or diabetes—and 50% take at 
least one prescription drug each day.47,48 Almost 40% take ﬁve or more 
prescription drugs daily. Older adults have more than 50% of all reported 
adverse drug reactions causing hospital admission, reﬂecting pharmacodynamic 
changes in the distribution, metabolism, and elimination of drugs that place 
them at increased risk.
■ A thorough medication history includes name, dose, frequency, and the 
patient’s view of the reason for taking each drug.
■ Ask the patient to bring in all medication bottles and over-the-counter prod-
ucts to develop an accurate medication list.
■ Explore all components of polypharmacy—a major cause of morbidity—in-
cluding suboptimal prescribing, concurrent use of multiple drugs, underuse, 
inappropriate use, and nonadherence.
■ Ask speciﬁcally about over-the-counter products; vitamin and nutritional 
supplements; and mood-altering drugs such as narcotics, benzodiazepines, 
and recreational substances.49
■ Assess medications for drug interactions.
■ Be particularly careful when treating insomnia, estimated to occur in 40% of 
older adults. A sleep history provides information essential for diagnosis; a 
sleep diary may be especially helpful in uncovering the origins of a poor sleep 
pattern.50 Increased exercise may be the best remedy. Turn to expert guide-
lines on types of sleep disorders and recommended management.51
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
972 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Medications are the single most common modiﬁable risk factor associated with 
falls. Review strategies for avoiding polypharmacy.52,53 Keep the number of drugs 
prescribed to a minimum and “start low, go slow” with respect to dosing. Learn 
about drug–drug interactions and consult the Beers criteria, updated in 2012 by 
the American Geriatrics Society and widely used by health care providers, educa-
tors, and policymakers. These criteria include the list of hazardous drugs for 
older adults.54,55 Risk factors for adverse drug reactions in hospitalized older 
patients are listed below.
Hospitalized Older Adults:  
Risk Factors for Adverse Drug Reactions
● More than four comorbid conditions
● Heart failure, renal failure, or liver disease
● Age ≥80 years
● Number of drugs, especially if eight or more
● Use of warfarin, insulins, oral antiplatelet agents, or oral hypoglycemic agents
● Previous adverse drug reaction
● Hyperlipidemia
● Raised white cell count
● Use of antidiabetic agents
● Length of stay ≥12 days
Source: Onder G, Petrovic M, Balamurugan T, et al. Less is more. Development and validation of a 
score to assess risk of adverse drug reactions among the in-hospital patients 65 years or older. Arch 
Intern Med. 2010;170:1142; Tangiisuran B, Scutt G, Stevenson J, et al. Development and validation of a 
risk model for predicting adverse drug reactions in older people during hospital stay: Brighton 
Adverse Drug Reactions Risk (BADRI) model. PLoS One. 2014;9:e111254; Budnitz DS, Lovegrove MC, 
Shehab N, et al. Emergency hospitalizations for adverse drug events in older Americans. N Engl J 
Med. 2011;365:2002.
Acute and Persistent Pain. Pain and associated complaints account for 
80% of clinician visits. Prevalence of pain may reach 25% to 50% in community-
dwelling adults and 40% to 80% in nursing home residents. Pain usually arises 
from musculoskeletal complaints such as back and joint pain.56,57 Headache, 
neuralgias from diabetes and herpes zoster, nighttime leg pain, and cancer pain 
are also common. Older patients are less likely to report pain, leading to suffering, 
depression, social isolation, physical disability, and loss of function. The American 
Geriatrics Society advocates use of the term persistent pain to reduce negative 
stereotypes associated with the term “chronic pain.”56
Pain is subjective, so some view pain 
as a spectrum disorder rather than 
“the fifth vital sign.” See discussion, 
pp. 134–137.
Characteristics of Acute and  
Persistent Pain
Acute Pain
Persistent Pain
Distinct onset
Lasts more than 3 months
Obvious pathology
Often associated with psychological or 
functional impairment
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
(continued )
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
973
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Accurate assessment is the basis of effective treatment.58,59 Inquire about pain 
each time you meet with an older patient. Assessing pain in older adults is chal-
lenging. They may be reluctant to report symptoms due to fear of additional 
testing, cost of care and medication, denial of disease, cognitive or verbal 
impairments, or barriers of trust, language, or cultural understanding. Patients 
may report multiple conditions that complicate assessment. Nonetheless, evi-
dence shows when patients do report pain, even those with even mild to mod-
erate cognitive impairment, self-report is reliable. Ask speciﬁcally, “Are you 
having any pain right now? How about during the past week?” Be alert for signs 
of untreated pain, such as use of the terms “burning,” “discomfort,” or “sore-
ness,” depressed affect, and nonverbal change in posture or gait. Many pain 
scales are available that have been validated in multicultural populations. Uni-
dimensional scales such as the Visual Analog Scale, graphic pictures, and the 
Verbal 0–10 Scale have all been validated and are easy to use.60,61 Interview 
caregivers or family members for relevant history in patients with severe cogni-
tive deﬁcits.
It is important to distinguish acute pain from persistent pain, and to thoroughly 
investigate its cause. In older adults, confusion, restlessness, fatigue, or irritabil-
ity often accompany conditions causing pain. Assessing pain includes evalua-
tion of these related conditions as well as the effect of pain on quality of life, 
social interactions, and functional level. Consider multidisciplinary assessment 
in complex cases where the risks of disability and comorbidity are high. Be 
familiar with the many modalities of pain relief, ranging from analgesics to 
numerous nonpharmacologic therapies, especially those that actively engage 
patients in their treatment plan and build self-reliance. Patient education alone 
has been shown effective.56 Relaxation techniques, tai chi, acupuncture, mas-
sage, and biofeedback can help reduce escalating doses or the addition of more 
medications.
Smoking and Alcohol
Smoking.  Smoking is harmful at all ages. At each visit, advise smokers, 
approximately 9.5% of older adults, to quit.62 The commitment to stop smoking 
may take time, but quitting is crucial for reducing the risk of heart disease, pul-
monary disease, malignancy, and loss of daily function.
See the 10-Minute Geriatric Screener 
for functional assessment on p. 986.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Characteristics of Acute and  
Persistent Pain (continued )
Acute Pain
Persistent Pain
Short duration
Can ﬂuctuate in character and intensity 
over time
Common causes: postsurgical, trauma, 
headache
Common causes: arthritis, cancer, clau-
dication, leg cramps, neuropathy, 
radiculopathy
Source: Reuben DB, Herr KA, Pacala JT, et al. Geriatrics at your Fingertips. 18th ed. New York, NY: 
American Geriatrics Society; 2016.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
974 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Alcohol. Recommended drinking limits are lower for adults over age 
65 years due to physiologic changes that alter alcohol metabolism, frequent 
comorbid illness, and risk of drug interactions. Older adults should have no 
more than three drinks on any one day or seven drinks a week.63
More than 40% of adults over age 65 years drink alcohol, about 4.5% are binge-
drinkers, and 2% to 4% may have abuse or dependence.64,65 More than 14% of 
older adults exceed the recommended limits.66 When health status is taken into 
account, more than 53% have harmful or hazardous drinking. From 10% to 15% 
of older patients in primary care practices and up to 38% of hospitalized older 
adults are reported to have problem drinking.67
Despite the high prevalence of alcohol-related problems, rates of detection 
and treatment are low. Screening all older adults for harmful alcohol use is 
especially important due to adverse interactions with most medications and 
exacerbation of comorbid illnesses, including cirrhosis, gastrointestinal bleed-
ing or reﬂux disease, gout, hypertension, diabetes, insomnia, gait disorders, 
and depression in up to 30% of older patients.65 Watch for clues of excess 
alcohol consumption, listed below, especially in patients with recent bereave-
ment or losses, pain, disability or depression, or a family history of alcohol 
disorders.
Clues to Alcohol-Use Disorders in Older Adults
● Memory loss, cognitive impairment
● Depression, anxiety
● Neglect of hygiene, appearance
● Poor appetite, nutritional deﬁcits
● Sleep disruption
● Hypertension refractory to therapy
● Blood sugar control problems
● Seizures refractory to therapy
● Impaired balance and gait, falls
● Recurrent gastritis and esophagitis
● Diﬃculty managing warfarin dosing
● Use of other addictive substances such as sedatives or narcotic analgesics, 
illicit drugs, nicotine
Source: American Geriatrics Society. Alcohol use disorders in older adults. AGS clinical practice 
guidelines screening recommendation. Ann Long Term Care. 2006;14(1). Available at http://www.
annalsoﬂongtermcare.com/article/5143. Accessed August 15, 2015.
Use the CAGE questions to uncover problem drinking. Although symptoms and 
signs are subtler in older adults, making early detection more difﬁcult, the four 
CAGE questions remain sensitive and speciﬁc in this age group, using the con-
ventional cutoff score of 2 or more.
Nutrition. Taking a dietary history and using nutritional screening tools 
often reveal nutritional deﬁcits. Prevalence of undernutrition increases with 
age, affecting up to 10% of nursing home residents and up to 50% of older 
See Chapter 3, Interviewing and the 
Health History, Alcohol and Illicit 
Drugs, pp. 96–97.
See Table 4-3, Nutrition Screening,  
p. 141.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
975
THE HEALTH HISTORY
patients at hospital discharge.68 Recent data suggest that only 30% to 40% 
meet recommended guidelines for daily intake of fruit and vegetables.69 
Older adults with chronic diseases are particularly vulnerable, especially 
those with poor dentition, oral or gastrointestinal disorders, depression or 
other psychiatric illness, and drug regimens that affect appetite and oral 
secretions.
Frailty. Frailty is a multifactorial geriatric syndrome characterized by an age-
related lack of adaptive physiological capacity occurring even in the absence of 
identiﬁable illness. Frailty typically signiﬁes loss of muscle mass, decreased 
energy and exercise intolerance, and decreased physiological reserve, with 
increasing vulnerability to physiologic stressors. Studies generally use one of two 
deﬁnitions. The narrower deﬁnition is based solely on physical conditions such 
as weight loss, exhaustion, weakness, slowness, and low physical activity; the 
broader deﬁnition also includes mood, cognition, and incontinence. Overall 
prevalence of frailty in community-dwelling adults is ∼10%, but reports of 
prevalence range from 4% to 59% depending on the deﬁnition and measurement 
indexes used.70,71
Screen your patients for the presence of three components identiﬁed in the 
Study for Osteoporotic Fractures and pursue related interventions: weight loss 
of more than 5% over 3 years, inability to do ﬁve chair stands, and self-reported 
exhaustion.72
Advance Directives and Palliative Care. Many older patients are 
interested in discussing end-of-life decisions and would like providers to 
initiate these discussions before the onset of serious illness.73 Advance care 
planning involves several tasks: providing information, clarifying the patient’s 
preferences, and identifying the surrogate decision maker. You can begin this 
discussion by linking these decisions to a current illness or experiences with 
relatives or friends. Ask the patient about “Do Not Resuscitate” orders specifying 
life support measures “if the heart or lungs were to stop or give out.” Also 
encourage the patient to designate in writing a health care proxy or durable 
power of attorney for health care, “someone who can make decisions reﬂecting 
your wishes in case of confusion or emergency.”
Roughly half of hospitalized older adults require surrogate decision making 
within 48 hours of admission. Common topics include life-sustaining care, 
surgeries and procedures, and discharge planning.74 Conversations about life 
care choices help patients and their families prepare openly and in advance 
for a peaceful death. Pursue these discussions during ofﬁce visits rather than 
in the stressful environment of the emergency department or intensive care 
unit.
Experts note that advance care directives can be more ﬂexible, depending on the 
situation. These directives “may range from general statements of values to such 
speciﬁc orders as [Do Not Resuscitate], do not intubate, do not hospitalize, do 
not provide artiﬁcial hydration or nutrition, or do not administer antibiotics. 
Different situations, including different stages of health and illness, demand 
different types of advanced care directives, and thus require both different 
See also Chapter 3, The Patient with 
Altered Cognition, pp. 87–89, and 
Death and the Dying Patient, pp. 98–99.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
976 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
conversations and different training in leading such discussions.”75 Moreover, 
always consult competent patients about current options because their deci-
sions supercede prior written instructions.
For patients with advanced or terminal illnesses, include the review of 
advanced directives in an overall plan for palliative care. Palliative care encom-
passes the alleviation of pain and suffering and the promotion of optimal 
quality of life across all phases of treatment, including curative interventions 
and rehabilitation. Its goals are “to consider the physical, mental, spiritual, 
and social well-being of patients and their families in order to maintain hope 
while ensuring patient dignity and respecting autonomy” both for patients 
with serious illnesses and for patients considering hospice care at the end of 
life.76 To ease patient and family distress, use good communication skills: 
Make good eye contact; ask open-ended questions; respond to anxiety, depres-
sion, or changes in the patient’s affect; show empathy; and be sure to consult 
caregivers.
Health Promotion and 
Counseling: Evidence and 
Recommendations
When to Screen. As more adults live into their 80s and beyond, decisions 
about screening become more complex, and the evidence base for screening 
decisions becomes more limited.77,78 The aging population is physiologically 
heterogeneous, many with numerous chronic diseases and also many with 
delayed or absent disability. Moreover, level of function in “successful aging” 
does not always parallel the number of chronic ailments, and there are substantial 
regional gaps in availability and use of preventive services.79 Although there is 
relative consensus about immunization recommendations and falls prevention, 
screening for speciﬁc disease states remains more controversial. In general, 
individualized screening decisions should be based on each older adult’s health 
and functional status, including presence of comorbidity, rather than age 
Important Topics for Health Promotion  
and Counseling in the Older Adult
● When to screen
● Vision and hearing
● Exercise
● Household safety and fall prevention
● Immunizations
● Cancer screening
● Depression
● Dementia, mild cognitive impairment, and cognitive decline
● Elder mistreatment and abuse
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
977
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
alone.80,81 This approach is depicted in Figure 20-8. The vertical axis shows the 
health status distribution of the population age 65 years and older, and the 
horizontal bars show the variation in importance of speciﬁc measures.
Health 
Status
(overlapping)
Robust
10-20%
Chronic 
Disease
30%
Multiple
Chronic 
Diseases
50%
Frail
7%
Disabled
30%
Annual Wellness Visit
Immunizations
Cancer Screenings
Visual, Auditory Screenings
Dementia, Depression
Geriatric Syndromes, Frailty
Advance Directives, End of Life
Time
Age
Health complexity
High
Low
Dependent
10-20%
End of Life
F I G U R E  2 0 - 8 .  Older adults: relative role of screening and preventive services 
according to functional status. Source: Nicholas JA, Hall WJ. Screening and preventive services for older adults. 
Mt Sinai J Med. 2011;78:498.
The American Geriatrics Society recommends a ﬁve-step approach to screening 
decisions82:
1. Assess patient preferences
2. Interpret the available evidence
3. Estimate prognosis
4. Consider treatment feasibility
5. Optimize therapies and care plans.
If life expectancy is short, give priority to treatment that beneﬁts the patient in 
the time that remains. Consider deferring screening if it overburdens the older 
adults who have multiple clinical problems, shortened life expectancy, or demen-
tia. Tests that help with prognosis and planning may still be warranted even if 
the patient does not want to pursue treatment.
Vision and Hearing. Although the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force 
(USPSTF) has cited insufﬁcient evidence for screening,83 geriatricians recommend 
screening for vision and hearing insofar as they are vital sensory modalities for 
daily living. They are key items in the 10-Minute Geriatric Screener.
See 10-Minute Geriatric Screener,  
p. 986, and Chapter 7, The Head and 
Neck, for techniques for assessing 
hearing, pp. 226–248.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
978 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
■ Test vision objectively using an eye chart.
■ Ask the patient about any hearing loss is effective for screening, then proceed 
to the whisper test and more formal testing, if indicated. Among adults aged 
65 to 69 years, 1% have visual impairment, increasing to 17% of those over 
age 80 years. About a third of adults over age 65 years have hearing loss, 
increasing to 80% in those over age 80 years. The Administration on Aging 
reports that a total of 6.5% of adults aged 65 years and older have disability 
from visual impairment and 17.5% from hearing loss.2
Exercise. Exercise is one of the most effective ways to promote healthy 
aging. Abundant literature documents the many beneﬁts of physical activity in 
older adults, even in those who are frail.77,85–88 These include a “decrease in all-
cause mortality; reduced risk of functional limitation and role limitation, falls, 
hypertension, diabetes, colorectal cancer, and breast cancer; and improvement 
in cognitive function, physical function . . . quality of life . . . gait speed, balance, 
and performance of activities of daily living” as well as preservation of cognition.77 
Recommendations emphasize combining aerobic exercise with graded resistance 
training in major muscle groups to increase strength. Guidelines from the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) are listed below. The CDC website 
provides information on higher targets for exercise and explanations of aerobic 
and muscle-strength training. For help with exercise prescriptions, turn to the 
Exercise in Medicine program of the American College of Sports Medicine.89,90 
The many beneﬁts of individualized supervised exercise plans usually outweigh 
the risks of joint pain, falls, and cardiac events.
Patients reporting hearing loss are 
twice as likely to have a verified impair-
ment; for those answering no, hearing 
loss is very unlikely (LR if 0.13).84
CDC Exercise Recommendations for Older Adults
Adults need at least:
● 2 hours and 30 minutes (150 minutes) of moderate-intensity aerobic activity 
(i.e., brisk walking) every week and
● muscle-strengthening activities on two or more days a week that work all 
major muscle groups (legs, hips, back, abdomen, chest, shoulders, and arms).
OR
● 1 hour and 15 minutes (75 minutes) of vigorous-intensity aerobic activity (i.e., 
jogging or running) every week and
● muscle-strengthening activities on two or more days a week that work all 
major muscle groups (legs, hips, back, abdomen, chest, shoulders, and arms).
OR
● An equivalent mix of moderate- and vigorous-intensity aerobic activity and
● muscle-strengthening activities on two or more days a week that work all 
major muscle groups (legs, hips, back, abdomen, chest, shoulders, and arms).
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. How much physical activity do older adults need?
Physical activity is essential to healthy aging. Updated June 4, 2015. Available at http://www.cdc.
gov/physicalactivity/basics/older_adults/index.htm. Accessed August 16, 2015.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
979
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Household Safety and Falls Prevention. In 2013, the CDC reported 
that 2.5 million nonfatal falls among older adults were treated in emergency 
departments, and more than 734,000 of these patients were hospitalized at a 
direct clinical cost of $34 billion.91 Many have hip fractures and traumatic brain 
injuries that impact daily function and independence. Emergency room visits 
and deaths are most likely to involve yard and garden equipment, ladders and 
stepstools, personal-use items like hair dryers and ﬂammable clothing, and 
bathroom and sports injuries. Encourage older adults to adopt corrective 
measures for poor lighting, chairs at awkward heights, slippery or irregular 
surfaces, and environmental hazards.
See also Further Assessment for 
Preventing Falls, pp. 987–989.
Home Safety Tips for Older Adults91
● Install bright lighting and lightweight curtains or shades.
● Install handrails and lights on all staircases. Pathways and walkways should be 
well-lit.
● Remove items that cause tripping like papers, books, clothes, and shoes from 
stairs and walkways.
● Remove or secure small throw rugs and other rugs with double-sided tape.
● Wear shoes both inside and outside the house. Avoid bare feet and wearing 
slippers.
● Store medications safely.
● Keep commonly used items in cabinets that are easy to reach without using a 
step stool.
● Install grab bars and nonslip mats or safety strips in baths and showers.
● Repair faulty plugs and electrical cords.
● Install smoke alarms and have a plan for escaping ﬁre.
● Secure all ﬁrearms.
● Have a clinical alert device/system for emergency contacts or easy access to 911.
Immunizations. Recommend vaccination for inﬂuenza; pneumonia, both 
PPSV23 and PCV13; herpes zoster (shingles); and tetanus/diphtheria and 
pertussis (Tdap and Td). For the most up-to-date recommendations, consult 
the updated annual guidelines and contraindications provided by the CDC at 
http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines.92,93 Note that vaccination rates still lag for Hispanics 
and African Americans.
See also Chapter 8, The Thorax and 
Lungs, Immunizations, pp. 316–317.
Older Adult Immunizations 2015
Inﬂuenza Vaccine94
The inﬂuenza vaccine protects against up to two strains of inﬂuenza A and inﬂu-
enza B in both trivalent and quadrivalent formulations. The following groups 
should receive the inﬂuenza vaccine each year:
● All adults ≥50 years
● Adults with chronic pulmonary and cardiovascular disorders including asthma 
(but excluding hypertension), and renal, hepatic, neurologic, hematologic, or 
metabolic disorders including diabetes
(continued )
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
980 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Older Adult Immunizations 2015 (continued )
● Adults who are immunosuppressed from medication or HIV
● Residents of nursing homes and other long-term care facilities; adults with 
morbid obesity (BMI ≥40)
● Household contacts and caregivers of children under 5 years and adults ≥50 
years, especially those with clinical conditions placing them at risk for severe 
complications from inﬂuenza.
Pneumococcal Vaccine95,96
PCV13 protects against 13 of the 90 types of pneumococcal bacteria; these types 
cause infection in about half of the aﬀected adults. PPSV23 protects against 23 
types of pneumococcal bacteria.
● Adults aged ≥65 years: Older adults who have not previously received PCV13 
should receive PCV13 ﬁrst, followed 6 to 12 months later by PPSV23. Those who 
have already received one or more doses of PPSV23 should receive PCV13 at 
least 1 year after the most recent dose of PPSV23. The recommendations for 
routine PCV13 use among adults aged ≥65 years will be re-evaluated in 2018.
● Adults aged 19 to 64 years: This age group should also be vaccinated as above if 
they have the following conditions: HIV infection, long-term immunosuppres-
sive therapy, chronic renal failure, nephrotic syndrome, functional or  
anatomic asplenia, cochlear implants, sickle cell disease or other hemoglobin-
opathies, congenital or acquired immunodeﬁciencies, generalized malig-
nancy, Hodgkin disease, leukemia, multiple myeloma, solid organ transplant, 
or cerebrospinal ﬂuid leaks.
Zoster Vaccine97,98
The approved herpes zoster vaccine is a live attenuated vaccine. Eﬃcacy against 
herpes zoster is 70% in people aged 50 to 59 years, falling to 38% in those aged 70 
or more years. Eﬃcacy against postherpetic neuralgia after age 60 years is 66%. 
HZ/su vaccine, a new recombinant subunit vaccine containing varicella-zoster 
virus glycoprotein E in an AS01B adjuvant system, is currently being investigated. 
It has an eﬃcacy of 97% across all age groups, but signiﬁcant local site injection 
reactions and myalgias have been reported.98
● All adults aged ≥60 years, regardless of whether they have already had either 
chicken pox or shingles, should be vaccinated.
● Contraindications: The vaccine should not be given to adults with a history of a 
primary or acquired immunodeﬁciency state, including leukemia, lymphoma, 
or other malignant neoplasm aﬀecting the bone marrow or lymphatic system, 
or with HIV/AIDS or to those receiving immunosuppressive therapy, including 
high-dose corticosteroids.
Tetanus/diphtheria (Td) and Tetanus/diphtheria/pertussis (Tdap) 
Vaccine99
● All adults aged ≥19 years, including those aged ≥65 years: All adults aged ≥19 
years who have not been vaccinated with Tdap should receive a single dose of 
Tdap regardless of the time interval since last receiving Td. After receiving 
Tdap, they should receive Td boosters at 10-year intervals. For adults aged  
≥65 years, this will reduce the likelihood of transmission to infants aged  
<12 months.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
981
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Cancer Screening. Cancer screening recommendations for older adults 
remain controversial. In 2015, the American Geriatrics Society stated: “Don’t 
recommend screening for breast, colorectal, prostate or lung cancer without 
considering life expectancy and the risks of testing, overdiagnosis and 
overtreatment.”100 Geriatricians advocate individualized decision making based 
on the principles outlined in “When to Screen” discussed earlier, since 
“guidelines become less robust and evidenced-based as individuals age and/or 
develop declining health status and disabilities.”78 Recent more complex 
published frameworks include “weighing quantitative information, such as risk 
of cancer death and likelihood of beneﬁcial and adverse screening outcomes, as 
well as qualitative factors, such as individual patients’ values and preferences.”101 
The American College of Physicians has developed high- and low-value screening 
strategies that factor in health beneﬁts, frequency of screening, and harms and 
costs.102
The recommendations of the USPSTF as of 2015, which target straightforward 
age cutoffs, are summarized below.103
See “When to Screen,” pp. 976–977, 
and also discussions about screening 
for breast cancer, pp. 427–433, cervi-
cal cancer, pp. 575–578, prostate 
cancer, pp. 610–615, and colorectal 
cancer, p. 615.
Screening Recommendations for Older Adults: 
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
● Breast cancer (2016): Recommends mammography every 2 years for women 
aged 50 to 74 years and cites insuﬃcient evidence for screening women aged 
≥75 years.
● Cervical cancer (2012): Recommends against routine screening for women 
over age 65 years if they have had adequate recent screening with normal Pap 
smears and are not otherwise at high risk for cervical cancer, based on fair  
evidence.
● Colorectal cancer (2008): Recommends screening with colonoscopy every 10 
years, sigmoidoscopy every 5 years with high-sensitivity fecal occult blood 
tests (FOBTs) every 3 years, or FOBTs every year beginning age 50 years 
through age 75 years. Recommends against routine screening for adults aged 
76 to 85 years, due to moderate certainty that the net beneﬁt is small.
● Prostate cancer (2012): Recommends against prostate-speciﬁc antigen-based 
screening for prostate cancer in men of all ages due to evidence that expected 
harms are greater than expected beneﬁts.
● Lung cancer (2013): For adults aged 55 to 80 years with a 30-pack/yr smoking 
history, and those who currently smoke or have quit within the past 15 years, 
recommends annual screening with low-dose computed tomography. Screen-
ing should be discontinued once a person has not smoked for 15 years or 
develops a health problem that substantially limits life expectancy or the  
ability or willingness to have curative lung surgery.
● Skin cancer (2009; updated in 2015): States that evidence is insuﬃcient to  
balance the beneﬁts and harms of whole-body skin examination.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
982 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Depression. Depression affects 5% to 7% of community-dwelling older 
adults and approximately 10% of older men and 18% of older women, but is 
often undiagnosed, untreated, or undertreated.77,104 Prevalence rises in those 
with multiple comorbidities and hospitalizations. Screening for the general adult 
population, with services in place for diagnosis, treatment, and follow-up, is now 
recommended by the USPSTF (2015)105 and requires only one or two questions. 
The single screening question, “Do you often feel sad or depressed?” has a 
sensitivity of 69% and speciﬁcity of 90%. The two screening questions below are 
100% sensitive and 77% speciﬁc.
■ “Over the past 2 weeks, have you felt down, depressed, or hopeless?” (screens 
for depressed mood)
■ “Over the past 2 weeks, have you felt little interest or pleasure in doing 
things?” (screens for anhedonia)
Positive responses should prompt further investigation with scales such as the 
Geriatric Depression Scale or the 9-item Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-
9).104,106,107 Depressed men over age 65 years are at increased risk for suicide and 
require particularly careful evaluation. Effective treatment for older adults both 
reduces morbidity and extends life, and includes exercise, supportive and group 
therapy, and medication.108
Dementia, Mild Cognitive Impairment, and Cognitive Decline. 
Dementia is “an acquired condition that is characterized by a decline in at least 
two cognitive domains (e.g., loss of memory, attention, language, or visuospatial 
or executive functioning) that is severe enough to affect social or occupational 
functioning.” Affected patients may also exhibit behavioral and psychological 
symptoms. In the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5 (DSM-5), 
dementia is classiﬁed as a “major neurocognitive disorder.”109 The major dementia 
syndromes include Alzheimer disease (AD), vascular dementia, frontotemporal 
dementia, dementia with Lewy bodies, Parkinson disease with dementia, and 
dementia of mixed etiology. AD, the predominant form, affects 11% of Americans 
over age 65 years, or roughly 5.1 million people; over two thirds are women.110 
By 2050, prevalence is estimated to increase to 13.8 million cases. Risk factors 
include advancing age, family history, and the gene mutation apolipoprotein 
(APOE) ε4. Risk of AD more than doubles in ﬁrst-degree relatives. Risk doubles 
in the presence of one APOE ε4 allele and increases ﬁvefold or more in the 
presence of two alleles, although only 2% of the population carries these genes.111
The diagnosis of AD is challenging: the mechanisms of disease are still under 
intense investigation; the absence of a consistent and uniformly applied deﬁni-
tion of disease hampers investigation of risk factors; between 60% and 90% of 
Alzheimer patients have coexisting ischemic disease; and distinguishing age-
related cognitive decline from mild cognitive impairment and AD can be subtle. 
Excluding delirium and depression can further complicate diagnosis.112,113 Some 
distinguishing clinical features are highlighted on next page.
See Chapter 5, Behavior and Mental 
Status, Depression, pp. 156–157.
See Table 20-2, Delirium and Dementia, 
p. 1001, and Table 20-3, Screening for 
Dementia: The Mini-Cog, p. 1002.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
983
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
The Spectrum of Cognitive Decline
Age-related Cognitive Decline
● This diagnosis is suggested by mild forgetfulness, diﬃculty remembering names, 
mildly reduced concentration.
● Such symptoms are sporadic and do not aﬀect daily function.
Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI)
● Daily function is preserved, but there is evidence of modest cognitive decline in one 
or more cognitive domains (complex attention, executive function, learning and 
memory, language, perceptual-motor, or social cognition) based on objective 
tasks, as reported by the patient, an informant, or the clinician or on clinical  
testing.109,114,115
● Alertness and attention is preserved (unlike delirium).
● Other dementias are unlikely (see below).
● AD develops at a higher frequency in MCI patients, progressing to AD at a 
reported rate of 6% to 15% per year.116,117
Alzheimer Disease
● Probable AD, based on DSM-5 criteria, consists of evidence of a causative genetic 
mutation from family history or genetic testing, or the presence of cognitive decline 
in two or more cognitive domains, with all three of the following features: (1) clear evi-
dence of a decline in memory and learning and at least one other cognitive domain 
(see above); (2) steady progressive decline in cognition without extended plateaus; 
and (3) no evidence of mixed etiology from other neurodegenerative, cerebrovas-
cular, mental, or systemic disease.114
● Possible AD is diagnosed when the patient meets all three criteria by evidence 
from genetic testing or when family history is absent.
● Alertness and attention is preserved.
● Other dementias are unlikely (see below).
● Memory diﬃculties may take the form of repeating questions, losing objects, or con-
fusion when performing tasks such as shopping. Later stages include impaired judg-
ment and disorientation progressing to aphasia, apraxia, left–right confusion, and 
ultimately, dependence of IADLs. Psychosis and agitation may also occur.
● “The diﬀerentiation of dementia from MCI rests on the determination of whether 
or not there is signiﬁcant interference in the ability to function at work or in usual 
daily activities.”118
Other Dementias112,119
● Vascular dementia is suggested by vascular risk factors or cerebrovascular disease 
causing cognitive impairment. Stepwise decline, especially in executive function, 
should correlate with the onset of cerebrovascular event, but consider this 
dementia even if just risk factors are present. At times, there are gait changes and 
focal ﬁndings.
● Lewy body disease is suggested by evidence of parkinsonism. Visual hallucinations, 
delusions, and gait disorder may be early clues. At times, there are extrapyramidal 
symptoms, ﬂuctuating mental status, and sensitivity to antipsychotic medica-
tions.
● Frontotemporal lobar degeneration is suggested by prominent behavioral or lan-
guage disorders, at times with personality changes including impulsivity, aggres-
sion, and apathy. At times, there is excessive eating and drinking. There is relative 
preservation of memory and visual–spatial skills. Onset may occur before age  
60 years.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
984 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Screening Tests for Dementia. The Mini Mental State Examination has 
the best sensitivity and speciﬁcity, over 86%, but is now copyrighted for com-
mercial use, so is less accessible. Recommended screening tests include the Mini-
Cog and the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), both included in Tables 20-3 
and 20-4.
■ The Mini-Cog has a sensitivity and speciﬁcity in some studies as high as 91% 
and 86%, respectively, and is shorter to administer—about 3 minutes.109,120,121
■ The MoCA has comparable sensitivity and speciﬁcity, 91% and 81% in 
recent studies, and takes 10 minutes to administer.119,121–124
Caring for Patients with Altered Cognition. Once you identify cogni-
tive changes, a number of steps are helpful for planning patient care.
See Table 20-3, Screening for Dementia: 
The Mini-Cog, p. 1003, and Table 20-4, 
Screening for Dementia: The Montreal 
Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), p. 1004.
See Chapter 3, The Patient with 
Altered Cognition, pp. 87–89.
Caring for Patients with Altered Cognition
● Collateral information: Obtain collateral information from family mem-
bers and caretakers.
● Neuropsychological testing: Consider formal neuropsychological testing.
● Contributing factors: Investigate contributing factors such as medica-
tions; metabolic abnormalities; depression; delirium; and other clinical and 
psychiatric conditions, including vascular risk from diabetes and hypertension.
● Caregivers: Counsel families about the challenges for caregivers. The NIH 
Senior Health website http://nihseniorhealth.gov/ is especially helpful about 
“Alzheimer caregiving.” Review household safety measures.
● Drivers with dementia: Learn the laws about reporting drivers with demen-
tia in your state. Consult the American Academy of Neurology evidence-based 
practice parameters for drivers with dementia, updated in 2010, and guidelines 
from numerous professional organizations, including the American Medical 
Association. Note, however, that underlying quantitative evidence linking 
assessment to road safety is limited.125 A 2013 Cochrane review details the pitfalls 
of disqualifying impaired drivers, which can lead to depression and social with-
drawal if disqualiﬁcation is premature.126,127 The review concludes that for drivers 
with dementia, there is no good evidence that neuropsychological or on-road 
assessment will maintain mobility and improve safety. The authors call for more 
research to develop assessment tools “that can reliably identify unsafe drivers 
with dementia in an oﬃce setting” and determine what changes in function pro-
vide a threshold for disqualiﬁcation, as no single validated test is available.
● Advance directives: Encourage patient and family discussion of appoint-
ing a health care proxy and arranging for power of attorney, health care power 
of attorney, and advance directives while the patient can still contribute to 
active decision making.
Elder Mistreatment and Abuse. Screen vulnerable older adults for possible 
elder mistreatment, which includes abuse, neglect, exploitation, and abandonment. 
Prevalence ranges from 5% to 10%, depending on the population studied, and is 
even higher among older adults with depression and dementia.128–130 Many cases are 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
985
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
undetected due to the patient’s fear of reprisal, physical or cognitive inability to 
report, and unwillingness to expose the abuser, of whom 90% are family 
members. Self-neglect, or “the behavior of an elderly person that threatens his/her 
own health and safety,” is also a growing national concern and represents more 
the 50% of adult protective service referrals.
In a 2013 review, the USPSTF found no valid reliable screening tools to identify 
abuse of elderly or vulnerable adults in the primary care setting and therefore 
cited insufﬁcient evidence for recommending screening.81 Consequently, a care-
ful history and high index of suspicion are important.
Techniques of Examination
Assessment of the older adult has several unique features compared to the cus-
tomary format of the history and physical examination. It calls for enhanced 
interviewing techniques, special emphasis on the topics reviewed in the previous 
sections, and a focus on functional assessment. Because of its importance to older 
adult health, Techniques of Examination begins with “Assessing Functional Sta-
tus: the ‘Sixth Vital Sign,’” which includes steps for evaluating the patient’s risk 
for falls, one of the primary threats to older adult well-being. Following this sec-
tion are the components of the traditional “head-to-toe” examination, tailored to 
the older adult.
Assessing Functional Status:  
the “Sixth Vital Sign”
All visits are opportunities to promote the patient’s independence and optimal 
level of function. Although the speciﬁc goals of care vary from patient to patient, 
preserving the patient’s functional status, the “sixth vital sign,” is of primary 
importance. Functional status is the ability to perform tasks and fulﬁll social 
roles associated with daily living across a wide range of complexity.
Establishing functional status provides a baseline for making interventions that 
optimize the patient’s level of function and for identifying geriatric syndromes 
that can be treated or delayed, such as cognitive impairment, falls, inconti-
nence, low BMI, dizziness, and impaired vision and hearing. Deﬁcits in func-
tion are now recognized as better predictors of patient outcome and mortality 
after hospitalization than the admitting diagnoses. In 2010, the USPSTF outlined 
new prevention recommendations for older adults that address the multifactorial 
nature of geriatric syndromes and combine recommendations on related topics, 
such as osteoporosis, vitamin D supplementation, and prevention of falls, so that 
they are “more consistent, interlinked, and comprehensive” and directed at inter-
ventions that are effective.131
Your assessment of functional status begins as the patient enters the room. The 
10-Minute Geriatric Screener is one of several validated and time-efﬁcient perfor-
mance-based assessment tools. The Screener is brief, has high interrater agree-
ment, and can be easily used by ofﬁce staff.132 It covers three important areas: 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
986 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
cognitive, psychosocial, and physical function. It includes vision, hearing, and 
questions about urinary incontinence, an often hidden source of social isolation 
and distress. Up to 55% of community-dwelling women aged ≥65 years and 
30% of men report bladder leakage, increasing to 70% of long-term nursing 
home residents.133
10-Minute Geriatric Screener
Problem
Screening Measure
Positive Screen
Vision
Two parts:
Ask: “Do you have diﬃculty driving, or watching 
television, or reading, or doing any of your 
daily activities because of your eyesight?”
If yes, then:
Test each eye with Snellen chart while the patient 
wears corrective lenses (if applicable).
Yes to question and inability to read 
>20/40 on Snellen chart
Hearing
Use audioscope set at 40 dB Test hearing  
using 1,000 and 2,000 Hz.
Inability to hear 1,000 or 2,000 Hz in 
both ears or either of these frequen-
cies in one ear
Leg Mobility–Timed Get 
Up and Go (TUG) Test
Time the patient after asking:
“Rise from the chair. Walk 10 feet briskly, turn, 
walk back to the chair, and sit down.”
Unable to complete task in 10 seconds
Urinary incontinence
Two parts:
Ask: “In the last year, have you ever lost your 
urine and gotten wet?”
If yes, then ask:
“Have you lost urine on at least 6 separate dates?”
Yes to both questions
Nutrition/weight loss
Two parts:
Ask: “Have you lost 10 lbs over the past 6 mo 
without trying to do so?”
Weigh the patient.
Yes to the question or weight <100 lbs
Memory
Three-item recall
Unable to remember all three items 
after 1 minute
Depression
Ask: “Do you often feel sad or depressed?”
Yes to the question
Physical disability
Six questions: “Are you able to . . . :
“Do strenuous activities like fast walking or 
bicycling?”
“Do heavy work around the house like washing  
windows, walls, or ﬂoors?”
“Go shopping for groceries or clothes?”
“Get to places out of walking distance?”
“Bathe, either a sponge bath, tub bath, or 
shower?”
“Dress, like putting on a shirt, buttoning and 
zipping, or putting on shoes?”
No to any of the questions
Source: Adapted from Moore AA, Siu AL. Screening for common problems in ambulatory elderly: clinical conﬁrmation of a screening instrument. Am J 
Med. 1996;100:438.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
987
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Urinary Incontinence. For identifying causes of incontinence, two 
mnemonics may be helpful:
■ DIAPERS: Delirium, Infection, Atrophic urethritis/vaginitis, Pharmaceuti-
cals, Excess urine output from conditions like hyperglycemia or heart fail-
ure, Restricted mobility, and Stool impaction, and
■ DDRRIIPP: Delirium, Drug side effects, Retention of feces, Restricted mo-
bility, Infection of urine, Inﬂammation, Polyuria, and Psychogenic.
Further Assessment for Preventing Falls. Compelling evidence 
links falls, a multifactorial geriatric syndrome, to fatal and nonfatal injuries, 
mortality, and burgeoning clinical costs that exceed $34 billion annually.134 One 
in three older adults falls each year, but less than half discuss this with their 
health care provider. Falls are the most common cause of traumatic brain injury 
in older adults and cause 95% of hip fractures.
In 2010, the American Geriatrics Society and British Geriatrics Society updated an 
excellent algorithm for individualizing falls prevention in older adults.135 Recog-
nizing a gap in adoption by clinicians, the CDC’s Injury Center has launched the 
STEADI (Stopping Elderly Accidents, Deaths, and Injuries) falls prevention toolkit 
to help primary care providers to better assess and treat patients at risk and 
make referrals to community-based falls prevention programs (Fig. 20-9).136,137 
STEADI materials include a risk triage algorithm, a Fall Risk Checklist, videos 
on how to conduct standard falls assessment tests, and “Stay Independent” bro-
chures for falls prevention for patients and families.
Note the key features of the STEADI algorithm on p. 988 that you should incor-
porate into your practice. If time, consider functional assessment and environ-
mental/home safety assessment.
STEADI Falls Prevention Algorithm: Key 
Features for Clinical Practice
● Screen all community-dwelling older adults about risk for falls.
● Encourage all older patients to pursue gait and balance exercise.
● Do a gait, strength, and balance assessment with the Timed Get Up and Go 
test in patients who screen positive.
● Stratify patients according to low, moderate, and high risk.
● Identify high-risk older adults, namely, those with a gait, strength, or balance 
problem and at least one fall with an injury.
● In high-risk older adults, conduct a multifactorial risk assessment, including:
● review of the Stay Independent brochure;
● a falls history and medication review;
● physical examination including assessment of visual acuity, postural hypo-
tension, a cognitive screen, inspection of the feet and use of footwear, and 
use of mobility aids;
● functional assessment; and
● environmental or home safety assessment.
● Implement individualized interventions, including physical therapy and follow-up 
in 30 days.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
988	
B a t e s ’  G u i d e  t o  P h y s i c a l  E x a m i n a t i o n  a n d  H i s t o r y  T a k i n g
Techniques of Examination
Patient completes Stay Independent brochure
Screen for falls and/or fall risk
Patient answers YES to any key question:
• Fell in past year? if YES ask,
 - How many times? and,
 - Were you injured?
• Feels unsteady when standing or walking?
•Worries about falling?
YES to any key question
No gait, 
strength or 
balance 
problems*
NO to all 
key 
questions
Gait, strength or balance problem
≥2 falls
1 fall
Injury
No injury
0 falls
Evaluate gait, strength & balance
• Timed Up & Go (recommended)
• 30 Second Chair Stand (optional)
• 4 Stage Balance Test (optional)
Conduct multifactorial 
risk assessment
• Review Stay Independent
 brochure
• Falls history
• Physical exam including:
 -Postural dizziness/postural     
   hypotension
 - Medication review
 - Cognitive screen
 - Feet & Footwear
 - Use of mobility aids
 - Visual acuity check
HIGH RISK
Individualized fall 
interventions
• Educate patient
• Vitamin D +/- calcium
• Refer to PT to enhance 
 functional mobility & improve
 strength & balance
• Manage & monitor 
 hypotension
• Modify medications
• Address foot problems
• Optimize vision
• Optimize home safety
Follow up with HIGH RISK 
patient within 30 days
• Review care plan
• Assess & encourage fall risk
 reduction behaviors
• Discuss & address barriers 
 to adherence
Transition to maintenance 
exercise program when patient 
is ready
MODERATE RISK
Individualized fall 
interventions
• Educate patient
• Review & modify medications
• Vitamin D +/- calcium
• Refer to PT to improve gait, 
 strength & balance
or
 refer to a community fall
 prevention program
LOW RISK
Individualized fall 
interventions
• Educate patient
• Vitamin D +/- calcium
• Refer for strength & balance 
 exercise (community exercise
 or fall prevention program
Low Risk
Moderate Risk
High Risk
*For these patients, consider additional risk assessment (e.g. medication review, cognitive screen, syncope)
F i g u r e  2 0 - 9 .   STEADI algorithm. Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Center for Injury Prevention and 
Control. STEADI–Stopping Elderly Accidents, Deaths and Injuries. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/steadi/pdf/algorithm_2015–04-a.pdf. Accessed August 23, 2015.
Although methods for studying individual and multifactorial fall interventions 
vary greatly, the USPSTF found evidence of falls reduction from the following 
interventions: gait, balance, and strength training, particularly over an 
extended period—by 13%; vitamin D supplementation—by 14% to 17%; and 
minimization or withdrawal of psychoactive and other medications.138–141 
Multifactorial assessment and intervention appear to be more effective than 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
989
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
interventions targeting speciﬁc risk factors, reducing falls in some studies by 
up to 25%. Additional prevention strategies that have been evaluated include 
reducing home hazards, vision correction, and improved management of 
chronic conditions such as change in postural blood pressure, and numerous 
types and combinations of exercise.141
Physical Examination of the Older Adult
General Survey. As the patient enters the room, how does the patient walk 
to the chair? Move onto the examining table? Are there changes in posture or 
involuntary movements? Note the patient’s hygiene and dress. Assess the patient’s 
apparent state of health, degree of vitality, and mood and affect. As you talk with 
the patient, decide if screening for cognitive changes is needed.
Vital Signs. Measure blood pressure using recommended techniques (see 
pp. 124–132), checking for increased systolic blood pressure (SBP) and widened 
PP, deﬁned as SBP minus DBP. With aging, SBP and peripheral vascular resistance 
increase, whereas DBP decreases. For adults aged ≥60 years, the eighth Joint 
National Committee (JNC8) recommends blood pressure targets of ≤150/90 
but notes that if treatment results in SBP <140 and is “well tolerated and 
without adverse effects to health or quality of live, treatment does not need to 
be adjusted.”142 However, in the “oldest old,” those aged 80 years and older, 
other experts cite studies showing that blood pressure targets of 140 to <150/70 
to 80 appear optimal for notable reductions in stroke, cardiovascular events, and 
all-cause mortality.143–146
Assess the patient for orthostatic hypotension, deﬁned as a drop in SBP of 
≥20 mm Hg or DBP of ≥10 mm Hg within 3 minutes of standing. Measure blood 
pressure and heart rate in two positions: supine after the patient rests for up to 
10 minutes; then within 3 minutes after standing up.
Undernutrition, slowed motor perfor-
mance, loss of muscle mass, or weak-
ness suggests frailty.
Kyphosis or abnormal gait can impair 
balance and increase risk of falls. 
Flat or impoverished affect is seen in 
depression, Parkinson disease, and 
Alzheimer disease. 
See Table 20-3, Screening for Dementia: 
The Mini-Cog, p. 1002, and Table 20-4, 
Screening for Dementia: The Montreal 
Cognitive Assessment, p. 1003 for 
brief and validated screening tools for 
dementia.120,121
Isolated systolic hypertension (SBP ≥ 140) 
after age 50 years and PP ≥ 60 increase 
risk of stroke, renal failure, and heart 
disease.147
See JNC8 recommendations on p. 130.
Orthostatic hypotension occurs in 20% 
of older adults and in up to 50% of 
frail nursing home residents, espe-
cially when they first get up. Symp-
toms include lightheadedness, 
weakness, unsteadiness, visual blur-
ring, and, in 20% to 30% of patients, 
syncope. Causes include medications, 
autonomic disorders, diabetes, pro-
longed bed rest, volume depletion, 
amyloidosis, postprandial state, and 
cardiovascular disorders.148–151
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
990 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Measure heart rate, respiratory rate, and temperature. The apical heart rate often 
allows better detection of arrhythmias in older patients than does the radial 
pulse. Use thermometers accurate for lower temperatures. Obtain oxygen satura-
tion using a pulse oximeter.
Weight and height are especially important in the elderly, and are needed for 
calculation of the BMI. Weight is also a key clinical measure for patients with 
heart failure and chronic kidney disease. Weight should be measured at every 
visit, preferably with footwear removed.
Skin. Note physiologic changes of aging, such as thinning, loss of elastic 
tissue and turgor, and wrinkling. Skin may be dry, ﬂaky, rough, and often itchy 
(asteatosis), with a latticework of shallow ﬁssures that creates a mosaic of small 
polygons, especially on the legs.
Observe any patchy changes in 
color. Check the extensor surface of 
the hands and forearms for white 
depigmented patches, or pseudos-
cars, and for well-demarcated viv-
idly purple macules or patches, 
actinic purpura, that may fade after 
several weeks (Fig. 20-10).
Look for changes from sun exposure. Areas of skin may appear weather beaten, 
thickened, yellowed, and deeply furrowed; there may be actinic lentigines, or 
“liver spots,” and actinic keratoses, superﬁcial ﬂattened papules covered by a dry 
scale.
Inspect for the benign lesions of aging, namely comedones, or blackheads, on the 
cheeks or around the eyes; cherry angiomas, which often appear early in adult-
hood; and seborrheic keratoses, raised yellowish lesions that feel greasy and velvety 
or warty.
Respiratory rate ≥25 breaths per 
minute points to lower respiratory 
infection, heart failure, and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease 
exacerbation.
Hypothermia is more common in 
older patients.
Low weight is a key indicator of poor 
nutrition, seen in depression, alcohol-
ism, cognitive impairment, malig-
nancy, chronic organ failure (cardiac, 
renal, pulmonary), medication use, 
social isolation, poor dentition, and 
poverty. Rapidly increasing daily 
weights occur in fluid overload. 
F I G U R E  2 0 - 1 0 .  Actinic purpura on 
forearm.
Distinguish such lesions from a basal 
cell carcinoma, a translucent nodule 
that spreads and leaves a depressed 
center with a firm elevated border, 
and squamous cell carcinoma, a firm 
reddish-appearing lesion often 
emerging in a sun-exposed area. A dark 
raised asymmetric lesion with irregular 
borders may be a melanoma. See 
Tables 6-4, 6-5, and 6-6, pp. 197–203, 
assessment of rough, pink, and brown 
lesions and related carcinomas.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
991
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Watch for any painful vesicular lesions in a dermatomal distribution.
In older bed-bound patients, especially those emaciated or neurologically 
impaired, inspect the skin for damage or ulceration on the sacral and perianal 
areas, the lower back, heels, and elbows where pressure ulcers commonly occur.
Head and Neck. Perform a thorough examination of the head and neck.
Inspect the eyelids, the bony orbit, and the eye. The eye may appear recessed 
from atrophy of fat in the surrounding tissues. Observe any senile ptosis arising 
from weakening of the levator palpebrae, relaxation of the skin, and increased 
weight of the upper eyelid. Check the lower lids for ectropion or entropion. Note 
yellowing of the sclera, and arcus senilis, a benign whitish ring around the limbus.
Test the best-corrected visual acuity in each eye, using a pocket Snellen chart or 
wall-mounted chart. Note any presbyopia, the loss of near vision arising from 
decreased elasticity of the lens related to aging.
Test pupillary constriction to light, both the direct and consensual response and 
during the near response. Then swing the light beam several times between the 
right and left eyes. Test the six directions of gaze. Except for possible impairment 
in upward gaze, extraocular movements should remain intact.
Using your ophthalmoscope, carefully examine the lenses and fundi.
Using the ophthalmoscope beam, check at 1 to 2 feet for a red reﬂex. With the 
ophthalmoscope lens at +10 diopters, inspect each lens close to the eye for 
opacities. Do not depend on the ﬂashlight alone because the lens may look clear 
superﬁcially.
Vesicular lesions occurring in a der-
matomal distribution are suspicious 
for herpes zoster from reactivation of 
latent varicella-zoster virus in the dor-
sal root ganglia. Risk increases with 
age and impaired cell-mediated 
immunity.98,152
Pressure ulcers arise from obliteration 
of arteriolar and capillary blood flow 
to the skin or from shear forces during 
movement across sheets or when lifted 
upright incorrectly. See Table 6-13, 
Pressure Ulcers, p. 213.
See Chapter 7, The Head and Neck, 
pp. 215–302.
See Table 7-7, Variations and Abnor-
malities of the Eyelids, p. 274, and 
Table 7-9, Opacities of the Cornea  
and Lens, p. 276. 
One in three adults suffers some form 
of visual loss by age 65 years.153
If the pupil dilates as the light swings 
over, a relative afferent pupillary 
defect is present, which is suspicious 
for optic nerve disease. Refer to an 
ophthalmologist. 
The prevalence of cataracts, glau-
coma, and macular degeneration all 
increases with aging. 
A red reflex is seen with cataracts 
(Figs. 20-11 and 20-12). At +10 diop-
ters, a cataract appears white.154 
Cataracts are the world’s leading cause 
of blindness. Risk factors include ciga-
rette smoking, exposure to UV-B light, 
high alcohol intake, diabetes, medica-
tions (including steroids), and trauma. 
See Table 7-9, Opacities of the Cornea 
and Lens, p. 276.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
992 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
In older adults, the fundi lose their youthful shine and light reﬂections, and the 
arteries look narrowed, paler, straighter, and less brilliant. Assess the cup-to-disc 
ratio, usually 1:2 or less, for possible glaucoma (Fig. 20-13).
Inspect the fundi for colloid bodies causing alterations in pigmentation, called 
drusen.
F I G U R E  2 0 - 1 1 .  Nuclear cataract.
F I G U R E  2 0 - 1 2 .  Peripheral cataract.
F I G U R E  2 0 - 1 3 .  Glaucoma with 
disc “cupping.”
Retinal microvascular disease is linked 
to cerebral microvascular changes and 
cognitive impairment.155,156
An increased cup-to-disc ratio suggests 
primary open angle glaucoma (POAG), 
caused by irreversible optic neuropa-
thy and leading to loss of peripheral 
and central vision and blindness. Preva-
lence of POAG is four to five times 
higher in African Americans and His-
panics, though non-Hispanic whites, 
especially older women, are highest in 
the number affected.157,158
Macular degeneration causes poor cen-
tral vision and blindness (Fig. 20-14).159 
Types include dry atrophic (more com-
mon but less severe) and wet exuda-
tive, or neovascular. Drusen may be 
hard and sharply defined, or soft and 
confluent with altered pigmentation 
(see p. 285).
F I G U R E  2 0 - 1 4 .  Age-related 
macular degeneration and drusen.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
993
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Test hearing by occluding one ear and using the whispered voice technique or 
an audioscope. Be sure to inspect the ear canals for cerumen because removal 
can quickly improve hearing. Asking if hearing loss is present is an effective 
screening method. Proceed to audiometry for those saying yes; check acuity to 
whispered voice for saying no.84
Examine the oral cavity for odor, appearance of the gingival mucosa, any caries, 
mobility of the teeth, and quantity of saliva. Inspect closely for lesions on any of 
the mucosal surfaces. Ask the patient to remove dentures so that you can check 
the gums for denture sores.
Continue with your usual examination of the thyroid gland and lymph nodes.
Thorax and Lungs. Complete the usual examination, observing for subtle 
signs of changes in pulmonary function.
Cardiovascular System. Review your ﬁndings from measurement of the 
blood pressure and heart rate.
Begin by inspecting the jugular venous pressure. Palpate the carotid upstrokes 
and auscultate for carotid bruits.
See techniques for testing hearing, 
pp. 242–248. 
Malodor points to poor oral hygiene, 
periodontitis, and caries. Gingivitis 
accompanies periodontal disease. 
Dental plaque and cavitation may 
cause caries. For increased tooth 
mobility from abscesses or advanced 
caries, consider removal to prevent 
aspiration. Decreased salivation 
results from medication effects, radia-
tion, Sjögren syndrome, or dehydra-
tion. Oral tumors can cause lesions, 
usually on the lateral margins of the 
tongue and floor of the mouth.160,161
Increased anteroposterior diameter, 
purse-lipped breathing, and dyspnea 
with talking or minimal exertion suggest 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
There is considerable overlap of asthma 
and COPD in older adults, heralded by 
nonspecific symptoms like dyspnea, 
cough, wheezing, and nocturnal onset. 
Proceed to objective testing with spi-
rometry, which most tolerate well.162
Isolated systolic hypertension and a 
widened PP are cardiac risk factors, 
prompting a search for left ventricular 
hypertrophy (LVH). 
A tortuous atherosclerotic aorta can 
raise pressure in the left jugular veins 
by impairing emptying into the right 
atrium. A tortuous aorta can also 
cause kinking of the carotid artery 
low in the neck on the right, chiefly in 
women with hypertension, which can 
be mistaken for a carotid aneurysm. 
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
In older adults, common causes of 
hyperthyroidism are Graves disease 
and toxic multinodular goiter. Causes 
of hypothyroidism include autoim-
mune thyroiditis, followed by drugs, 
neck radiotherapy, thyroidectomy, or 
radioiodine ablation.24
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
994 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Assess the point of maximal impulse (PMI), then auscultate S1 and S2. Listen also 
for the extra sounds of S3 and S4.
Beginning in the second right interspace, listen for cardiac murmurs in all areas 
of auscultation (see pp. 393–397). Describe the timing, shape, location of maxi-
mal intensity, radiation, intensity, pitch, and quality of each murmur you detect.
Breasts and Axillae. Palpate the breasts carefully for lumps or masses. 
Include palpation of the tail of Spence that extends into the axilla. Examine the 
axillae for lymphadenopathy. Note any scaly, vesicular ulcerated lesions on or 
near the nipple.
Abdomen. Inspect the abdomen for masses or visible pulsations. Auscultate 
for bruits over the aorta and the renal and femoral arteries. Palpate to the right 
and left of the midline for aortic pulsations. Try to assess the width of the aorta 
by pressing more deeply on each of its lateral margins (see p. 483).
Peripheral Vascular System. Carefully palpate the brachial, radial, 
femoral, popliteal, and pedal pulses.
Diminished or absent pulses are present in peripheral arterial disease (PAD). Con-
ﬁrm your ﬁndings with an ofﬁce ankle-brachial index (ABI); if <0.9, the ABI has 
a sensitivity of 70% and speciﬁcity of 90%. In patients with PAD, 30% to 60% 
report no leg symptoms.167
Female Genitalia and Pelvic Examination. Take the time to explain 
your plans for the examination and arrange for careful patient positioning.168 
You may need help from an assistant to move the older woman onto the examining 
A sustained PMI is present in LVH; a dif-
fuse PMI and an S3 signal left ventricular 
dilatation from heart failure or cardio-
myopathy (see pp. 385–388).163 An S4 
often accompanies hypertension. 
A systolic crescendo–decrescendo 
murmur in the second right interspace 
suggests aortic sclerosis or aortic ste-
nosis, seen respectively in up to 40% 
and 2% to 3% of community-dwelling 
older adults. Both are associated with 
an increased risk of cardiovascular  
disease and death.164,165
A harsh holosystolic murmur at the 
apex radiating to the axilla suggests 
mitral regurgitation, the most com-
mon murmur in older adults. 
Any lumps or masses in older women, 
and, more rarely, in older men, man-
date further investigation for possible 
breast cancer. 
Paget disease with eczematoid scaling 
of the nipple is uncommon, but peaks 
between the ages of 50 and 60 years.166
Abdominal bruits are suspicious for 
atherosclerotic vascular disease.
A widened aorta of ≥3 cm and pulsatile 
mass occur in abdominal aortic aneu-
rysm, especially in older male smokers.
See Table 12-3, Using the Ankle-
Brachial Index, p. 536.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Carotid bruits can occur in aortic ste-
nosis. The presence of bruits from 
carotid stenosis increases risk of  
ipsilateral stroke. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
995
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
table, then into the lithotomy position. Raising the head of the table may make 
her more comfortable. For the woman with arthritis or spinal deformities who 
cannot ﬂex her hips or knees, an assistant can gently raise and support the legs, 
or help the woman into the left lateral position.
Inspect the vulva for changes related to menopause such as thinning of the skin, 
loss of pubic hair, and decreased distensibility of the introitus. Identify any labial 
masses. Bluish swellings may be varicosities. Bulging of the anterior vaginal wall 
below the urethra may be an urethrocele or urethral diverticulum.
Inspect for any vulvar erythema.
Inspect the urethra for caruncles, or prolapse of ﬂeshy erythematous mucosal 
tissue at the urethral meatus. Note any enlargement of the clitoris.
Spread the labia, press downward on the introitus to relax the levator muscles, and 
gently insert the speculum after moistening it with warm water or a water-soluble 
lubricant. If you ﬁnd severe vaginal atrophy, a gaping introitus, or an introital stric-
ture from estrogen loss, you will need to change the size of the speculum.
Inspect the vaginal walls, which may be atrophic, and the cervix. Note any thin 
cervical mucus or vaginal or cervical discharge.
If indicated, use an endocervical brush (or less commonly, a wooden spatula) to 
obtain endocervical cells for the Pap smear. Consider using a blind swab if the 
atrophic vagina is too small.
After removing the speculum, ask the patient to bear down to detect uterine 
prolapse or a cystocele, urethrocele, or rectocele.
Perform the bimanual examination. Check the motion of the cervix and palpate 
for any uterine or adnexal masses.
Benign masses include condylomata, 
fibromas, leiomyomas, and sebaceous 
cysts. See Table 14-2, Bulges and 
Swellings of the Vulva, Vagina, and 
Urethra, p. 597.
Erythema with satellite lesions results 
from Candida infection; erythema 
with ulceration or a necrotic center is 
suspicious for vulvar carcinoma. Multi-
focal reddened lesions with white 
scaling plaques occur in extramam-
mary Paget disease, a form of intraepi-
thelial adenocarcinoma.
Clitoral enlargement may accompany 
androgen-producing tumors and use 
of androgen creams.
The thin patchy atrophic white 
plaques of lichen sclerosus are more 
common in postmenopausal women 
and may be precancerous.169
Estrogen-stimulated cervical mucus with 
ferning is seen in use of hormone 
replacement therapy, endometrial hyper-
plasia, and estrogen-producing tumors. 
Discharge may accompany vaginitis 
or cervicitis. See Table 14-3, Vaginal 
Discharge, p. 598. 
Current USPSTF recommendations are 
to discontinue screening in low-risk 
women >age 65 years if adequate 
prior screening has been negative.170
See Table 14-7, Positions of the 
Uterus, p. 601, and Table 14-8, Abnor-
malities of the Uterus, p. 602.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
Mobility of the cervix is restricted with 
inflammation, malignancy, or surgical 
adhesion. Enlarging uterine fibroids, or 
leiomyomas, can be normal or malig-
nant leiomyosarcoma; ovarian masses or 
enlargement are seen in ovarian cancer. 
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
996 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Perform the rectovaginal examination if indicated. Assess for uterine and adnexal 
irregularities through the anterior rectal wall, and check for rectal masses. 
Change gloves after the bimanual examination so that no blood is present on 
your gloves when you obtain the stool sample.
Male Genitalia and Prostate. Examine the penis, retracting the 
foreskin, if present. Examine the scrotum, testes, and epididymis.
Proceed with the rectal examination. Assess rectal tone. Palpate for any rectal 
masses or nodularity or masses of the prostate. The anterior and central lobes 
of the prostate are inaccessible to palpation, which limits your ability to detect 
prostate enlargement or malignancy.
Musculoskeletal System. Your evaluation of this system began with leg 
mobility testing during the 10-Minute Geriatric Screener, p. 986, at the outset of 
the visit. Leg mobility is routinely tested by the “Timed Get up and Go,” or TUG, 
test for gait and balance, an excellent screen for risk of falling. Ask the patient to 
get up from a chair, walk 10 feet, turn, and return to the chair. Older adults 
should complete this test in 10 seconds.
If the patient has joint deformities, deﬁcits in mobility, pain with movement, or 
a delayed “get up and go” perform a more thorough examination of individual 
joints and a more comprehensive neurologic examination.
A uterus that is enlarged, fixed, or 
irregular may have adhesions or con-
tain a malignancy. Rectal masses are 
found in colorectal cancer. 
Findings include smegma, penile 
cancer, and scrotal hydroceles.
A loss of rectal tone can result in fecal 
incontinence. Rectal masses suggest 
colorectal cancer. Rule out prostate 
cancer if nodules or masses are pres-
ent. See discussion of prostate cancer 
screening on pp. 612–615.
Look for degenerative joint changes in 
osteoarthritis and joint inflammation 
from rheumatoid or gouty arthritis.
See Chapter 16, The Musculoskeletal 
System; see Tables 16-1 to 16-10,  
pp. 696–707. 
Timed Get Up and Go Test
Performed with patient wearing regular footwear, using usual walking aid if 
needed, and sitting back in a chair with armrest.
On the word, “Go,” the patient is asked to do the following:
1. Stand up from the arm chair
2. Walk 3 m (in a line)
3. Turn
4. Walk back to chair
5. Sit down
Time the second eﬀort.
Observe patient for postural stability, steppage, stride length, and sway.
Scoring:
● Normal: completes task in <10 s
● Abnormal: completes task in >20 s
Low scores correlate with good functional independence; high scores correlate 
with poor functional independence and higher risk of falls.
Reproduced from: Get-up and Go Test. In: Mathias S, Nayak USL, Isaacs B. “Balance in elderly patient” 
The “Get Up and Go” Test. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 1986;67:387; Podsiadlo D, Richardson S. The Timed 
“Up and Go”: A test of basic functional mobility for frail elderly persons. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1991;39:142.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
997
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Nervous System. As with the musculoskeletal examination, your 
evaluation began with the 10-Minute Geriatric Screener (p. 986). Carefully assess 
memory and affect.
Pay close attention to gait and balance, particularly standing balance; timed 
10-foot walk; stride characteristics like width, pace, and length of stride; and 
careful turning. A recent study of neurologic versus non-neurologic (primarily 
hip and knee orthopedic) gait disorders showed that neurologic disorders like 
parkinsonian; sensory ataxic; spastic; higher level gait; and, particularly, multiple 
neurologic gait disorders tripled the risk for recurrent falls.171 Investigators are 
looking at the neurobiology of gait disorders as markers of preclinical dementia 
and other neurologic conditions that may lead to earlier diagnosis and new pre-
ventive strategies.172
When gait abnormalities are detected, pursue a more detailed neurologic exam-
ination.173,174 Distinguishing neurologic changes of aging from abnormal ﬁnd-
ings is challenging, as neurologic abnormalities without identiﬁable disease are 
common in the older population and increase with age, occurring in up to 50% 
of older adults.175 Examples of age-related abnormalities include unequal pupil 
size, decreased arm swing and spontaneous movements, increased leg rigidity 
and abnormal gait, presence of the snout and grasp reﬂexes, and decreased toe 
vibratory sense.
Examine for evidence of Tremor, Rigidity, Akinesia, and Postural instability, or 
TRAP, which are several of the most common features of Parkinson disease.176 
Also look for bradykinesia, the most characteristic clinical sign, and micro-
graphia, shufﬂing “freezing” gait, and difﬁculty rising from a chair.
Learn to distinguish delirium from 
depression and dementia (Table 20-2, 
p. 1001). Search carefully for underly-
ing causes.105,106 See Table 20-3, 
Screening for Dementia: The Mini-Cog, 
p. 1002 and Table 20-4, The Montreal 
Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), p. 1003. 
Abnormalities of gait and balance, 
especially widening of base, slowing 
and lengthening of stride, and diffi-
culty turning, are correlated with risk 
for falls.135,138
These findings are seen in Parkinson 
disease, found in ∼60,000 new cases a 
year and affecting about 1 million 
people in the United States.177 Tremor 
is slow frequency, occurs at rest, has a 
“pill-rolling” quality, and is aggra-
vated by stress and inhibited during 
sleep or movement. Prodromal non-
motor symptoms including depres-
sion, rapid eye movement behavior 
disorder, and daytime sleepiness are 
now being identified.178,179
Essential tremor is bilateral and 
symmetric, with a positive family 
history and commonly diminished  
by alcohol.
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
998 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
Note that initially you may use sentences to describe your ﬁndings; later you will 
use phrases. The style below contains phrases appropriate for most write-ups. As 
you read through this physical examination, you will notice some atypical ﬁnd-
ings. Try to test yourself. See if you can interpret these ﬁndings in the context of 
all you have learned about the examination of the older adult.
Recording Your Findings
Recording the Physical Examination— 
The Older Adult
Mr. J is an older adult who appears healthy but overweight, with good muscle bulk 
and tone. He is alert and interactive, with good recall of his life history. He is 
accompanied by his son.
Vital Signs: Ht (without shoes) 5′ 10′′. Wt (dressed) 195 lbs. BMI 28. BP 145/88 
right arm, supine; 154/94 left arm, supine. Heart rate (HR) 98 and regular.  
Respiratory rate (RR) 18. Temperature (oral) 98.6°F.
10-Minute Geriatric Screener (see p. 986)
Vision: Patient reports diﬃculty reading. Visual acuity 20/60 on Snellen chart.
Hearing: Cannot hear whispered voice in either ear. Cannot hear 1,000 or 2,000 Hz 
with audioscope in either ear.
Leg Mobility: Able to walk 10 feet briskly, turn, walk back to chair, and sit down 
in 9 seconds.
Urinary Incontinence: Has lost urine and gotten wet on 20 separate days.
Nutrition: Has lost 15 lbs over the past 6 months without trying.
Memory: Can remember three items after 1 minute.
Depression: Does not often feel sad or depressed.
Physical Disability: Can walk fast but cannot ride a bicycle. Can do moderate 
but not heavy work around the house. Can go shopping for groceries or clothes. 
Can get to places out of walking distance. Can bathe each day without diﬃculty. 
Can dress, including buttoning and zipping, and can put on shoes.
Physical Examination
Skin. Warm and moist. Nails without clubbing or cyanosis. Hair thinning at 
crown.
Head, Eyes, Ears, Nose, Throat (HEENT). Scalp without lesions. Skull NC/AT. Con-
junctiva pink, sclera muddy. Pupils 2 mm constricting to 1 mm, round, regular, 
Further evaluation for glasses and 
possibly a hearing aid is needed. 
Further evaluation for incontinence, 
including “DIAPERS” assessment (see 
p. 987), prostate examination, and 
postvoid residual, which is normally 
≤50 mL (requires bladder scan or  
catheterization) is needed. 
Evaluate and monitor weight loss. 
Needs nutritional screen, p. 141. 
Consider an exercise regimen with 
strength training. 
(continued )
EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
999
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
Recording the Physical Examination— 
The Older Adult (continued )
equally reactive to light and accommodation. Extraocular movements intact. 
Disc margins sharp, without hemorrhages or exudates. Mild arteriolar narrow-
ing. TMs with good cone of light. Weber midline. AC ≥ BC. Nasal mucosa pink. 
No sinus tenderness. Oral mucosa pink. Dentition fair. Caries present. Tongue 
midline, slight beefy redness. Pharynx without exudates.
Neck. Supple. Trachea midline. Thyroid lobes slightly enlarged, no nodules.
Lymph Nodes. No cervical, axillary, epitrochlear, or inguinal lymph nodes.
Thorax and Lungs. Thorax symmetric. Kyphosis noted. Lungs resonant with good 
excursion. Breath sounds vesicular. Diaphragms descend 4 cm bilaterally.
Cardiovascular. JVP 6 cm above the left atrium. Carotid upstrokes brisk, with-
out bruits. PMI tapping, in the 5th ICS, 9 cm lateral to the midsternal line. II/VI 
harsh holosystolic murmur at the apex, radiating to the axilla. No S3, S4, or other 
murmurs.
Abdomen. Scaphoid, with active bowel sounds. Soft, nontender. No masses or 
hepatosplenomegaly. Liver span 7 cm in right midclavicular line; edge smooth 
and palpable at the RCM. No CVAT.
Genitourinary. Circumcised male. No penile lesions. Testes descended bilater-
ally, smooth without masses or tenderness.
Rectal. Good rectal sphincter tone. Rectal vault without masses. Stool brown, 
negative for occult blood.
Extremities. Warm and without edema. Calves supple.
Peripheral Vascular. Pulses 2+ and symmetric.
Musculoskeletal. Mild degenerative changes at the knees, with quadriceps wast-
ing. Good range of motion in all joints.
Neurological. Oriented to person, place, and time. Montreal Cognitive Assess-
ment (MoCA): score 29. Cranial nerves II–XII intact. Motor: Decreased quadriceps 
bulk. Tone intact. Strength 4/5 throughout. RAMs, ﬁnger-to-nose intact. Gait with 
widened base. Sensation intact to pinprick, light touch, position, and vibration. 
Romberg negative. Reﬂexes 2+ and symmetric, with plantar response downgoing.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
1000 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
1000 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 20-1 Interviewing Older Adults: Enhancing 
Culturally Appropriate Care
Cultural Dimension
Interview
Cultural Identity of the 
Individual
Where are you and your family from?
What is your ancestry?
Are there cultural differences between you and your parents or you and your signiﬁcant 
other?
Do you feel a strong connection to any groups of people? If so, whom?
What foods do you eat?
What holidays do you celebrate?
What languages do you speak?
With whom do you speak these languages?
What languages would you like to speak with me?
What types of activities do you enjoy?
What are your sources for news and entertainment?
Has this changed over time?
Cultural Explanations of the 
Individual’s Illness
Do you or anyone else have a name for the problem you’re having now?
Why do you think it’s happening to you?
What will make it better or worse?
When did it start and when do you think you’ll get better?
Has anyone else you know had this problem?
What activities has this problem stopped you from doing that you, your family, or your 
friends expect?
Who else have you seen for help with this problem?
Should I talk to anyone else you trust to help you with this problem?
Cultural Factors Related to 
Psychological Environment 
and Levels of Functioning
Who lives at home with you?
Can they help with this problem?
Who else can help you?
Is anything going on to make this problem better or worse?
How has this problem affected your life?
Is it preventing you from working?
Moving, grooming, feeding, or sleeping?
Do people close to you understand how you feel?
Cultural Elements of the 
Clinician–Patient 
Relationship
Do you think your friends or family would be upset if you spoke to me about the 
problem?
What can I do to make you feel more comfortable?
How often can you see me?
Do you have any wishes for or concerns about treatment?
What are your thoughts about medications?
Can I share your answers with anyone else you trust?
Source: Aggarwal NK. Reassessing cultural evaluations in geriatrics: insights from cultural psychiatry. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2010;58:2191.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
1001
Table 20-2 Delirium and Dementia
Delirium and dementia are common and important disorders that affect multiple aspects of mental status. Both have many 
possible causes. Some clinical features of these two conditions and their effects on mental status are compared below. A delirium 
may be superimposed on dementia.
Delirium
Dementia
Clinical Features
Onset
Acute
Insidious
Course
Fluctuating, with lucid intervals; worse at 
night
Slowly progressive
Duration
Hours to weeks
Months to years
Sleep/Wake Cycle
Always disrupted
Sleep fragmented
General Clinical Illness or 
Drug Toxicity
Either or both present
Often absent, especially in Alzheimer 
disease
Mental Status
Level of Consciousness
Disturbed. Person less alert to clearly aware 
of the environment and less able to focus, 
sustain, or shift attention
Usually normal until late in the course of 
the illness
Behavior
Activity often abnormally decreased 
(somnolence) or increased (agitation, 
hypervigilance)
Normal to slow; may become inappropriate
Speech
May be hesitant, slow or rapid, incoherent
Difﬁculty in ﬁnding words, aphasia
Mood
Fluctuating, labile, from fearful or irritable 
to normal or depressed
Often ﬂat, depressed
Thought Processes
Disorganized, may be incoherent
Impoverished. Speech gives little 
information
Thought Content
Delusions common, often transient
Delusions may occur
Perceptions
Illusions, hallucinations, most often visual
Hallucinations may occur
Judgment
Impaired, often to a varying degree
Increasingly impaired over the course of 
the illness
Orientation
Usually disoriented, especially for time. A 
known place may seem unfamiliar.
Fairly well maintained, but becomes 
impaired in the later stages of illness
Attention
Fluctuates, with inattention. Person easily 
distracted, unable to concentrate on 
selected tasks
Usually unaffected until late in the illness
Memory
Immediate and recent memory impaired
Recent memory and new learning 
especially impaired
Examples of Cause
Delirium tremens (due to withdrawal from 
alcohol)
Uremia
Acute hepatic failure
Acute cerebral vasculitis
Atropine poisoning
Reversible: Vitamin B12 deﬁciency, thyroid 
disorders
Irreversible: Alzheimer disease, vascular 
dementia (from multiple infarcts), 
dementia due to head trauma
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
1002 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
1002 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
Table 20-3 Screening for Dementia: The Mini-Cog
Administration
The test is administered as follows:
1. Instruct the patient to listen carefully to and remember three unrelated words and then to repeat the words.
2.  Instruct the patient to draw the face of a clock, either on a blank sheet of paper or on a sheet with the clock circle already 
drawn on the page. After the patient puts the numbers on the clock face, ask him or her to draw the hands of the clock to 
read a speciﬁc time.
3. Ask the patient to repeat the three previously stated words.
Scoring
Give 1 point for each recalled word after the clock drawing test (CDT) distractor.
Patients recalling none of the three words are classiﬁed as demented (Score = 0).
Patients recalling all three words are classiﬁed as nondemented (Score = 3).
Patients with intermediate word recall of one to two words are classiﬁed based on the CDT (Abnormal = demented; Normal = 
nondemented).
Note: The CDT is considered normal if all numbers are present in the correct sequence and position, and the hands readably 
display the requested time.
3-Item Recall = 1–2
NONDEMENTED
DEMENTED
CDT Abnormal
CDT Normal
MINI-COG
3-Item Recall = 3
3-Item Recall = 0
Source: From Borson S, Scanlan J, Brush M, et al. The Mini-Cog: a cognitive ‘vital signs’ measure for dementia screening in multi-lingual elderly. Int J Geriatr 
Psychiatry. 2000;15:1021. Copyright John Wiley & Sons Limited.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
1003
Table 20-4  Screening for Dementia: The Montreal  
Cognitive Assessment (MoCA)
B
1
4
A
2
C
E
3
5
D
Begin
End
Copy 
cube
Draw Clock (Ten past eight)
(3 points)
SCORE
Read list of words, subject must repeat them. 
Do 2 trials, even if 1st trial is successful. 
Do a recall after 5 minutes.
Serial 7 subtraction starting at 100
1st trial
2nd trial
ROSE
CHAIR
RED
SPOON
HOUSE
Contour
Hands
Numbers
Read list of digits (1 digit /sec.). 
Subject has to repeat them in the forward order
 
Subject has to repeat them inthe backward order
[   ]
[   ]
[   ]
[   ]
[   ]
[   ]
[   ]
[   ]
[   ]  3  2  7  4 5
[   ]    2  7  4 
Read list of letters. The subject must point with his finger at each letter C.  No points if ≥ 2 errors.
[   ]  FBCAMNCCJKLBCFCKDECCJAMOFA
[   ] 95 
[   ] 86 
[   ] 76 
[   ] 65 
[   ] 45
[   ] Date 
[   ] Month 
[   ] Year 
[   ] Day 
[   ] Place 
[   ] City
4 or 5 correct subtractions: 3 pts, 2 or 3 correct: 2pts, 1 correct: 1pt,  0 correct: 0pt
Repeat : I only know that Judy is the one to help today. [   ]
 
The cat always hid under the couch when dogs were in the room. [   ]
Fluency / Name maximum number of words in one minute that begin with the letter F   [   ] 
(N ≥ 11 words)
ROSE
[   ]
CHAIR
[   ]
RED
[   ]
SPOON
[   ]
HOUSE
[   ]
Similarity between e.g. banana - orange = fruit 
 [   ] train - bicyle 
[   ] watch - ruler
Has to recall words
WITH NO CUE
Category cue
Multiple choice cue
Points for 
UNCUED
recall only
Normal ≥ 26 / 30
TOTAL
Add 1 point if ≤ 12 yr edu
Administered by: 
/30
/6
/5
/2
/1
/2
/3
/1
/2
/3
No 
points
/5
NAME:
Education:
Sex:
Date of birth:
DATE:
VISUOSPATIAL / EXECUTIVE
NAMING
MEMORY
ATTENTION
LANGUAGE
ABSTRACTION
DELAYED RECALL
ORIENTATION
Optional
Source: © Z. Nasreddine MD. Reproduced with permission. Copies are available at www.mocatest.org.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
1004 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
References
 1. Administration on Aging. Census data and population estimates. 
2013. Available at http://www.aoa.gov/AoARoot/Aging_Statistics/
Census_Population/Index.aspx. Accessed May 13, 2015.
 2. Administration on Aging. A proﬁle of older Americans: 2013. 
Available at http://www.aoa.gov/AoARoot/Aging_Statistics/ 
Proﬁle/2013/docs/2013proﬁle_508.pdf. Accessed May 13, 2015.
 3. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. Health, United States, 2013. DHHS 
Publication No. 2014 –1232, 2013. Available at http://www.cdc.
gov/nchs/data/hus/hus13.pdf#018. Accessed August 5, 2015.
 4. Administration on Aging. Census data and population estimates, 
2013. Available at http://www.aoa.gov/AoARoot/Aging_Statistics/
Census_Population/Index.aspx. Accessed May 13, 2015.
 5. Federal Interagency Forum on Aging Related Statistics. Older 
Americans 2012, Key Indicators of Well Being. See Indicators 16, 
Chronic Health Conditions (p. 27); 18, Respondent Assessed 
Health Statistics (p. 29); 20, Functional Limitations (p. 32); and 
45, Obesity (p. 41). Federal Interagency Forum on Aging-Related 
Statistics. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce. 
June 2012. Available at http://agingstats.gov/agingstatsdotnet/
Main_Site/Data/2012_Documents/Docs/EntireChartbook.pdf. 
Accessed August 5, 2015.
 6. Sabia S, Singh-Manoux A, Hagger-Johnson G, et al. Inﬂuence of 
individual and combined healthy behaviours on successful aging. 
CMAJ. 2012;184:1985.
 7. Davy C, Bleasel J, Liu H, et al. Effectiveness of chronic care models: 
opportunities for improving healthcare practice and health out-
comes: a systematic review. BMC Health Serv Res. 2015;15:194.
 8. Partnership for Health in Aging Workgroup on Interdisciplinary 
Team Training in Geriatrics. Position statement on interdisciplin-
ary team training in geriatrics: an essential component of quality 
health care for older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2014;62:961.
 9. Bodenheimer T, Wagner EH, Brumbach K. Improving primary 
care for patients with chronic illness. JAMA. 2002;288:1775.
 10. Institute of Medicine. Crossing The Quality Chasm: A New Health 
System For The 21st Century. Washington DC: National Academy 
Press; 2011.
 11. Reuben DB, Tinetti ME. Goal-oriented patient care—an alterna-
tive health outcome paradigm. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:777.
 12. Carlson C, Merel SE, Yukawa M. Geriatric syndromes and geriat-
ric assessment for the generalist. Med Clin N Am. 2015;99:263.
 13. Sebastiani P, Bae H, Sun FX, et al. Meta-analysis of genetic variants 
associated with human exceptional longevity. Aging. 2014;5:653.
 14. Sebastiani P, Sun FX, Andersen SL, et al. Families enriched for 
exceptional longevity also have increased health-span: ﬁndings 
from the Long Life Family Study. Front Public Health. 2013;1:38.
 15. Kane EL, Ouslander JG, Abrass IB, et al. Ch 3, Evaluating the geri-
atric patient, in Essentials of Clinical Geriatrics. 7th ed. New York: 
McGraw Hill Medical; 2013.
 16. Morley JE, Tolsen DT. Ch 3, The physiology of aging. In: Vellas BJ, 
Pathy MS, Sinclair A, et al (eds). Pathy’s Principles and Practice of 
Geriatric Medicine. 5th ed. Oxford: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.; 
2012:33.
 17. Morley JE, Tolsen DT. Ch 9, Sexuality and aging. In: Vellas BJ, 
Pathy MS, Sinclair A, et al (eds). Pathy’s Principles and Practice of 
Geriatric Medicine. 5th ed. Oxford: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.; 
2012:93.
 18. Hollingsworth JM, Wilt TJ. Lower urinary tract symptoms in men. 
BMJ. 2014;14;349.
 19. Evans WJ. Sarcopenia should reﬂect the contribution of age-asso-
ciated changes in skeletal muscle to risk of morbidity and mortal-
ity in elderly people. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2015;16:5464.
 20. Demonet J-F, Celsis P. Ch 5, Aging of the brain. In: Vellas BJ, ed. 
Pathy’s Principles and Practice of Geriatric Medicine. 5th ed. John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc.; 2012:49.
 21. Iowa Geriatric Education Center, University of Iowa. Geriatric 
Assessment Tools. Available at https://www.healthcare.uiowa.
edu/igec/tools/. Accessed August 9, 2015.
 22. Rosen SL, Reuben DB. Geriatric assessment tools. Mt Sinai J Med. 
2011;78:489.
 23. Bhatia LC, Naik RH. Clinical proﬁle of acute myocardial infarc-
tion in elderly patients. Cardiovasc Dis Res. 2013;4:107.
 24. Papaleontiou M, Haymart MR. Approach to and treatment of thy-
roid disorders in the elderly. Med Clin North Am. 2012;96:297.
 25. Hogue JD. Ofﬁce evaluation of dizziness. Prim Care. 2015;42:249.
 26. de Moraes SA, Soares WJ, Ferriolli E, et al. Prevalence and cor-
relates of dizziness in community-dwelling older people: a cross 
sectional population based study. BMC Geriatr. 2013;13:4.
 27. Lo AX, Harada CN. Geriatric dizziness: evolving diagnostic and 
therapeutic approaches for the emergency department. Clin Geriatr 
Med. 2013;29:181.
 28. Koroukian SM, Warner DF, Owusu C, et al. Multimorbidity rede-
ﬁned: prospective health outcomes and the cumulative effect of 
co-occurring conditions. Prev Chronic Dis. 2015;12:E55.
 29. Strandberg TE, Pitkälä KH, Tilvis RS, et al. Geriatric syndromes–
vascular disorders? Ann Med. 2013;45:265.
 30. Montlahuc C, Soumaré A, Dufouil C, et al. Self-rated health and 
risk of incident dementia: A community-based elderly cohort, the 
3C Study. Neurology. 2011;77:1457.
 31. Mendonça MD, Alves L, Bugalho P. From subjective cognitive 
complaints to dementia: who is at risk?: A systematic review. Am 
J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2015pii: 1533317515592331.
 32. Fernández-Ruiz M, Guerra-Vales JM, Trincado R, et al. The abil-
ity of self-rated health to predict mortality among community-
dwelling elderly individuals differs according to the speciﬁc 
cause of death: data from the NEDICES cohort. Gerontology. 
2013;59:368.
 33. Vogelsang EM. Self-rated health changes and oldest-old mortality. 
J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 2014;69:612.
 34. Iecovich E, Biderman A. Concordance between self-reported and 
physician-reported chronic co-morbidity among disabled older 
adults. Can J Aging. 2013;32:287.
 35. Yeo G. How will the U.S. healthcare system meet the challenge 
of the ethnogeriatric imperative? J Am Geriatr Soc. 2009;57: 
1278.
 36. Jackson CS, Gracia JN. Addressing health and health-care dis-
parities: the role of a diverse workforce and the social determi-
nants of health. Pub Health Rep. 2014;129:57.
 37. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Health Disparities 
and Inequalities Report 2013. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/
minorityhealth/CHDIReport.html. Accessed August 11, 2015.
 38. August KJ, Sorkin DH. Racial and ethnic disparities in indicators 
of physical health status: do they still exist throughout late life?  
J Am Geriatr Soc. 2010;58:2009.
 39. Ng JH, Bierman AS, Elliott MN, et al. Beyond black and white: 
race/ethnicity and health status among older adults. Am J Manag 
Care. 2014;20:239.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
1005
REFERENCES
 40. Stanford School of Medicine. Ethnogeriatrics. Available at http://
geriatrics.stanford.edu/. Accessed August 11, 2015.
 41. Ofﬁce of Minority Health, Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices. Think Cultural Health. Available at https://www.thinkcul-
turalhealth.hhs.gov/index.asp. Accessed August 11, 2015.
 42. Aggarwal NK, Glass A, Tirado A, et al. The development of the 
DSM-5 Cultural Formulation Interview-Fidelity Instrument (CFI-
FI): a pilot study. J Health Care Poor Underserved. 2014;25:1397.
 43. Kobylarz FA, Heath JM, Lide RC. The ETHNIC(S) mnemonic: a 
clinical tool for ethnogeriatric education. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2002; 
50:1852.
 44. Aggarwal NK. Reassessing cultural evaluations in geriatrics: 
insights from cultural psychiatry. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2010;58:2191.
 45. Stanford Geriatrics Education Center. “Test your Ethnogeriatric 
IQ.” Available at http://sgec.stanford.edu/resources/training/iq.
html. Accessed August 11, 2015.
 46. Stanford Geriatric Education Center. Modules—EthnoGeriatrics 
Overview. Available at https://geriatrics.stanford.edu/culturemed.
html. Accessed August 11, 2015.
 47. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. Percent of U.S. adults 55 and over 
with chronic conditions (2009). Available at http://www.cdc.gov/
nchs/health_policy/adult_chronic_conditions.htm. Accessed 
August 12, 2015.
 48. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. Special feature on prescription 
drugs, p. 20; see Figure 20, Prescription drug use in the past 30 
days, p. 21, in Health, United States, 2013. DHHS Publication 
No. 2014–1232, 2013. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/
data/hus/hus13.pdf#018. Accessed August 12, 2015.
 49. Wang YP, Andrade LH. Epidemiology of alcohol and drug use in 
the elderly. Curr Opin Psychiatry. 2013;26:343.
 50. Rodriguez JC, Dzierzewski JM, Alessi CA. Sleep problems in the 
elderly. Med Clin North Am. 2015;99:431.
 51. Bloom HG, Ahmed I, Alessi CA, et al. Evidence-based recommen-
dations for the assessment and management of sleep disorders in 
older persons. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2009;57:761.
 52. Wooten JM. Rules for improving pharmacotherapy in older adult 
patients: part 1 (rules 1–5). South Med J. 2015;108:97.
 53. Wooten JM. Rules for improving pharmacotherapy in older adult 
patients: part 2 (rules 6–10). South Med J. 2015;108:145.
 54. American Geriatrics Society 2012 Beers Criteria Update Expert 
Panel. American Geriatrics Society updated Beers criteria for 
potentially inappropriate medication use in older adults. J Am 
Geriatr Soc. 2012;60:616.
 55. Reuben DB, Herr KA, Pacala JT, et al. Geriatrics at your Fingertips. 
16th ed., p. 227. New York, NY: American Geriatrics Society; 2014.
 56. American Geriatrics Society Panel on the Pharmacologic Manage-
ment of Persistent Pain in Older Persons. Pharmacologic manage-
ment of persistent pain in older persons. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2009; 
57:1331.
 57. Budnitz DS, Lovegrove MC, Shehab N, et al. Emergency hospital-
izations for adverse drug events in older Americans. N Engl J Med. 
2011;365:2002.
 58. Hadjistavropoulos T, Hadjistavropoulos HD. Pain Management for 
Older Adults: A Self-Help Guide. Washington DC: American Psy-
chological Association; 2015. Available at http://ebooks.iasp-
pain.org/pain_management_for_older_adults/. 
See 
also 
International Association for the Study of Pain eBookstore. Avail-
able at http://ebooks.iasp-pain.org/. Accessed August 13, 2015.
 59. Savage SR. Multidimensional care of chronic pain: reducing reli-
ance on opioids for relief, June 2013. Webinar–American Medical 
Association. Available at http://eo2.commpartners.com/users/
ama/session.php?id=11044. Accessed August 11, 2015.
 60. American Academy of Pain Medicine. Pain index. Pain intensity 
scales. Available at http://www.painmed.org/SOPResources/Clini-
calTools/government-websites/. Accessed August 13, 2015.
 61. Hjermstad MJ, Fayers PM, Haugen DF, et al. Studies comparing 
Numerical Rating Scales, Verbal Rating Scales, and Visual Ana-
logue Scales for assessment of pain intensity in adults: a system-
atic literature review. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2011;41:1073.
 62. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Cigarette Smoking—
United States, 2006–2008 and 2009–2010, Table 1. Prevalence of 
current smoking among persons aged 12–17 years, by selected 
characteristics—National Survey on Drug Use and Health, United 
States, 2006–2010, in CDC Health Disparities and Inequalities 
Report—United States, 2013. MMWR Suppl. 62(3):82. Available 
at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/other/su6203.pdf. Accessed 
August 13, 2015.
 63. National Institute on Aging. Age Page: Alcohol use in older peo-
ple. Available at http://www.nia.nih.gov/health/publication/ 
alcohol-use-older-people. Accessed August 13, 2015.
 64. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Binge Drinking, United 
States, 2011- Table - Prevalence, frequency, and intensity of binge-
drinking, by sex, age group, race/ethnicity, education, and disability—
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System, United States, 2011. in 
CDC Health Disparities and Inequalities Report—United States, 
2013. MMWR Suppl. 62(3):79. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/
mmwr/pdf/other/su6203.pdf. Accessed August 13, 2015.
 65. American Geriatrics Society. Alcohol use disorders in older adults. 
AGS clinical practice guidelines screening recommendation. Ann 
Long Term Care. 2006;14. Available at http://www.annalsoﬂong-
termcare.com/article/5143. Accessed August 15, 2015.
 66. Wilson SR, Knowles SB, Huang Q, et al. The prevalence of harm-
ful and hazardous alcohol consumption in older U.S. adults: data 
from the 2005–2008 National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey (NHANES). J Gen Intern Med. 2014;29:312.
 67. Bommersbach TJ, Lapid MI, Rummans TA, et al. Geriatric alcohol 
use disorder: a review for primary care physicians. Mayo Clin Proc. 
2015;90:659.
 68. Morley JE. Undernutrition in older adults. Fam Pract. 2012; 
29(Suppl 1):i89.
 69. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Pro-
motion. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Table 1, The 
national report card on healthy aging. How healthy are older adults in 
the United States, p. 15. Atlanta: Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; 
2013. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/aging/pdf/state-aging-
health-in-america-2013.pdf. Accessed August 14, 2015.
 70. Collard RM, Boter H, Schoevers RA, et al. Prevalence of frailty in 
community-dwelling older persons: a systematic review. J Am 
Geriatri Soc. 2012;60;1487.
 71. Song X, Mitnitski A, Rockwood K. Prevalence and 10-year out-
comes of frailty in older adults in relation to deﬁcit accumulation. 
J Am Geriatr Soc. 2010;58:681.
 72. Clegg A, Rogers L, Young J. Diagnostic test accuracy of simple 
instruments for identifying frailty in community-dwelling older 
people: a systematic review. Age Ageing. 2015;44:148.
 73. O’Sullivan R, Mailo K, Angeles R, et al. Advance directives: survey 
of primary care patients. Can Fam Physician. 2015;61:353.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
1006 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
 74. Torke AM, Sachs GA, Helft PR, et al. Scope and outcomes of sur-
rogate decision making among hospitalized older adults. JAMA 
Intern Med. 2014;174:370.
 75. Billings JA. The need for safeguards in advance care planning. 
J Gen Intern Med. 2012;27:595.
 76. Swetz KM, Kamal AH. In the clinic. Palliative care. Ann Intern 
Med. 2012;156:ITC2–1.
 77. Gestuvo MK. Health maintenance in older adults: combining evi-
dence and individual preferences. Mt Sinai J Med. 2012;79:560.
 78. Nicholas JA, Hall WJ. Screening and preventive services for older 
adults. Mt Sinai J Med. 2011;78:498.
 79. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Administration on 
Aging, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Centers for 
Medicare and Medicaid Services. Enhancing Use of Clinical Preventive 
Services Among Older Adults. Washington, DC: AARP; 2011. Avail-
able at http://www.cdc.gov/aging/pdf/Clinical_Preventive_Ser-
vices_Closing_the_Gap_Report.pdf. Accessed August 15, 2015.
 80. Eckstrom K, Feeny DH, Walter LC, et al. Individualizing cancer 
screening in older adults: a narrative review and framework for 
future research. J Gen Intern Med. 2013;28:292.
 81. Leipzig RM, Whitlock EP, Wolff TA, et al. Reconsidering the 
approach to prevention recommendations for older adults. Ann 
Intern Med. 2010;153:809.
 82. American Geriatrics Society Expert Panel on the Care of Older 
Adults with Multimorbidity. Patient-centered care for older adults 
with multiple chronic conditions: a stepwise approach from the 
American Geriatrics Society: American Geriatrics Society Expert 
Panel on the Care of Older Adults with Multimorbidity. J Am 
Geriatr Soc. 2012;60:1957.
 83. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Draft Recommendation 
Statement Impaired Visual Acuity in Older Adults: Screening, 
2015. Available at http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/
Page/Document/draft-recommendation-statement161/impaired-
visual-acuity-in-older-adults-screening. Accessed August 15, 
2015.
 84. Bagai A, Thavendiranathan P, Detsky AS. Does this patient have 
hearing impairment? JAMA. 2006;295:416.
 85. Hötting K, Röder B. Beneﬁcial effects of physical exercise on neu-
roplasticity and cognition. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2013;37(9 Pt B): 
2243.
 86. Buchman AS, Boyle PA, Yu L, et al. Total daily physical activity and 
the risk of AD and cognitive decline in older adults. Neurology. 
2012;78:1323.
 87. Lee L, Heckman G, Mohar FJ. Frailty: Identifying elderly patients 
at high risk of poor outcomes. Can Fam Physician. 2015;61:227.
 88. Chou CH, Hwang CL, Wu YT. Effect of exercise on physical func-
tion, daily living activities, and quality of life in the frail older 
adults: a meta-analysis. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2012;93:237.
 89. American College of Sports Medicine. Exercise is Medicine–Sum-
mary Sheet for Healthcare Providers and Healthcare Providers 
Action Guide. Available at http://www.exerciseismedicine.org/
support_page.php?p = 8. Accessed August 15, 2015.
 90. Crookham J. A guide to exercise prescription. Prim Care. 2013; 
40:801.
 91. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Preventing falls in 
older adults. Updated September 23 2013. Available at http://www.
cdc.gov/Features/OlderAmericans/. Accessed August 17, 2015.
 92. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Vaccine information 
statements. Updated August 7, 2015. Available at http://www.cdc.
gov/vaccines/hcp/vis/. Accessed August 17, 2015.
 93. Kim DK, Bridges CB, Harriman KH. Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices recommended immunization schedule 
for adults aged 19 years or older: United States, 2015. Ann Intern 
Med. 2015;162:214.
 94. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Inﬂuenza vaccina-
tion. A summary for clinicians. Updated August 7, 2015. Avail-
able at http://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/vaccination/
vax-summary.htm. Accessed August 16, 2015.
 95. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Pneumococcal vac-
cination. Who needs it? Updated June 19, 2015. Available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd-vac/pneumo/vacc-in-short.
htm. Accessed August 16, 2015.
 96. Tomczyk S, Bennett NM, Stoecker C, et al. Use of 13-valent pneu-
mococcal conjugate vaccine and 23-valent pneumococcal poly-
saccharide vaccine among adults aged > 65 years: recommendations 
of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). 
MMWR. 2014;63:822.
 97. Hales CM, Harpaz MD, Ortega-Sanchez I, et al. Update on recom-
mendations for use of Herpes Zoster vaccine. MMWR. 
2014;63:729. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/
mmwrhtml/mm6333a3.htm. Accessed August 17, 2015.
 98. Lal H, Cunningham AL, et al. Efﬁcacy of an adjuvant herpes zos-
ter subunit vaccine in older adults. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:2087.
 99. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. Updated recom-
mendations for use of Tetanus Toxoid, Reduced Diphtheria Tox-
oid, and Acellular Pertussis (Tdap) vaccine in adults aged 65 years 
and older, ACIP 2012. MMWR. 2012;61:468. Available at http://
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6125a4.htm. 
Accessed August 17, 2015.
 100. American Geriatrics Society. Ten things physicians and patients 
should question—Choosing wisely, American Board of Internal 
Medicine, 2015. Available at http://www.choosingwisely.org/soci-
eties/american-geriatrics-society/. Accessed August 18, 2015.
 101. Walter LC, Covinsky KE. Cancer screening in elderly patients—a 
framework for individualized decision making. JAMA. 2011; 
285:2750.
 102. Wilt TJ, Harris RP, Qaseem A. Screening for cancer: advice for 
high value care from the American college of physicians. Ann 
Intern Med. 2015;162:718.
 103. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Recommendations for pri-
mary care practice. Available at http://www.uspreventiveservices-
taskforce.org/Page/Name/recommendations. Accessed August 18, 
2015.
 104. Park M, Unützer J. Geriatric depression in primary care. Psych 
Clin North Am. 2011;34:469.
 105. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Draft recommendation state-
ment. Depression in adults: screening. July, 2015. Available at 
http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Document/
draft-recommendation-statement115/depression-in-adults-
screening1. Accessed August 19, 2015.
 106. Taylor WD. Depression in the elderly. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:1228.
 107. Maurer DM. Screening for depression. Am Fam Physician. 2012; 
85:139.
 108. Arean PA, Niu G. Choosing treatment for depression in older 
adults and evaluating response. Clin Geriatr Med. 2014;30:535.
 109. Lin JS, O’Connor, E, Rossom RC, et al. Screening for cognitive 
impairment in older adults: an evidence update for the U.S. Pre-
ventive Services Task Force. 2013 November. Evidence Syntheses 
No. 107. Available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK174643/. Accessed August 18, 2015.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
C H A P T E R  20 |
 
The Older Adult 
1007
REFERENCES
 110. Alzheimer’s Association. 2015 Alzheimer’s disease: facts and ﬁg-
ures. Available at http://www.alz.org/facts/#prevalence. Accessed 
August 19, 2015.
 111. Mayeux R. Early Alzheimer’s disease. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:2194.
 112. Blass DM, Rabins PV. In the clinic. Dementia. Ann Intern Med. 
2014;161:ITC-2.
 113. Marcantonio ER. In the clinic. Delirium. Ann Intern Med. 2011; 
154:ITC6–1.
 114. American Psychiatric Association. Neurocognitive disorders, in 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 5th ed. Wash-
ington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing; 2013:602.
 115. Albert MS, DeKosky ST, Dickson D, et al. The diagnosis of mild 
cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer’s disease: recommenda-
tions from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Associa-
tion workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease. 
Alzheimers Dement. 2011;7:270.
 116. Markwick A, Zamboni G, Jager CA. Proﬁles of cognitive subtest 
impairment in the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) in a 
research cohort with normal Mini-Mental State Examination 
(MMSE) scores. J Clin Experimental Neuropsychology. 2012;34:750.
 117. Peters ME, Rosenberg PB, Steinberg M, et al. Neuropsychiatric 
symptoms as risk factors for progression from CIND to dementia: 
the Cache County Study. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2013;21:1116.
 118. McKhann GM, Knopman DS, Chertkow H, et al. The diagnosis of 
dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the 
National Institute on Aging–Alzheimer’s Association workgroups 
on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. 
2011;7:263.
 119. Langa KM, Levine DA. The diagnosis and management of mild 
cognitive impairment: a clinical review. JAMA. 2014;312:2551.
 120. Borson S, Scanlan JM, Chen P, et al. The Mini-Cog as a screen for 
dementia: validation in a population-based sample. J Am Geriatr 
Soc. 2003;51:1451.
 121. Tsoi KK, Chan JY, Hirai HW, et al. Cognitive tests to detect demen-
tia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med. 
2015;175(9):1450
 122. Montreal Cognitive Assessment. 2015. Available at http://www.
mocatest.org/. Accessed August 25, 2015.
 123. Liew TM, Feng L, Gao Q, et al. Diagnostic utility of Montreal 
Cognitive Assessment in the Fifth Edition of Diagnostic and Sta-
tistical Manual of Mental Disorders: major and mild neurocogni-
tive disorders. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2015;16:144.
 124. Roalf DR, Moberg PJ, Xie SX, et al. Comparative accuracies of two 
common screening instruments for classiﬁcation of Alzheimer’s 
disease, mild cognitive impairment, and healthy aging. Alzheimers 
Demen. 2013;9:529.
 125. Rizzo M. Impaired driving from medical conditions: a 70-year-old 
man trying to decide if he should continue driving. JAMA. 2011; 
305:1018.
 126. Iverson DJ, Gronseth GS, Reger MA, et al. Practice Parameter 
update: evaluation and management of driving risk in dementia. 
Report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American 
Academy of Neurology. Neurology. 2010;74:1316.
 127. Martin AJ, Marottoli R, O’Neill D. Driving assessment for main-
taining mobility and safety in drivers with dementia. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2013;8:CD006222.
 128. Wang XM, Brisbin S, Loo T, et al. Elder abuse: an approach to 
identiﬁcation, assessment and intervention. CMAJ. 2015;187:575.
 129. Acierno R, Hernandez MA, Amstadter AB, et al. Prevalence and 
correlates of emotional, physical, sexual, and ﬁnancial abuse and 
potential neglect in the United States: the National Elder Mistreat-
ment Study. Am J Public Health. 2010;100:292.
 130. National Center of Elder Abuse, Administration on Aging. Elder 
abuse: the size of the problem. Available at http://www.ncea.aoa.
gov/Library/Data/index.aspx. Accessed August 21, 2015.
 131. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Final recommendation state-
ment. Intimate partner violence and abuse of elderly and vulner-
able Adults: screening, January 2013. Available at http://www.
uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Document/UpdateSum-
maryFinal/intimate-partner-violence-and-abuse-of-elderly-and-
vulnerable-adults-screening?ds = 1&s = elder abuse. Accessed 
August 21, 2015.
 132. Moore AA, Siu AL. Screening for common problems in ambula-
tory elderly: clinical conﬁrmation of a screening instrument. Am 
J Med. 1996;100:438.
 133. Gorina Y, Schappert S, Bercovitz A, et al. Prevalence of inconti-
nence among older Americans. National Center for Health Statis-
tics. Vital Health Stat. 2014;3(36). Available at http://www.cdc.gov/
nchs/data/series/sr_03/sr03_036.pdf. Accessed August 22, 2015.
 134. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Older adult falls. Get 
the facts. Updated July 1, 2015. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/
homeandrecreationalsafety/falls/adultfalls.html. Accessed August 
23, 2015.
 135. Panel on Prevention of Falls in Older Persons, American Geriat-
rics Society and British Geriatrics Society. Summary of the 
updated American Geriatrics Society/British Geriatrics Society 
clinical practice guideline for prevention of falls in older persons, 
2010. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2011;59:148.
 136. Stevens JA, Phelan EA. Development of STEADI: a fall prevention 
resource for health care providers. Health Promot Pract. 2013; 
14:706.
 137. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. About CDC’s STEADI 
(Stopping Elderly Accidents, Deaths, & Injuries) Tool Kit. 
Updated July 1, 2015. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/steadi/
about.html. Accessed August 22, 2015.
 138. Moyer VA; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Prevention of falls 
in community-dwelling older adults: U.S. Preventive Services Task 
Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2012;157:197.
 139. Tinetti ME, Kumar C. The patient who falls: “It’s always a trade-
off.” JAMA. 2010;303:258.
 140. Bjelakovic G, Gluud LL, Nikolova D, et al. Vitamin D supplemen-
tation for prevention of mortality in adults. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2014;1:CD007470.
 141. Kalyani RR, Stein B, Valiyil R, et al. Vitamin D treatment for the 
prevention of falls in older adults: systematic review and meta-
analysis. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2010;58:1299.
 142. Gillespie LD, Robertson MC, Gillespie WJ, et al. Interventions for 
preventing falls in older people living in the community. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2012;9:CD007146.
 143. James PA, Oparil S, Carter BL, et al. 2014 Evidence-based guide-
lines for the management of high blood pressure in adults: report 
from the panel members appointed to the eighth joint national 
committee (JNC8). JAMA. 2014;311:507.
 144. Krakoff LR, Gillespie RL, Ferdinand KC, et al. 2014 hypertension 
recommendations from the eighth joint national committee panel 
members raise concerns for elderly black and female populations. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:394.
 145. Benetos A, Rossignol P, Cherubini A, et al. Polypharmacy in the 
aging patient: management of hypertension in octogenarians. 
JAMA. 2015;314:170.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
1008 
B A T E S ’  G U I D E  T O  P H Y S I C A L  E X A M I N A T I O N  A N D  H I S T O R Y  T A K I N G
REFERENCES
 146. Bangalore S, Gong Y, Cooper-DeHoff RM, et al. 2014 Eighth Joint 
National Committee panel recommendation for blood pressure 
targets revisited: results from the INVEST study. J Am Coll Casrdiol. 
2014;64:784.
 147. Weber MA, Bakris GL, Hester A, et al. Systolic blood pressure and 
cardiovascular outcomes during treatment of hypertension. Am J 
Med. 2013;126:501.
 148. Kitzman DW, Taffet G. Kitzman DW, et al. Ch 74. Effects of aging 
on cardiovascular structure and function. In: Halter JB, Ouslander 
JG, Tinetti ME et al, eds. Hazzard’s Geriatric Medicine and Gerontol-
ogy. 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2009.
 149. Freeman R, Wieling W, Axelrod FB, et al. Consensus statement on the 
deﬁnition of orthostatic hypotension, neutrally mediated syncope 
and the postural tachycardia syndrome. Clin Auton Res. 2011;21:69.
 150. Vijayan J, Sharma VK. Neurogenic orthostatic hypotension - manage-
ment update and role of droxidopa. Ther Clin Risk Manag. 2015;8:915.
 151. Sathyapalan T, Aye MM, Atkin SL. Postural hypotension. BMJ. 2011: 
342:d3128.
 152. Perlmuter LC, Sarda G, Casavant V, et al. A review of the etiology, 
associated comorbidities, and treatment of orthostatic hypoten-
sion. Am J Ther. 2013;20:279.
 153. Wilson JF. In the clinic. Herpes zoster. Ann Intern Med. 2011;154: 
ITC3–1.
 154. Addis VM, DeVore HK, Summerﬁeld ME. Acute visual changes in 
the elderly. Clin Geriatr Med. 2013;29:165.
 155. Borooah S, Dhillon A, Dhillon B. Gradual loss of vision in adults. 
BMJ. 2015;350:h2093.
 156. Liew G, Baker ML, Wong TY, et al. Differing associations of white 
matter lesions and lacunar infarction with retinal microvascular 
signs. Int J Stroke. 2014;9:921.
 157. Wang JJ, Baker ML, Hand PJ, et al. Transient ischemic attack and 
acute ischemic stroke: associations with retinal microvascular 
signs. Stroke. 2011;42:404.
 158. Vajaranant TS, Wu S, Torres M, et al. The changing face of primary 
open-angle glaucoma in the United States: demographic and geo-
graphic changes from 2011 to 2050. Am J Ophthamol. 2012;154:303.
 159. Weinreb RN, Aung T, Medeiros FA. The pathophysiology and 
treatment of glaucoma: a review. JAMA. 2014;311:1901.
 160. Ratnapriya R, Chew EY. Age-related macular degeneration-clini-
cal review and genetics update. Clin Genet. 2013;84:160.
 161. Friedman PK, Kaufman LB, Karpas SL. Oral health disparity in 
older adults: dental decay and tooth loss. Dent Clin North Am. 
2014;58:757.
 162. Yellowitz JA, Schneiderman MT. Elder’s oral health crisis. J Evid 
Based Dent Pract. 2014;14(Suppl):191.
 163. Gibson PG, McDonald VM, Marks GB. Asthma in older adults. 
Lancet. 2010;376:803.
 164. Goldberg LR. In the clinic. Heart failure. Ann Intern Med. 2010; 
152:ITC6–1.
 165. Coffey S, Cox B, Williams MJ. The prevalence, incidence, progres-
sion, and risks of aortic valve sclerosis: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardil. 2014;63:2852.
 166. Manning MJ. Asymptomatic aortic stenosis in the elderly: a clini-
cal review. JAMA. 2013;310:1490.
 167. Sandoval-Leon AC, Drews-Elger K, Gomez-Fernandez CR, et al. 
Paget’s disease of the nipple. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013;141:1.
 168. McDermott MM. Lower extremity manifestations of peripheral 
artery disease: the pathophysiologic and functional implications 
of leg ischemia. Circ Res. 2015;116;1540.
 169. Miller KL, Baraldi CA. Geriatric gynecology: promoting health 
and avoiding harm. Am J Obstet Bynecol. 2012;207:355.
 170. Zendell K, Edwards L. Lichen sclerosus with vaginal involvement: 
report of 2 cases and review of the literature. JAMA Dermatol. 
2013;149:1199.
 171. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Cervical cancer: screening 
(update in progress). March 2012. Available at http://www.uspreven-
tiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Document/UpdateSummaryFinal/
cervical-cancer-screening. Accessed August 24, 2015.
 172. Mahlknecht P, Kiechl S, Bloem BR, et al. Prevalence and burden 
of gait disorders in elderly men and women aged 60–97 years: a 
population-based study. PLoS One. 2013;8:e69627.
 173. Lewis SJ. Neurological update: emerging issues in gait disorders. 
J Neurol. 2015;262:1590.
 174. Jankovic J. Gait disorders. Neurol Clin. 2015;33:249.
 175. Lam R. Ofﬁce management of gait disorders in the elderly. Can 
Fam Physician. 2011;57:765.
 176. Odenheimer G, Funkenstein HH, Beckett L, et al. Comparison of 
neurologic changes in “successful aging” persons vs. the total 
aging population. Arch Neurol. 1994;51:573.
 177. Frank C, Pari G, Rossiter JP. Approach to diagnosis of Parkinson 
disease. Can Fam Physician. 2006;52:862.
 178. Parkinson’s Disease Foundation. Statistics on Parkinson’s Avail-
able at http://www.pdf.org/en/parkinson_statistics. Accessed 
August 25, 2015.
 179. Chahine LM, Stern MB. Diagnostic markers for Parkinson’s dis-
ease. Curr Opin Neurol. 2011;24:309.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
1009
Index
A
ABCD method, for melanoma screening, 178, 
178b–180b
Abdomen. See also speciﬁc organs
anatomy of, 449–452
examination techniques for, 470–487
abdominal wall mass, 487
in adolescents, 898
aorta, 483, 483f
appendicitis, 485–486, 486f
ascites, 484–485, 484f, 485f
auscultation, 472, 473f
bladder, 483
in children, 879–881
cholecystitis, 486–487
in infants, 838–840
inspection, 471–472, 471f
kidneys, 481–482
liver, 475–478
in older adults, 994
palpation, 473–475, 474f
percussion, 473
during regnancy, 944–945
spleen, 479–481
ventral hernias, 487
in health history, 453–464
gastrointestinal tract and, 455–461
urinary tract and, 461–464
health promotion and counseling and, 464–470
in physical examination, 22
physiology of, 449–452
protuberant, 500t
pulses in, 512–513, 512f
quadrants of, 450–451, 450b, 450f
recording ﬁndings, 487, 487b
sounds in, 501t
tender, 502t–503t
viscera, 450f
Abdominal aorta, anatomic considerations,  
451
Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA), 483
in older adults, 483
risk factors for, 483
screening for, 520–521
Abdominal bruits, 994
Abdominal fullness, 458
Abdominal masses
assessment of, 487, 500t
categories of, 474
Abdominal pain, 488t–489t
gastrointestinal symptoms in, 457–458
lower acute, 457
lower chronic, 457
rebound tenderness, 475b
types of, 453–454
upper acute, 455
upper chronic, 455–456
Abdominal reﬂexes, 763, 763f
Abdominal striae, during pregnancy, 931b
Abdominal wall
assessment of mass, 487, 500t
localized bulges in, 499t
tenderness of, 502t
Abducens nerve, 715, 715f, 716b
examination of, 737
Abduction
of ﬁngers, 665, 665f
of hip, 679b, 680, 681f
of shoulder, 651b
of thumb, 665–666, 666f
of wrist, 662b
Abduction stress test, 689b
Abductor group, of hip muscles, 676, 676f
ABI. See Ankle–brachial index (ABI)
Abnormal blood pressure, 130, 130b
Abrasion of teeth with notching, 296t
Absence seizure, 781t
Absolute risk difference, 58
Abstract thinking, 166
Accessory muscle, 318
Accommodation, 230
ACE. See Aid to Capacity Evaluation (ACE)
Acetabulum, 674, 674f
Achalasia, 490t
Achilles tendinitis, 688
Achilles tendon, 688, 691, 692
ruptured, 688
Acholic stools, 461
ACL. See Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL)
Acne vulgaris, 204t
ACOG. See American College of Obstetricians and 
Gynecologists (ACOG)
Acoustic blink reﬂex, 826
Acoustic nerve, 715, 715f, 716b
examination of, 739
Acral melanoma, 202t
Acral nevus, 202t
Acrocyanosis, in infants, 816, 818b, 918t
Acromegaly, facies in, 272t
Acromioclavicular arthritis, 701t
Acromioclavicular joint, 646f, 647, 649, 653b
examination technique for, 653b
Acromion, 646–647, 646f, 648, 649
Actinic cheilitis, 290t
Actinic keratosis, 197t
Actinic purpura, 206t
Active listening, in interviewing, 68
Acute abdomen, 475
Acute bowel obstruction, 488t
Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis,  
295t
Acute pain, 134–137
Addiction, 96b
of ﬁngers, 665, 665f
of thumb, 666, 666f
Adduction
of hip, 679b, 681, 681f
of shoulder, 651b
stress test, 689b
of wrist, 662b
Adductor group, of hip muscles, 676, 676f
Adductor tubercle, 682, 682f, 685
Adhesive capsulitis, 701t
Adie pupil, 277t
Adipose tissue, of breast, 420
Adnexa, 567
masses, 592, 603t
during pregnancy, 930, 947
Adolescent acne, 912t
Adolescents
conﬁdentiality issue in, 892
contraception methods in, 581, 581b
developmental tasks of, 890b–891b
development of, 890
examination techniques for, 894–906
abdomen, 898
breasts, 896–897
ears, 895
eyes, 895
female genitalia, 900, 901b
general survey, 894
heart, 895–896
male genitalia, 898–899
musculoskeletal system, 901–905
neck, 895
nervous system, 906
recording ﬁndings, 906, 906b–909b
skin, 895
throat, 895
vital signs, 895
health history in, 891–893
health promotion and counseling and, 893, 894b
health supervision visits, 894b
sexual maturity assessment in, 569
Adult health history, components of, 8
Adult illness, in health history, 10
Adventitia, of artery, 509f, 510–511
Adventitious sounds, 325–326, 325b
Affect, in mental status examination, 155b, 159
Afferent ﬁbers, 715, 717
African Americans
breast cancer in women, 425
cardiovascular disease in, 727b
Afterload, 353
Aid to Capacity Evaluation (ACE), 89
Air conduction (AC), 244, 739
Alcohol use
CAGE questionnaire for, 151b, 465
in health history, 10
in older adults, 974, 974b
screening for, 151b, 157, 464–466, 465b
stroke and, 729b
Alertness, 769b
Page numbers followed by f indicate ﬁgures; those followed by b indicate in-chapter boxed material; those followed by t indicate end-of-chapter tables. Items 
related to children, adolescents, and older adults can be found listed under those entries as well as the speciﬁc anatomic area.
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
1010 
Index
Arm(s)
arteries of, 512, 512f
in coordination assessment, 749, 749f
lymph nodes of, 515, 515f
peripheral vascular system, examination 
techniques, 522–523
Arrhythmias, 131
syncope in, 778t
Arterial insufﬁciency
chronic, 537t, 538t
examination techniques for, 530–531
Arterial ischemia, symptoms of, 518
Arterial occlusion, 534t
Arterial pulse, 353
of arm, 512, 512f
feeling for difﬁcult, 528b
of leg, 513, 513f
recommended grading of, 522b
Arteries
anatomy and physiology of, 510–516
of arm, 511
of leg, 513
Arteriovenous (AV) crossing, 281t
Arteritis, giant cell, 268t–269t
Arthralgia, 631
Arthritis
acromioclavicular, 701t
acute septic, 632
in ankle and feet, 692–693
of elbow, 702t
gonococcal, 631
gouty
of feet, 706t
joint pain in, 696t
in hands, 703t
of hip, 678
of knee, 687
osteoarthritis, 696t
of hand, 660, 661, 703t
posttraumatic, 661
psoriatic, 661
rheumatoid, 632, 643, 696t
acute, 703t
chronic, 703t
in feet, 692
hand deformities in, 660–661, 703t
joint pain in, 696t
signs of, 643b
of spine, 669
Articular capsule, of shoulder, 648
Articular cartilage, 626b
Articular facets, 667, 667b
Articular processes, 667
Articular structures, 626, 626b
Ascites, assessment of, 484–485, 484f, 485f, 500t
Aspiration pneumonia, 308
Assessment
clinical data and, 29–40
problem list, 37, 37b
quality of, 29–30, 30b
recording, 38–40, 38b–40b
clinical reasoning and, 25–29
clinical hypotheses, 27b–28b
steps in, 25–29, 25b
clinician’s touch, 111f
determining scope of, 5–6
objective data vs. subjective data, 6, 7b
plan for care and, 24, 24f, 29
example, 35b–36b
overview, 24
Astereognosis, 755
Asterixis, 766–767, 767f
Antihelix, 242, 242f
Antiresorptive agents, osteoporosis and, 641
Antisocial personality disorder, 152b
Anus
abnormalities of, 621t–622t
anatomy and physiology of, 607–608,  
607f, 608f
examination techniques for
female, 619
male, 616–618
recording ﬁndings, 619, 619b
Anxiety, 163b
chest pain in, 330t–331t
disorders, 155, 169t
with hyperventilation
dyspnea in, 332t–333t
in mental status examination, 155
screening questions for, 151b
Aorta, 344
anatomic considerations, 450f, 451
coarctation of, 131
examination techniques for, 483
Aortic aneurysm
abdominal, 483, 520–521
in older adults, 483
risk factors for, 483
screening for, 520–521
Aortic dissection, chest pain in,  
330t–331t, 356
Aortic regurgitation
detection of, 392, 392f
Aortic sclerosis, 961
Aortic stenosis, 961
syncope in, 778t
Aortic valve, 345, 345f
Aortic valve stenosis, 919t
Apgar score, 804, 805b
Aphasia, 160, 160b, 784t
Broca’s, 784t
Wernicke’s, 784t
Aphonia, 784t
Aphthous ulcer, 221, 298t
on labial mucosa, 255f
Apical impulse, 385–387
Apley scratch test, 653b
Apnea, 313, 829
Apocrine glands, 175
Apparent gallop, 836
Apparent state of health, 120
Appendicitis
acute, 488t, 503t
examination techniques for, 485–486
Appendix, anatomic considerations, 451
Appraisal (critical), 56–59
biases, understanding of, 56–57, 56b
attrition bias, 57b
detection bias, 57b
performance bias, 56b
selection bias, 56b
generalizability, 59
guideline recommendations, 59
results, 57–58
treatment effectiveness, measurement of, 58
treatment/prevention, evaluation of,  
57–58
Apprehension sign, 701t
Appropriate for gestational age (AGA), 807, 807b, 
808f
Aqueous humor, 227, 227f
Arcus senilis, 991
Areola, 419f, 420, 420f, 421
Argyll Robertson pupils, 236, 277t
Allen test, 529–530, 530f
Allergic rhinitis, 220
perennial, 915t
Allergies, in health history, 10
Allis sign, 844
Alopecia areata, 209t
Alternative health care practices, 11
Alveolar mucosa, 252, 252f
Alveoli, 309
Ambiguous genitalia, 842
Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring, 124–126, 
124b, 125b
Amelanotic melanoma, 200t
Amenorrhea, 570b, 571, 901
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), 801
American College of Chest Physicians (AACP), 59, 
63t
American College of Obstetricians and 
Gynecologists (ACOG), 936
Amnestic disorders, 165
Anabolic agents, osteoporosis and, 641
Anagen efﬂuvium, 209t
Anal canal, 607–608, 607f
Anal ﬁssure, 622t
Analgesia, deﬁnition, 754
Anal lesions, 494t
Anal reﬂex, 764, 848
Anal sphincter, 608
Anasarca, 357
Anatomical snuffbox, 661, 661b
Anesthesia, deﬁnition, 754
Aneurysm
abdominal aortic, 483, 520–521
in older adults, 483
risk factors for, 483
screening for, 520–521
Angina pectoris, 310, 330t–331t, 356
Angioedema, 290t
Angle closure glaucoma, red eyes in, 270t
Angle of Louis, 304, 304f
Angular cheilitis, 290t, 960
Anhedonia, 156, 157
Anisocoria, 235, 277t, 736
Ankle
anatomy of, 690–691, 691f
assessment of reﬂexes in, 762, 762f
dorsiﬂexion at, testing, 748, 748f
examination techniques for, 692–695
movements of, 693b
plantar ﬂexion at, testing, 748, 748f
Ankle–brachial index (ABI), 519–520, 536t
Ankle clonus, 763, 763f, 848
Ankle reﬂexes, in older adults, 964
Ankyloglossia, 827
Ankylosing spondylitis, 669, 672, 699t
Ankylosis, 643
Annulus ﬁbrosis, 668
Anorectal ﬁstula, 622t
Anorectal junction, 607–608, 607f
Anorexia, 458
Anorexia nervosa, clinical features, 140t
ANS. See Autonomic nervous system (ANS)
Anserine bursa, 683f, 684, 686–687
Anserine bursitis, 684, 687
Anterior axillary line, 306, 306f
Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL), 643, 682, 684, 
689, 690b
Anterior drawer sign, 690, 690b
Anterior horn cell, 775t
Anterior naris, 248, 248f
Anterior taloﬁbular ligament, 691, 691f
Anterior triangle, of neck, 257, 257f
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
I n d e x  
1011
gums, 221
postmenopausal, 570b, 572
Blepharitis, 275t
Blind eye, 277t
right eye, 273t
Bloating, 456
Blocking, 162b
Blood
in urine, 463
vomiting, 458
Blood pressure, 353–354
abnormal, 130, 130b
in adolescents, 864b
assessment of
Doppler method for, 814
of infants, 814, 814f
during pregnancy, 942
in children, 863–865, 864b, 877
classiﬁcation of, 130, 130b
diet and, 118–119, 143t
factors affecting, 353b
hypertension
deﬁnitions of, 125b
diagnosing for, 125
types of, 126
in infants, 814
Korotkoff sounds, 128, 131
low, 131
measurement of, 373–374
measurements of, 118–119, 124–130
ambulatory, 124–126, 124b, 125b
auscultatory, 124b, 124f
automated devices, 124–126
complexities of, 124–125
cuff for, 124, 124b, 126, 127b
home, 125b
methods for, 124b–125b, 124f
obese/thin patient, 131
steps to ensure accurate, 127–130, 127b, 
128f, 129f
unequal in arms and legs, 131–132
normal, 130, 130b
of older adults, 957
orthostatic hypotension, 131, 778t
and pulse pressure in cardiac cycle, 354f
Blue nevus, 202t
BMI. See Body mass index (BMI)
Body dysmorphic disorder, 169t
Body mass index (BMI)
calculation of, 122–123, 123b
in children, 863, 863b
classiﬁcation by, 116, 116b
obesity and, 116, 116b
during pregnancy, 935
Body odor, in general survey, 121–122
Body position sense
assessment of, 754–755
motor assessment of, 741
Romberg test for, 751
Bone conduction (BC), 244, 739
Bone density, osteoporosis and, 638–639, 639b
Bones
of ankle and feet, 690–691, 691f
of elbow, 656
of knee, 682
of shoulder, 646, 646f
vertebrae, 667–668, 667b
of wrist and hand, 658, 658f
Borborygmi, 472
Borderline personality disorders, 152b, 153
Bouchard’s nodes, 661, 703t
Boutonnière deformity, 703t
in health history, 634–635
incidence, 634
lumbar spinal stenosis, 699t
lumbosacral radiculopathy and, 765–766
mechanical, 699t
red ﬂags for, 635b
sciatica, 699t
nocturnal, 699t
Bacterial pneumonias, cough in, 334t
Bacterial rhonosinusitis, 251
Bacterial vaginosis, 598t
Baker’s cyst, 687
Balanitis, 551
Ball-and-socket joints, 629, 629b, 629f
Ballard scoring system, for gestational age, 805, 
806f
Balloon sign, 687, 687f
Ballotting of patella, 688, 688f
BAP. See Brief action planning (BAP)
Barlow test, 844, 8434f
Barrel chest, 336t
Bartholin glands
anatomic considerations, 565f, 566
examination of, 586
infection, 597t
Basal cell carcinomas, of skin, 198t, 286t
benign mimics, 198t–199t
nodular, 198t
superﬁcial, 198t
ulcerated, 199t
Basal ganglia, 713, 718b
damage to, 719
lesions of, 775t
Base of the heart, 343
Battered child syndrome, 915t
Bayes theorem, 51–52
Beau lines, 212t
Beers criteria, 972
Behavior
in mental status examination, 158–159
motor, 159
Bell’s palsy, 739
Bending, lateral
of neck, 672b
of spine, 673b
Beneﬁcence, in patient care, 100b
Benign melanocytic nevi, 196t
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), 610, 620t, 
623t, 963
Bethesda system, for Pap smear classiﬁcation, 577b
Biases, deﬁnition, 85
Biceps reﬂex, assessment of, 759, 759f
Biceps tendon, palpation of, 650, 650f
Bicipital groove, of humerus, 646f, 648
Bicipital tendinitis, 701t
Biliary colic, 488t
Bilirubin, 174
in jaundice, 460–461, 461b
Bimanual examination, of female genitalia, 
591–592
Biot breathing, 335t
Birth weight, assessment of, 805–807, 807f
Bites, 912t
Black hairy tongue, 297t
Bladder
anatomic considerations, 450f, 451
distention, 483
examination techniques for, 483
intraurethral pressure, 452
neuroregulatory control of, 452
Bleeding
abnormal uterine, 570b, 571, 571b
Asthma
cough in, 334t
dyspnea in, 332t–333t
physical ﬁndings in, 340t
Asymmetric tonic neck reﬂex, 850b
Asymmetric weakness, 723
Ataxia, 722, 750
cerebellar, 789t
sensory, 789t
Ataxic breathing, 335t
Atelectasis, physical ﬁndings, 339t
Atheroma, 510, 510f
complex, 511
Atherosclerosis, 517, 527, 534t
Atherosclerotic peripheral arterial disease, 517, 
527, 534t
Athetosis, 783t
Atonic seizure, 781t
Atopic dermatitis, 175, 911t
Atrial ﬁbrillation, 131
stroke and, 729b
Atrial septal defect, 920t
Atrioventricular (AV) valves, 345
Atrophic glossitis, 297t
Atrophy, muscular, 740
Attention, in mental status examination, 154b,  
155, 164–165
Attrition
bias, 57b
of teeth, 296t
Audiometers, handheld, 223
Auricle, 242, 243, 243f
Auscultation
of abdomen, 472, 473f
in infants, 839
during pregnancy, 945
chest, 323–327, 328–329
deﬁnition, 19b
of heart
in infants, 834–838
during pregnancy, 943
of heart sounds and murmurs, 389–396, 390f
of lungs
in infants, 831–832, 831b
Auscultatory gap, 128, 128f
Autonomic nervous system (ANS), 714
Autonomy, in patient care, 100b
Avoidant personality disorder, 153b
Axillae
examination techniques for
in older adults, 994
in physical examination, 22
Axillary lymph nodes, 419f, 421–422, 422f
Axillary temperature, 133
Axillary vein, 419f
Axiohumeral muscle group, 648, 648f
Axioscapular muscle group, 648
Axons, 713
B
Babinski response, 764, 764f
in infants, 848
Back
movements of, 672b–673b
pain. See Back pain
in physical examination, 21
Backache, during pregnancy, 931b
Back pain
from abdomen/pelvis, 699t
low, 699t
chronic back stiffness, 699t
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
1012 
Index
Calculating ability, 166
Callus, 707t
CAM. See Confusion assessment method (CAM)
Canal of Schlemm, 227, 227f
Cancer. See also speciﬁc cancers
of breast, 423–434
in African American women, 425
assessment risk of, 424–437
benign disease and, 428, 428b
BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations, 427–428
breast density and, 429
characteristics of, 444t
chemoprevention, 432–433
counseling about, 433
incidence, 424b, 425–426
male, 426, 440
risk assessment tools, 426–427
risk factors for, 425, 425b–426b, 433
screening for, 427–433
visual signs of, 445f, 445t
web sites for, 433, 433b
cervical, 600t
human papilloma virus and, 575
risk factors for, 575
screening for, 575–578, 576b, 577b
colorectal
epidemiology of, 468
guidelines for, 469
prevention, 468–469
risk factors for, 468
screening for, 468–470, 469b
esophageal, 490t
gastric, 488t
lung, 315–316
of oral cavity, 224
of pancreas, 488t
of penis, 558t
prostate, 623t
chemoprevention, 611
incidence and mortality rates, 611f
prevention from, 611–612
resources about, 614, 615b
risk factors for, 610, 611b
screening for, 612–615, 612b, 614b, 615b
of rectum, 622t
of stomach, 488t
of testis, 552, 559t
of tongue, 256
of vulva, 596t
Cancer screening
cervical, 575–578
colorectal, 615
in older adults, 981, 981b
ovarian, 578–579
prostate, 612–615
Candidal diaper dermatitis, 911t
Candidal vaginitis, 598t
Candidiasis, 293t, 297t
Canker sore, 298t
Capacity, 88
decision-making, 88b
Capillaries, anatomy of, 511
Capillary beds, 516, 516f
Caput succedaneum, 821
Carcinoma
of cervix, 600t
ﬂoor of mouth, 298t
of lip, 291t
of penis, 558t
of vulva, 596t
Cardiac apex, 344
Cardiac chambers, 345, 345f
ataxic, 335t
audible sounds of, 318
normal, 132, 335t
obstructive, 335t
rapid deep, 335t
rapid shallow, 335t
rate and rhythm of, abnormalities in, 335t
slow, 335t
Breath odor, in general survey, 121–122
Breath sounds, 308, 337t, 832
added, 325–326, 325b
bronchial, 324
bronchovesicular, 324
characteristics of, 324b–325b
decrease in, 323
intensity of, 323
normal, 324
tracheal, 324
vesicular, 324
Brief action planning (BAP), 105t
Broca’s aphasia, 784t
Bronchi, segmental, 308
Bronchiectasis, cough in, 334t
Bronchitis
acute, cough in, 334t
chronic
cough in, 334t
dyspnea in, 332t–333t
physical ﬁndings in, 339t
Bronchophony, 327
Bronchus, 308
left main, 308
right main, 308
Brudzinski’s sign, 765, 876
Bruits, 355, 381–382
abdominal, 472, 473f, 501t
Brushﬁeld spots, 824, 916t
BSE. See Breast self-examination (BSE)
Buccal mucosa, 254, 254f
Buerger’s disease, 534t
Buerger test, 531–532, 532f
Bulbar conjunctiva, 226, 226f
Bulge sign, 687
Bulimia nervosa, clinical features of, 140t
Bulla, 193t
Bullous myringitis, 288t
Burrow (scabies), 195t
Bursae
deﬁnition, 626b
of elbow, 656
of hip, 676
of knee, 684
of shoulder, 648
synovial joints and, 630
Bursitis, 631
ischial (ischiogluteal), 676
olecranon, 656, 702t
subacromial/subdeltoid, 650
trochanteric, 631, 635, 676
C
Café-au-lait spots, 820b
CAGE questionnaire, 97
for alcohol abuse, 151b, 465
Calcaneoﬁbular ligament, 691, 691f
Calcaneus bone, 691, 691f
Calcium
food sources of, 143t
osteoporosis and, 639–640
recommended dietary intake for, 640b
Bowel function, change in, 459
Bowel obstruction, acute, 488t
Bowel sounds, 472, 501t
Bow-legs, 684
BPH. See Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH)
Brachial artery, pulse assessment at, 512, 523
Brachialis muscle, 656
Brachial pulse, assessment of, 382, 382f
Brachioradialis, 656
reﬂexes of, assessment, 760, 760f
Bradykinesia, 719
Bradypnea, 335t
Brain
anatomy of, 711–712, 711f, 713–714, 713f
lobes of, 711f
tumors of, headache due to, 268t–269t
Brainstem, 711f, 714
lesions of, 774t
Branchial cleft cysts, 828
BRCA1, 427–428
BRCA2, 427–428
BRCAPRO model, 427
Breast asymmetry, 896
Breast buds, 896
Breast cancer, 423–434
in African American women, 425
assessment risk of, 424–427
BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations, 427–428
breast density and, 429
characteristics of, 444t
chemoprevention, 432–433
counseling about, 433
incidence, 424b, 425–426
male, 426, 440
probability of developing, 424b
risk assessment tools, 426–427
risk factors for, 425, 425b–426b, 433
screening for, 427–433
visual signs of, 445f, 445t
web sites for, 433, 433b
Breastfeeding, plan for, 933
Breast(s)
anatomy of, 419–421, 419f, 420f
benign disease, 428, 428b
examination techniques for, 434–439, 444t
in adolescents, 896–897
axillae, 440–441
breast augmentation patient, 441
in infants, 838
inspection, 434–436, 435f, 436f
male, 440
in mastectomy patient, 441
in older adults, 994
palpation, 437–439, 437f–439f
during regnancy, 943–944
in health history, 422–423
health promotion and counseling, 423–434
lymphatics of, 421–422
male
anatomic considerations, 421
examination techniques, 440
palpable masses, 423, 423b–424b, 444t
in physical examination, 22
quadrants of, 420f
recording ﬁndings, 443, 443b
in review of systems, 12b
Breast self-examination (BSE), 431, 441, 442b
Breast tenderness/tingling, during pregnancy,  
931b
Breathing, 309
assessment of, 132
in comatose patient, 768
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
I n d e x  
1013
circumference of chest, 306, 306f
vertical axis, 304–305, 304f, 305f
pain, 310–311
in health history, 356
sources of, 310b
in various disorders, 330t–331t
posterior, examination of
auscultation, 323–327
inspection, 319
palpation, 319–320
percussion, 320–323
Chest wall
anatomy of, 303, 303f
cardiac auscultatory ﬁndings on, 350, 350f
pain, 330t–331t
Cheyne–Stokes breathing, 335t
Chief complaint, in health history, 8b, 9
Child development
in adolescents, 890
in early childhood (1 to 4 years), 853
factors affects, 800, 800f
in infants, 849, 852
middle childhood (5 to 10 years), 854
principles of, 800–801, 800b
Childhood asthma, 876
Childhood illness, in health history, 10
Children
assessment of
older, 857–859
at play, 855b
younger, 855–857, 856b, 857b
cyanosis, 918t
development of, 853–854
epilepsy in, 725
examination techniques for, 862–889
abdomen, 879–881
ears, 867–871
eyes, 866–867
female genitalia, 882–885
general survey, 862–863
head, 865–866
heart, 877–879
male genitalia, 881–882
mouth and pharynx, 872–875, 872b
musculoskeletal system, 885–887
neck, 875–876
nervous system, 887–889
nose and sinuses, 871
recording ﬁndings, 906, 906b–909b
rectum, 885
skin, 865
thorax and lungs, 876–877
vital signs, 863–865
health history in, 855–859
health promotion and counseling and, 860–861
age-speciﬁc screening procedures, 802
anticipatory guidance, 802
health supervision visits, 801, 860b
immunizations, 801–802
interaction with child and family, 801
key components of, 801–802, 802b–803b
physical ﬁndings with, 801
Chill, shaking, 112
Chilliness, 112
Chills, 112
Chlamydia, 579, 579b, 589
Chloasma, 942
Cholecystitis
acute, 488t, 503t
examination techniques for, 486–487
Chondrodermatitis helicis, 286t
Chondromalacia, 686
Cataracts, 222, 276t, 991
nuclear, 276t
peripheral, 276t
Cauda equina, 714, 714f
compression, 671
Cauda equina syndrome, 635
CBE. See Clinical breast examination (CBE)
CDC. See Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC)
Cecum, anatomic considerations, 450f, 451
Celiac trunk, 513
Cellulitis, acute, 534t
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  
(CDC), 17
recommendations for hand hygiene, 17b–18b
Central cyanosis, cardiac causes of, 832b
Central lymph nodes, 421–422
Central nervous system, 713–714
brain, 713–714
disorders of, 774t–775t
spinal cord, 714
Central sensitization pain, 136b
Central vertigo, 271t
Cephalohematoma, 821, 913t
CER. See Control event rate (CER)
Cerebellar ataxia, 751, 789t
Cerebellar lesions, 775t
Cerebellar system, 718b
assessment of, in children, 888
disorders of, 719, 748–752
Cerebellum, 711f, 714
Cerebral cortex, lesions of, 774t
Cerebrum, 713
Cerumen, 246
Cervical broom, 589b
Cervical scrape, 590b
Cervical vertebrae, anatomy of, 667b
Cervicitis, mucopurulent, 600t
Cervix, 566
abnormalities of, 600t
cancer of, 600t, 923t
human papilloma virus and, 575
risk factors for, 575
screening for, 575–576, 575–578, 576b, 577b
inspection of, 588–589
myelopathy, 698t
os of, 567, 600t
polyp, 599t
during pregnancy, 930, 946–947
radiculopathy, 698t, 745
systolic murmur, 355
variations in surface of, 599t
Chadwick sign, 930
Chalazion, 275t
Chancre of primary syphilis, 291t
Chancroid, 557t
Chemoprevention
in breast cancer, 432–433
in prostate cancer, 611
Cherry angioma, 196t, 205t
Chest
anatomic descriptors of, 308, 308b
anterior, examination of, 327
auscultation, 328–329
inspection, 327
palpation, 327–328, 327f, 328f
percussion, 328
barrel-chest appearance, 318
disorders
physical ﬁndings in, 339t–340t
indrawing, in infants, 829f, 830
locating ﬁndings on, 304
Cardiac conduction system, 351–352, 351f, 352f
electrocardiogram, 351, 351f
P, Q, R, S, and T waves, 352, 352f
Cardiac cycle, 345–348, 346f, 347f, 348f
ECG waves and, 352, 352f
Cardiac examination, 382–399
auscultation, 389–396
inspection and palpation in, 384–389, 384f
aortic area, 389
heaves and lifts, 385
left ventricular area, 385–388
pulmonic area, 389
right ventricular area, 388–389
S1 and S2, 385
S3 and S4, 385, 388
thrills, 385
location and timing of cardiac ﬁndings in, 
383–384, 383f
patient positioning, 382
percussion, 389
sequence for, 383b
Cardiac output, 352
in older adults, 961
Cardinal directions of gaze, 231, 231f
Cardinal techniques of examination, 18, 18b–19b
auscultation, 19
inspection, 18
palpation, 19
percussion, 19
Cardiomyopathy, hypertrophic, 778t
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), 99
Cardiovascular disease (CVD), 358
promoting lifestyle change and risk factor 
modiﬁcation, 370–372
and risk factors, 363b
screening for, challenges in, 359
early screening, 359
risk factor reduction, 360
screening for risk factors, 363–370
stroke and, 727
women and, 360–363, 360b
Cardiovascular system, 343
anatomy and physiology of, 343–355
examination techniques for, 373–399
blood pressure, 373–374
carotid pulse, 380–382
heart, 382–399
heart rate, 373–374
jugular venous pressure, 374–378
jugular venous pulsations, 378–379
in older adults, 993–994
special techniques, 397–399
in health history, 355–358
health promotion and counseling and, 358–373
physical examination of, 22
recording examination ﬁndings, 399
in review of systems, 12b
Carotene, 174
Carotid artery, 258, 258f
thrills and bruits, 381–382
Carotid artery disease, stroke and, 730b
Carotid bruit, in children, 878, 879b
Carotid pulse, 380, 380f
assessment characteristics of, 380b–381b
Carotid sinus, 380
Carpal tunnel, 659, 659f
Carpal tunnel syndrome, 660
examination techniques for, 663–664,  
745–746
Cartilage, articular, 626b
Cartilaginous joints, 628, 628b, 628f
Caruncle, urethral, 597t
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
1014 
Index
Control event rate (CER), 58
Convergence, test for, 238, 238f
Conversion disorder, 169t
Cooper ligaments, 420
Coordination
assessment of, in children, 887
motor assessment of, 748–752
COPD. See Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD)
Copper wiring, 281t
Coracoid process, 646, 646f, 649
Corn, 707t
Cornea, 226, 226f
Corneal arcus, 276t
Corneal injury/infection, red eyes in, 270t
Corneal reﬂex, assessment of, 738, 738f
Corneal scar, 276t
Corona, 541–542
Coronary heart disease (CHD), chest pain in, 356
Corpus cavernosum, 541
Corpus spongiosum, 541–542
Corticobulbar tracts, 718, 718b, 718f
Corticospinal (pyramidal) tract, 717b–718b, 718, 
718f
Costal margin, 449f
Costovertebral angle (CVA), 451, 451f
Costovertebral angle tenderness (CVAT), 451
Cotton-wool patches, 241f, 285t
Cough, 311–312
acute, 312
chronic, 312
hemoptysis and, 334t
subacute, 312
Cough syncope, 778t
Cover–uncover test, 236, 278t
CPR. See Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
Crackles, 325–326, 325b, 338t
coarse, 338t
ﬁne, 338t
in infants, 832
Cranial nerves (CNs), 715, 715f, 716b, 735b
of children, 889, 889b
I (olfactory), 715, 715f, 716b
examination of, 736
II (optic), 715, 715f, 716b
examination of, 736
III (oculomotor), 715, 715f, 716b
examination of, 736–737
injuries and dysconjugate gaze, 278t
IV (trochlear), 715, 715f, 716b
examination of, 737
IX (glossopharyngeal), 715, 715f, 716b
examination of, 739–740
of newborns and infants, 846, 846b–847b
in physical examination, 23
V (trigeminal), 715, 715f, 716b
examination of, 737–738
VI (abducens), 715, 715f, 716b
examination of, 737
VII (facial), 715, 715f, 716b
examination of, 739
lesion of, 787t
VIII (acoustic), 715, 715f, 716b
examination of, 739
X (vagus), 715, 715f, 716b
examination of, 739–740
XI (spinal accessory), 715, 715f, 716b
examination of, 740
XII (hypoglossal), 715, 715f, 716b
examination of, 740–741
Cranial neuralgias, 268t–269t
Craniosynostosis, 822, 913t
Colles’ fracture, 660
Colloid oncotic pressure, 516
Colobomas, 824
Colon, anatomic considerations, 450f, 451
Colonoscopy, 469, 469b, 470, 615
Colorectal cancer
constipation and, 494t
risk factors for, 468
screening for, 468–470, 469b, 615
Columnar epithelium, 567, 599t
Coma, 769b
Glasgow Coma Scale, 791t
structural, 790t
toxic-metabolic, 790t
Comatose patient
examination techniques for, 767–772
airway, breathing, and circulation, 768
cardinal don’ts, 768b
level of consciousness, 768, 769b
neurologic examination in, 769–772
postures in, 793t
pupils in, 792t
Communication, respectful, 85–86
Compartment syndrome, 534t
Competence
cultural. See Cultural competence
deﬁnition, 88
Comprehensive assessment, 5–7, 5b
health history, adult, 7–13, 8b
physical examination, adult, 14–24
Comprehensive health history. See Health histories
Compulsions, 162b
Conductive hearing loss, 244, 247, 248, 289t, 739
Condylar joints, 629b, 630, 630f
Condyle, of mandible, 644
Condyloma acuminatum, 596t
Condyloma latum, 596t
Condylomata acuminata, 557t
Cone of light, 243, 243f
Confabulation, 162b
Conﬁdentiality
adolescents and, 892
in patient care, 100b
Confusion assessment method (CAM), 732
Congenital heart murmurs, 919t–920t
aortic valve stenosis, 919t
atrial septal defect, 920t
patent ductus arteriosus, 920t
pulmonary valve stenosis, 919t
tetralogy of Fallot, 919t
transposition of great arteries, 920t
ventricular septal defect, 920t
Congenital hypothyroidism, 914t
Congenital ptosis, 823
Congenital syphilis, 914t
Congenital torticollis, 828
Conjugate gaze, in children, 866
Conjunctiva, 226, 824
Conjunctivitis, red eyes in, 270t
Consciousness
level of
in comatose patient, 768, 769b
in general survey, 120
in mental status examination, 159
loss of, in health history, 724
Constipation, 459–460, 494t
during pregnancy, 931b
Constructional ability, 166–167, 167f
Contact diaper dermatitis, 911t
Contraception methods, health promotion and 
counseling, 581, 581b
Contractions, during pregnancy, 931b
Chorea, 783t
Chorioretinitis, healed, 285t
Chronic back stiffness, 699t
Chronic limp, in childhood, 886
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), 
311. See also Chest
dyspnea in, 332t–333t
ﬁndings predictive of, 326
physical ﬁndings in, 340t
Chronic open-angle glaucoma, 240
Chronic pain, deﬁnition, 134
Chvostek sign, 823
Ciliary body, 227, 227f
Circumlocutions, 160
Circumstantiality, 161b
Clanging, 162b
Claudication, intermittent, 517, 534t
Claus model, 427
Clavicle, 257, 257f, 646–647, 646f
Clavicles, 829
Clinical assessment, 24, 24f, 25–29
Clinical breast examination (CBE), 431
Clinical ethics and professionalism, 100–103
building blocks of, 100b
Clinical evidence, evaluation of
appraisal (critical), 56–59
diagnostic tests, 46–55, 48b, 49b, 50b, 51b
EBCP Venn diagram, 45f
health promotion, 55
pyramid, 55f
Clinical hypotheses, steps for generating, 27–28
Clinical planning, 24, 24f, 29, 29f
Clinical proﬁciency, foundations for, 3–41
case study, 30–40, 41t
clinical assessment, 24, 24f, 25–29
clinical reasoning, 24, 25–29
ﬁndings, recording of, 38–40
health history, 7–13
patient assessment, 5–7
physical examination, 14–24
planning, 24, 24f, 29, 29f
quality clinical record, 29–37
Clinical reasoning, 24, 25–29
hypothesis in, 27b–28b
steps in, 25–29, 25b
Clinical record, 29–37
checklist for, 38–40
patient data, 30
problem list, 37
Clinician-centered interviewing, 66
Clitoris, 565–566, 565f
Clubbing
of ﬁngers, 211t
of nails, 318
Cluster headaches, 216, 267t
CNs. See Cranial nerves (CNs)
CN X paralysis, 257
Coarctation of aorta, 131, 878
Cochlea, 243f, 244
Coefﬁcient of variation, 55
Cognitive development
of adolescents, 890
of children, 854, 854b, 888
of infants, 809
Cognitive function
higher, 155b, 165–167
in mental status examination, 155b, 164–167
Cognitive impairment, in older adults, 967, 982
Cogwheel rigidity, 788t
Cold sore, 290t
Colitis, ulcerative, diarrhea due to, 492t
Collaborative partnerships, 85b, 86
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
I n d e x  
1015
positive predictive value, 48–49, 49b
prevalence of disease, 49–50
sensitivity, 48, 48b, 49
speciﬁcity, 48, 48b, 49
Diaphragm, 309
Diaphragmatic excursion, 322–323, 322f
Diarrhea, 491t–493t
acute, 459, 491t
chronic, 459, 491t–493t
drug-induced, 491t
osmotic, 493t
secretory, 493t
voluminous, 493t
Diarrheal syndrome, 491t–492t
Diastasis recti, 499t, 839, 930
Diastole, 345–346
identiﬁcation of, 392
Diastolic blood pressure, 129
Diastolic murmurs, 394, 395b, 411t
early, 395b
middiastolic, 395b
presystolic, 395b
rumbling, 411t
Diencephalon, 711f, 713–714, 715f
Diet. See also Nutrition
assessing intake, 116
blood pressure and, 118–119, 143t
food sources of nutrients, 143t
in health history, 11
health promotion and counseling and, 114–119, 
115b
nutrition screening, 141t
recommendations for weight loss, 117–118, 117b
Diethylstilbestrol (DES), cervical abnormalities  
due to, 600t
Differential diagnosis, 46
Difﬁcult patient, 149
Diffuse esophageal spasm, chest pain in,  
330t–331t
Digital rectal examination (DRE), 612, 612b, 
616–619
Diphtheria, 293t
Diplopia, 218, 722, 723, 737
horizontal, 218
vertical, 218
DIPs. See Distal interphalangeal joints (DIPs)
Disc, herniated, assessment for, 765
Discomfort
deﬁnition, 455–456
lower abdomen, 457
upper abdomen, 455–456
Discriminative sensations, assessment of, 755–756, 
755f
Disease, 77
Disequilibrium, 271t, 722
Dislocation
anterior of humerus, 701t
anterior of shoulder, 649
posterior of elbow, 657, 657f
Dissociative disorder, 169t
Distal interphalangeal joints (DIPs)
of ﬁngers, 658, 658f, 661
of toes, 691
Distal radioulnar joint, 658, 658f
Distal weakness, 723
Distress, signs of, 120–121
Diverticulitis, 494t
acute, 488t, 503t
Dizziness, 219, 271t, 722
Dolichocephaly, 821
Doll’s eyes movements, 770, 770f
Dominant mass, 438
biceps, 759, 759f
brachioradialis, 760, 760f
in children, 888
knee, 761, 761f
in newborn, 847–848
triceps, 760, 760f
Deep tendon reﬂexes, in newborns, 847–848, 848f
Deep veins, of leg, 513–514, 514f
Deep venous thrombosis (DVT), 529, 534t
Defecation reﬂex, constipation and, 494t
Delayed puberty, 586
in females, 900
in males, 898
Delirium, 156
health promotion and counseling and, 732
in older adults, 732–733, 1001t
Deltoid ligament, 691, 691f
Deltoid muscle, 668f
Delusions, 163b
Dementia, 156, 164–165
health promotion and counseling and, 733
in older adults, 732–733, 1001t–1003t
screening for, 1002t–1003t
Mini-Cog assessment, 1002t
Montreal cognitive assessment (MoCA), 1003t
Dental caries, in children, 872–873, 917t
Denture stomatitis, 255
Dependent personality disorder, 153b
Depression
constipation related to, 494t
health promotion and counseling and, 733
low back pain and, 636
in older adults, 732–733
screening for, 151b, 156–157
de Quervain’s tenosynovitis, 661–662, 663, 664, 
745
Derailment, 161b
Dermatoﬁbroma, 196t
Dermatomes, 720
assessment of, 756–757, 756f, 757f
deﬁnition, 756
Dermatomyositis, 723
Dermis, 174, 174f
Dermoscopy, 181
Detection bias, 57b
Detrusor muscle, 452
Developmental disorders, and dysconjugate gaze, 
278t
Developmental quotient, 852, 852b
DEXA scanning, 638
Dextrocardia, 385
Diabetes
cardiovascular disease and, 367, 368b
peripheral neuropathies and, 731
in stroke, 729b
Diabetic neuropathies, 731
Diabetic retinopathy, 284t
Diagnosis, working, 28–29
Diagnostic tests
health history as, 46–47
physical examination as, 46–47
probability of, 46f, 47
reproducibility of, 53–55
kappa scores, 53–54, 54b, 54f
observer agreement, 54
precision, 54–55
validity of, 47–53
Bayes theorem, 51–52
Fagan nomogram, 52–53, 52f
likelihood ratios, 50–51, 51b
natural frequencies, 53, 53b
negative predictive value, 48–49, 49b
Craniotabes, 822
Crepitus, 319
Crescendo–decrescendo murmur, 396b
Crescendo murmur, 395b
Cricoid cartilage, 258, 258f
Crohn’s disease, 492t
Crossover test, 653b
Crying, quality of infant, 827, 828b
Cryptorchidism, 559t, 841, 881
Cuboid bone, 691, 691f
Cuff, for blood pressure measurements, 124, 124b, 
126, 127b
Cultural competence
collaborative partnerships, 86
cultural humility, 82–84
dimensions of, 85–86, 85b
deﬁnition, 82
respectful communication, 85–86
self-awareness, 85
Cultural considerations
African Americans
breast cancer in women, 425
cardiovascular disease in, 727
health disparities in health care delivery, 135
Cultural humility, 82–86, 83b, 84b
collaborative partnerships, 85b, 86
respectful communication, 85–86, 85b
self-awareness, 85, 85b
Culture, deﬁnition, 84
Cuneiforms bone, 691, 691f
Cushing syndrome, facies in, 272t
Cutaneous cyst, 286t
Cutaneous horn, 197t
Cutaneous stimulation reﬂexes, 721b, 763–764
abdominal, 763, 763f
anal, 764
plantar, 764, 764f
Cutis marmorata, 816
Cutis rhomboidalis nuchae, 206t
CVA. See Costovertebral angle (CVA)
CVAT. See Costovertebral angle tenderness (CVAT)
CVD. See Cardiovascular disease (CVD)
CVD risk calculators, 365b
Cyanosis, 318
bluish lips in, 918t
central, cardiac causes of, 832b
generalized, 918t
perioral, 918t
peripheral, 918t
Cystocele, 597t
Cystourethrocele, 597t
Cyst(s)
Baker’s, 687
of breast, 423b, 444t
epidermoid, 596t
ganglion, 704t
nabothian, 599t
of ovaries, 603t
popliteal, 687
retention, 599t
D
Dacryocystitis, 825
Decerebrate rigidity, 770, 793t
Decision-making capacity, 88
Decorticate rigidity, 770, 793t
Decrescendo murmur, 395b
Deep tendon reﬂexes, 720–721, 721b
assessment of, 758–763
ankle, 762, 762f
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
1016 
Index
Epididymitis, 560t
tuberculous, 560t
Epigastric hernia, 499t
Epigastric pain, 454f
Epiglottitis, acute, 874
Epilepsy, 725
Episcleritis, 275t
Epistaxis, 220–221
Epitrochlear lymph nodes, 22, 515, 523
Epstein pearls, 827
Equipment, for physical examination, 15–16, 
15b–16b
Erectile dysfunction, 546
Erection, 542
Erosion of teeth, 296t
Erythema, 882
Erythema nodosum, 534t–535t
Erythema toxicum, 819b, 911t
Erythroplakia, 298t
Esophageal cancer, 490t
Esophageal dysphagia, 490t
Esophageal spasm, diffuse, 490t
Esophageal stricture, 490t
Estrogen replacement therapy, in menopause, 582
Ethics and professionalism, 100–103
building blocks of, 100
Ethnogeriatric imperative, 968
Eustachian tube, 243, 243f
Eversion, of ankle, 693b
Evidence-based clinical practice
appraisal (critical), 56–59
diagnostic tests, 46–55
EBCP Venn diagram, 45f
health promotion, 55
Evidence-based decision making, 27
Exercise
counseling about, 117, 117f
in health history, 11
health promotion and counseling for, 119, 119b, 
637, 637b
moderate and vigorous activity, 119b
in older adults, 978, 978b
during pregnancy, 937–938
in stroke, 729b
Exophthalmometer, 264
Exophthalmos, 264, 274t
Exostosis, 245, 245f
Experimental event rate (EER), 57
Expiration, 309
Extension
of ankle, 693b
of elbow, 657b
of ﬁngers, 665, 665f
of hip, 679b, 680
of knee, 688b
of neck, 672b
of shoulder, 651b
of spine, 673b
of thumb, 665–666, 665f
of wrist, 662b
Extensor group, of hip muscles,  
675, 675f
External acoustic meatus, 644
External jugular vein, 258, 258f, 374, 375f
External rotation
of hip, 679b, 681, 681f
of knee, 688b
of shoulder, 652b, 653b, 654b
Extra-articular structures, 626b
Extraocular movements, 231
examination techniques for, 737
testing of, 237, 237f
Eardrum
abnormalities of, 287t–288t
healed perforation, 287t
inspection of, 246, 246f
normal, 287t
perforation of, 287t
retracted drum, 287t
tympanosclerosis, 287t
Ear(s)
examination techniques for
in adolescents, 895
in children, 867–871
in infants, 825–826
in physical examination, 21
in review of systems, 12b
Eating disorders
anorexia nervosa, 140t
bulimia nervosa, 140t
Ecchymosis, 205t
Eccrine glands, 175
ECG. See Electrocardiogram (ECG)
Echolalia, 162b
Ectocervix, 567
Ectopic pregnancy, ruptured, 603t
Ectropion, 274t, 567
Eczema, 911t
Edema
of foot and leg, 528–529
in health history, 357
in newborns, 817
peripheral, types of, 533t
pitting, 528, 533t
during pregnancy, 931b
scrotal, 558t
EER. See Experimental event rate (EER)
Efferent ﬁbers, 715
Egophony, 327
Ejaculation, 546
premature, 546
Ejaculatory duct, 542
Elastic laminae, 511
Elbow
anatomic considerations, 656, 656f
examination techniques for, 656–657
extension at, testing, 744, 744f
movements of, 657b
muscle groups of, 656, 656f
swollen/tender, 702t
Electrocardiogram (ECG), 351, 351f
Electronic thermometers, 133
Emotional development
of adolescents, 890
of children, 854
of infants, 809
Empathic responses, 69
Empowering patient, 72–73, 73b, 73f
Endocervical brush, 590b
Endocrine system, in review of systems,  
13b
Endometriosis, 574
Entropion, 274t, 991
Environment, for physical examination, 15
Epicondylitis
lateral, 657, 702t
medial, 657, 702t
Epidermal inclusion cyst, 196t
Epidermis, 173, 174f
Epidermoid cyst, 286t, 552, 552f, 596t
Epididymis
abnormalities of, 560t
anatomy of, 542
palpation of, 552–553
Doppler method, for blood pressure assessment, 814
Dorsalis pedis artery, 513
pulse assessment at, 528
Dorsiﬂexion, 693b
Dorsiﬂexor muscles, 691
Down syndrome (trisomy 21), 915t
DRE. See Digital rectal examination (DRE)
Dress
in general survey, 121
in mental status examination, 159
Drop arm sign, 655b
Drop attack, 781t
Dropped-arm test, 655b
Drug-induced rhinitis, 220
Drug use
constipation due to, 494t
in health history, 10
urinary incontinence due to, 498t
Drusen, 242, 242f, 285t, 992
Dual diagnosis, 147
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, 741
Dullness, in abdomen, 473
Dull percussion note, 322, 323b
Duodenum, anatomic considerations, 450f, 451
Dupuytren’s contracture, 642, 660, 662, 704t
DVT. See Deep venous thrombosis (DVT)
Dynamic stabilizers, of shoulder, 646
Dysarthria, 160, 723, 737, 740, 784t
Dysconjugate gaze, 236, 278t
Dysdiadochokinesis, 749
Dysesthesias, 724
Dyskinesias, oral–facial, 782t
Dyslipidemia
cardiovascular disease and, 368–369, 369f
in stroke, 729b
Dysmenorrhea, 570, 570b
Dysmetria, 750
Dyspareunia, 574
Dyspepsia, 455–456, 488t
Dysphagia, 458, 490t
esophageal, 490t
oropharyngeal, 490t
Dysphonia, 784t
Dysplastic nevus, 201t
Dyspnea, 310, 311
in health history, 357
in various disorders, 332t–333t
Dystonia, 783t
Dysuria, 462
E
Ear
anatomy and physiology of, 242–244
equilibrium, 244
external ear, 242–243, 242f
hearing pathways, 244, 244f
inner ear, 243f, 244
middle ear, 243–244, 243f
examination techniques for, 244–248
auditory acuity, testing for, 246–247
auricle, 244–245
conductive vs. neurosensory hearing loss, 
testing for, 247–248
ear canal and drum, 245–246, 245f, 246f
in health history, 219–220
lumps on or near, 286t
recording ﬁndings, 266b
Earache, 219
Ear canal, 242–243, 242f, 825
inspection of, 245–246, 245f, 246f
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
I n d e x  
1017
Finger(s)
abduction of, testing, 745, 745f
range of motion and maneuvers for, 665–666
rub test, 223
Finger-to-nose test, 750
Finkelstein’s test, 664, 664f
Fissured tongue, 297t
Flaccidity, 742, 788t
Flaccid paralysis, 770
Flank pain, 463, 464f
Flat feet, 706t, 922t
Flat percussion note, 323b
Flatus, 459
Flexion
of ankle, 693b
of elbow, 657b
of ﬁngers, 665, 665f
of hip, 679b, 680, 680f
of knee, 688b
of neck, 672b
at shoulder, testing, 651b
of spine, 672b
of thumb, 665–666, 665f
of wrist, 662b
Flexor group, of hip muscles, 675, 675f
Flexor retinaculum ligament, 659
Flight of ideas, 162b
Floating ribs, 304
Fluid exchange, 516
FOBT. See Fecal occult blood testing (FOBT)
Focal seizures, 780t
Focused health history, 67
Focused patient assessment, 5–7, 5b
Folate, food sources of, 143t
Fontanelles, of infants, 820–821, 821f
Forced expiratory time, 329
Fordyce spots, 294t
Foreign body in eye, 264
everting upper eyelid to search for, 264–265, 
265f
Foreskin, 542, 551, 840
Fornix, 566
Fovea, 227, 228f
inspection of, 242
Fracture
Colles’, 660
risk with osteoporosis, 639
scaphoid, 661
supracondylar, 657, 657f
Fractured rib, identiﬁcation of, 329
Frailty, in older adults, 955, 975
FRAX calculator, 639
Fremitus, 320, 320f
Friction rub, 472, 501t
Frontal lobe, 711f
Frontal sinuses, 249, 251, 251f
Frozen shoulder, 701t
Functional incontinence, 463, 498t
Functional syndromes, 148, 149, 150b
Fundal height, 944
Fundus, 566
dark-skinned person, normal fundus of,  
283t
in diabetic retinopathy, 284t
in hypertensive retinopathy, 283t
inspection of, 241
light-colored spots in, 285t
light-skinned person, normal fundus of,  
283t
red spots and streaks in, 282t
Funnel chest, 336t
Furuncles, 194t
Falls
assessment for preventing, 987–989
health promotion and counseling and, 641
risk factors for, 641
STEADI algorithm, 987b, 988f
Families, of children
agendas of, 859
as resource, 859
working with, 858–859
Family history, of patient, 8b, 10–11
Family planning, 581, 581b
Fasciculations, 740
Fat, abdominal, 500t
Fatigue
in health history, 112
during pregnancy, 931b
Fecal impaction, 494t
Fecal occult blood testing (FOBT), 469b, 615
Feelings of depersonalization, 163b
Feelings of unreality, 163b
Feet
abnormalities of, 706t
anatomy of, 690–691, 691f
edema of, 528
examination techniques for, 692–695
movements of, 693b
soles of, abnormalities of, 707t
Felon, 705t
Female genitalia
anatomy and physiology of, 565–569, 565f, 
566f, 567f, 568f
examination techniques for, 583–594, 584b.  
See also Pelvic examination
in adolescents, 900, 901b
in children, 882–885
external, 586
hernias, 594
in infants, 841–842
internal, 587–594
in older adults, 994–996
during regnancy, 945–947
special techniques, 594
in health history, 569–575, 570b
health promotion and counseling and, 575–583
recording ﬁndings, 595, 595b
in review of systems, 13b
sexually transmitted infections of, 574–575,  
596t
Femoral artery, pulse assessment at, 513, 526
Femoral canal, 544
Femoral hernia, 544, 561t
Femur
in knee joint, 682
lateral epicondyle of, 682
medial epicondyle of, 682
Fetal alcohol syndrome, 914t
Fetal exposure, to diethylstilbestrol, 600t
Fetal macrosomia, 933
Fever
blister, 290t
causes, 133
deﬁnition, 112, 133
in health history, 112
Fiber deﬁciency, constipation and, 494t
Fibroadenomas, characteristics of, 423b, 444t
Fibroids, of uterus, 602t
Fibromyalgia, 632
joint pain in, 696t–697t
Fibrous connective tissue, of breast, 420
Fibrous joints, 628b, 629, 629f
Fibrous papule, 199t
Fibula, 682
Extremities
lower, in physical examination, 22–23
during pregnancy, 947
Exudates
hard, 285t
soft, 285t
Exudative tonsillitis, 292t
Eyeball, 227
Eyelids
patch, 819b
variations and abnormalities of, 274t
Eye movements, in infants, 823
Eye protrusion, 264
Eyes
anatomy and physiology of, 226–230, 226f, 
227f, 228f
autonomic nerve supply to, 230
autonomic stimulation, 230–231
binocular vision, 228, 228f
examination techniques for, 231–238
in adolescents, 895
in children, 866–867
conjunctiva and sclera, 234, 234f
cornea and lens, 235
extraocular muscles, 236–238, 237f,  
238f
eyebrows and eyelids, 233–234
in infants, 823–825
iris, 235, 235f
lacrimal apparatus, 234
optic disc, 240–241
position and alignment of eyes, 233
pupils, 235–236, 235f
retina, 241–242
visual acuity, 231–232
visual ﬁelds, 232–233
headache due to disorder of, 268t–269t
in health history, 217–218
lumps and swellings in and around, 275t
monocular vision, 228, 228f
ophthalmoscopic examination, 238–240
in physical examination, 21
during pregnancy, 943
recording ﬁndings, 266b
in review of systems, 12b
visual ﬁelds and, 228, 228f
visual pathways and, 229–230, 229f, 230f
F
Face, during pregnancy, 942
Faces Pain Scale, for pain, 135, 135f
Facial expression
in general survey, 121
in mental status examination, 159
Facial nerve, 715, 715f, 716b
examination of, 739
lesion of, 787t
Facial nerve palsy, 889, 914t
Facial paralysis, 787t
Facial swelling, 272t
Facial symmetry, in infants, 822
Facies, abnormal, 264t, 272t
in infants, 822, 823b
Factitious disorder, 169t
Fagan nomogram, 52–53, 52f
Failure to thrive
Fainting, 358, 724
in health history, 724
hysterical, 778t
Fallopian tubes, 567
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
1018 
Index
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae type b, 923t
Hair
anatomy of, 174
loss of. See also Hair loss
in arterial peripheral vascular disease, 518
of older adults, 958f, 959
during pregnancy, 942
terminal, 174
vellus, 174
Hair loss, 176, 209t–210t
anagen efﬂuvium, 209t
examination of patient with, 188–189
focal, 209t–210t
generalized or diffuse, 209t
telogen efﬂuvium, 209t
Hair pull test, 188
Hair shaft disorders, 210t
Halitosis, 875
Hallucination, 163b
Hallux valgus, 706t
Hammer toe, 707t
Hamstring muscles, 683, 683f
Hand
anatomy of, 658, 658f
arthritis in, 660–661, 703t
assessment of arterial supply to, 529–530
examination techniques, 659–665
swelling and deformities of, 704t
Hand grip strength, 663, 663f
Hand hygiene, CDC recommendations for, 17–18, 
17f
Handwashing, 182
Harlequin dyschromia, 816
Hashimoto thyroiditis, 263
Hawkin’s impingement test, 654b
Head
anatomy and physiology of, 224–225, 225f
examination techniques for, 225–226
in children, 865–866
face, 226
hair, 225
in infants, 820–823
in older adults, 991–993
during regnancy, 942–943
scalp, 225
skin, 226
skull, 226
in health history, 216–217
nodes and cysts of, 828f
in physical examination, 21
recording ﬁndings, 266b
in review of systems, 12b
Headache
attributes of, 216
head position and, 217
in health history, 216–217, 721–722
migraine, 722
postconcussion, 268t–269t
primary, 216, 267t, 721
secondary, 216, 268t–269t, 721
symptoms associated with, 217
warning signs, 216b
Head circumference
of children, 863
of infants, 814, 814f, 822
Head to toe, physical examination of
abdomen, 22
anterior thorax and lungs, 22
axillary nodes, 22
back, 21
breasts, 22
cardiovascular system, 22
Glasgow Coma Scale, 791t
Glass thermometers, 133
Glaucoma, 222
headache due to, 268t–269t
narrow-angle, 235
open-angle, 235
primary open-angle, 222–223
Glaucomatous cupping, 280t
Glenohumeral joint, 645, 646f, 647
Glenoid fossa, 646f, 647
Glossopharyngeal nerve, 715, 715f, 716b
examination of, 739–740
Gluteus maximus muscle, 668f, 675, 675f
Gluteus medius muscle, 676
Gluteus minimus muscle, 676
Goiter, 221, 262
multinodular, 299t
Golfer’s elbow, 657, 702t
Gonococcal arthritis, 631, 633
Gonococcal tenosynovitis, 661
Gonorrhea, 579, 579b
Gout
acute, 696t
chronic tophaceous, 696t, 703t
Gouty arthritis
of feet, 706t
joint pain in, 696t
Gown, patient, 182
GRADE. See Grading of Recommendations, 
Assessment, Development, and 
Evaluation (GRADE)
Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, 
Development, and Evaluation (GRADE), 
59
Grand mal seizure, 781t
Graphesthesia, 755
Graves disease, 263
Graves ophthalmopathy, 264
Graves speculum, 585, 585f
Gray matter
of brain, 713, 713f
of spinal cord, 717, 775t
Great arteries, transposition of, 920t
Greater trochanter, of femur, 675, 675f, 676
Greater tubercle, of humerus, 646, 646f
Great vessels
heart, 344
neck, 258, 258f
Grip, testing, 745, 745f
Groin
anatomy of, 543–544, 543f
lymph nodes of, 516
Grooming
in general survey, 121
in mental status examination, 159
Growth, somatic
of adolescents, 894
of children, 862–863
of infants, 813–814
Growth charts, 813
Guarding, abdominal, 475b
Guided questioning, 69–71, 69f
Guidelines for Adolescent Preventive Services 
(GAPS), 893
Guillain–Barré syndrome, 723
Gynecomastia, 421, 440, 897
H
Habit tic deformity, 211t
Habituation, 826
G
Gag reﬂex, assessment of, 740
Gail model, 427
Gait
abnormalities of, 789t
assessment of, in children, 887
in coordination assessment, 750–751
examination technique for, 676–677
in general survey, 122
Parkinsonian, 789t
stance phase of, 676, 676f
swing phase of, 676–677, 677f
Galactorrhea, 423
Galeazzi test, 844
Gallbladder, anatomic considerations, 450f, 451
Ganglion cyst, 704t
GAPS. See Guidelines for Adolescent Preventive 
Services (GAPS)
Gaseous distention, 500t
Gastrocnemius muscle, 688
Gastroesophageal reﬂux disease (GERD), 455, 456, 
458, 488t
Gastrointestinal reﬂux disease
chest pain in, 330t–331t
cough in, 334t
Gastrointestinal system, in health history, 455–461
Gay sexual orientation, 545
Gaze
cardinal directions of, 231, 231f
dysconjugate, 236, 278t
of newborn(s), 823
nystagmus and, 785t–786t
Gelling, 631, 632
General appearance, 12b, 120–123
Generalized anxiety disorder, 155
Generalized lymphadenopathy, 261
Generalized seizures, 781t
General survey, 21, 111, 120–123
documentation, 138b
examination techniques for
in adolescents, 894
in children, 862–863
in older adults, 989
during regnancy, 941
of infants, 813–816
Genital herpes, 557t, 596t
Genital system
female. See Female genitalia
male. See Male genitalia
in review of systems, 13b
Genital warts, 557t
Genu valgum, 684
Genu varum, 684
Geographic tongue, 297t, 874
Geriatric approach, for primary care, 956b–957b
Geriatric diversity, 968b
Geriatric syndromes, 956, 966–967
Gestational age, assessment of, 805–808
Ballard Scoring System, 805, 806f
intrauterine growth based on, 807f
Gestational hypertension, 942
Giant cell arteritis, headache due to, 268t–269t
Gingiva, 252, 252f
Gingival hyperplasia, 295t
Gingival margins, 252
Gingival sulcus, 252
Gingivitis, 223, 255
acute necrotizing ulcerative, 295t
Gland lobules, of breast, 419f
Glandular tissue, of breast, 420
Glans, 541–542, 551
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
I n d e x  
1019
conductive, 219, 244, 247, 248, 289t
patterns of, 289t
sensorineural, 219, 244, 248, 289t
Hearing pathways, 244, 244f
Heart. See also Cardiac entries
anatomy of, 343–344, 344f
chambers, valves, and circulation, 345, 345f
conduction system, 351–352, 351f, 352f
examination techniques for
in adolescents, 895–896
in children, 877–879
in infants, 832–838
during regnancy, 943
and great vessels, 344
as pump, 352–353
surface projections of, 343–344
Heartburn, 310, 456
during pregnancy, 931b
Heart failure
left-sided
cough in, 311
dyspnea in, 332t–333t
physical ﬁndings in, 339t
with preserved ejection fraction, 353
with reduced ejection fraction, 353
Heart murmurs, 349–350
aging and, 355
benign
in adolescents, 895–896, 896b
in children, 878, 879b
in infants, 836–838, 837b–838b
congenital, 919t–920t
aortic valve stenosis, 919t
atrial septal defect, 920t
patent ductus arteriosus, 920t
pulmonary valve stenosis, 919t
tetralogy of Fallot, 919t
transposition of great arteries, 920t
ventricular septal defect, 920t
continuous murmurs, 395b
diastolic murmurs, 394, 395b, 411t
gradations of, 396, 396b
identiﬁcation of, 393–394, 394b
intensity of, 396
location of maximal intensity, 396
maneuvers for identiﬁcation of,  
397–399
midsystolic murmurs,  
408t–409t
in older adults, 961
pansystolic murmurs, 410t
pathologic, 837b–838b
pitch and quality, 397
right-sided, 397
shape, 395–396
systolic murmurs, 394, 394b
timing, 394–395
Heart rate. See also Pulses
assessment of, 132, 132f
from birth to 1 year, 815b
of children at rest, 865b
measurement of, 373–374
normal, 132
in older adults, 958
during pregnancy, 945
Heart rhythms
arrhythmias, 131
syncope in, 778t
in children, 835b
irregular, 132
in older adults, 958
during pregnancy, 945
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA), 88
Health maintenance, 10
Health promotion and counseling
abdominal aortic aneurysm screening, 520–521
alcohol abuse screening, 157–158, 464–466, 
465b
blood pressure and dietary sodium, 118–119
breast cancer, 423–434
cervical cancer screening, 575–578, 576b, 577b
colorectal cancer screening, 615
colorectal screening, 468–470, 469b
delirium, dementia and depression, 732–733
depression screening, 156–157
exercise, 119, 119b, 637, 637b
fall prevention, 641
family planning, 581, 581b
hearing loss, 223
hepatitis risk factors, 466–468
herpes zoster, 731–732
HIV prevention, 548–549, 548b, 549b
human papillomavirus, 547–548
immunizations, 316–317
inﬂuenza, 316
lung cancer, 315–316
menopause, 582
nutrition, weight, and physical activity, 636–637, 
637b
oral health, 223–224
osteoporosis, 637
bone density, measurement of, 638–639, 639b
fracture risk assessment for, 639
risk factors for, 638b
screening for, 638
treatment and prevention, 639–641
ovarian cancer screening, 578–579
peripheral arterial disease screening, 519–521
peripheral neuropathies, 731
during pregnancy
domestic violence, 935–940, 939, 939b
exercise, 937–938
immunizations, 937
nutrition, 935–936
substance abuse, 938
weight gain, 936, 937b
prostate cancer screening, 612–615, 612b, 614b, 
615b
renal artery disease screening, 520
sexually transmitted infections, 547–548, 548b, 
579–581, 615
skin cancer prevention, 176–177
skin cancer screening, 178–180
streptococcal pneumonia, 317
stroke prevention, 726–731
substance abuse screening, 157–158
suicide risk screening, 157
testicular self-examination, 550, 555, 
555b–556b
tobacco cessation, 313–315
vision, loss of, 222–223
weight, nutrition, and diet, 114–118, 115b
Healthy People 2020, 370, 372, 636
Hearing
acoustic nerve and, 739
in children, 870–871, 870f, 871b
older adults, 959–960
Hearing aids, 223
Hearing Handicap Inventory for the Elderly—
Screening Version, 223
Hearing loss, 219, 223
assessment of
in infants, 826
epitrochlear nodes, 22
general survey, 21
head, eyes, ears, nose, throat (HEENT), 21
lower extremities, 22–23
lungs, 21
neck, 21
nervous system, 23
posterior thorax, 21
rectal and genital examinations, 23–24
skin, 21
vital signs, 21
Health, apparent state of, 120
Health disparities
alcohol, prescription drugs and substance abuse, 
157–158
breast cancer in women, 425
cardiovascular disease, 727
fracture risk, 639
in health care delivery, 135
obesity/overweight, 109b
osteoporosis screening, 638
prostate cancer screening, 610, 612, 613
stroke risk prevalence and mortality, 727–728
Health history. See also Interviewing, health history
abdomen in, 453–464
gastrointestinal tract and, 455–461
urinary tract and, 461–464
adult, 7–13, 8b
chief complaint(s), 9
date and time, 8
family history, 10–11
overview, 8b
past history, 10
personal and social, 11
present illness, 9–10
reliability of information, 8b, 9
review of systems, 11–13
source of history/referral, 9
behavior and mental status examination, 
153–156, 154b–155b
breast in, 422–423
cardiovascular system in, 355–358
comprehensive vs. focused, 5b
as diagnostic tests, 46–47
ears in, 219–220
eyes in, 217–218
family, 10–11
fatigue and weakness in, 112
female genitalia in, 569–575, 570b
fever, chills and night sweats in, 112
format, 66
headache and, 216–217
head in, 216–217
interviewing and, 65–105, 65f
kinds of, 67–68
male genitalia in, 544–547, 544b
mouth in, 221
musculoskeletal system in, 630–635
neck in, 221
nervous system in, 721–725
nose in, 220–221
pain in, 114, 134–137
past, 10
peripheral vascular system in, 517–518
review of systems in, 11–13
sexual, 544–546, 544b, 572–573
sinuses in, 220–221
social and personal, 11
subjective data vs. objective data in, 7b
thorax and lungs in, 310–313
throat in, 221
weight changes in, 113–114
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
1020 
Index
Hypertensive retinopathy, 283t
with macular star, 283t
Hyperthyroidism, 221, 299t
in children, 915t
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
murmur of, 398
syncope in, 778t
Hypertrophy, muscular, 741
Hyperventilation, 335t
hypocapnia due to, 778t
Hypesthesia, deﬁnition, 754
Hypocapnia, 778t
Hypogastric pain, 454f
Hypoglossal nerve, 715, 715f, 716b
examination of, 740–741
Hypoglycemia, syncope in, 778t
Hyporeﬂexia, 758
Hypospadias, 551, 558t, 922t
Hypotension, orthostatic, 131, 957
blood pressure, 131
syncope in, 778t
Hypothalamus, 713–714
Hypothenar atrophy, 660, 704t, 741–742, 742f
Hypothermia, 133
causes of, 133
deﬁnition, 133
Hypothesis, in clinical reasoning, 27b–28b
Hypothyroidism, 221, 299t, 762
congenital, 914t
Hypotonia, 742
I
Icterus, 460–461
Idiopathic pain, 136b
Iliac crest, 449f, 668f, 669, 670, 674, 674f, 675
Iliac spine
anterior superior, 449f, 674, 674f, 678
posterior superior, 675, 675f, 678, 678b
Iliac tubercle, 674, 674f, 675f, 677b
Iliopectineal bursa, 676
Iliopsoas bursa, 676
Ilium, 674
wing of, 674, 674f
Illness, 77
anxiety disorder, 77, 169t
Illusions, 163b
Immunizations
in health history, 10
hepatitis B, 466–467
inﬂuenza, 316, 316b
pneumococcal vaccine, 317, 317b
during pregnancy, 937
Impetigo, in infants, 911t
Impingement syndrome, 700t
Incisional hernia, 499t
Incoherence, 162b
Incus, 243, 243f
Indigestion, 457
Infantile automatisms, 849, 849b–851b
Infants
assessment of
distraction and play for, 810
general guidelines for, 810–811
tips for, 810b
cognitive and language development of, 809
developmental milestones for, 809f, 810f, 811
development of, 809
examination techniques for
abdomen, 838–840
breasts, 838
ﬂexion, 746, 746f
movements of, 679b, 680–681
Histrionic personality disorders, 152b
HIV infection
in females, 580
health promotion and counseling for, 548–549, 
548b, 549b, 580–581
incidence, 548b, 580
in males, 548–549
screening guidelines, 579
Hoarseness, 221
Holosystolic murmurs. See Pansystolic murmurs
Home blood pressure monitoring, 125b
Hordeolum, 275t
Horizontal defect, 273t
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT)
in breast cancer, 425
in menopause, 582
Hormones, of ovaries, 568
Horner’s syndrome, 277t, 736–737
Household safety, of older adults, 978, 978b
Houston, valves of, 607f, 608, 608f
Human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV)
in females, 580
health promotion and counseling for, 548–549, 
548b, 549b, 580–581
incidence, 548b, 580
in males, 548–549
screening guidelines, 579
Human papilloma virus (HPV)
cervical cancer and, 575
vaccine for, 577–578
Humeroulnar joint, 656
Humerus, 646, 646f
anterior dislocation of, 701t
in elbow joint, 656
in shoulder anatomy, 646–647
Hutchinson teeth, 296t
Hydrocele, 552–553, 558t
transillumination of, 841f
Hydrocephalus, 913t
Hydrostatic pressure, 516f
Hymen, 565f, 566
imperforate, 587
in prepubertal and adolescent females, 884b
Hyoid bone, 258, 258f
Hypalgesia, deﬁnition, 754
Hyperalgesia, deﬁnition, 754
Hyperesthesia, deﬁnition, 754
Hyperopia, 217, 240
Hyperpnea, 335t
Hyperpyrexia, 133
Hyperreﬂexia, 758
Hyperresonant percussion note, 323b
Hypertension
in adolescents, 895
cardiovascular disease and, 365–367, 366b
in children, 863–865, 910t
classiﬁcation of, 130b
deﬁnitions of, 125b
diagnosing for, 125
gestational, 942
isolated systolic, 130
lifestyle modiﬁcations for, 371, 371b
masked, 126
nocturnal, 126
primary, 365
secondary, 365
in stroke, 729b
types of, 126
white coat, 124b, 126, 131
in women, 360
Heart sounds, 393b
extra
in diastole, 407t
in systole, 406t
in infants, 835–836
splitting of, 348–349, 348f, 404t
variations in, 404t, 405t
Heberden’s nodes, 660–661, 661f, 703t
Heel-to-shin test, 750
Hegar sign, 930
Height
of children, 862–863
in general survey, 122
Helix, 242, 242f
Hematemesis, 220, 458
Hematochezia, 460, 495t
Hematologic system, in review of systems, 13b
Hematuria, 463
Hemianopsia, 273t
bitemporal, 273t, 736
homonymous, 736
left homonymous, 273t
Hemiparesis
deﬁnition, 743
spastic, 789t
Hemiplegia, 743
posture in, 793t
Hemoglobin, 174
Hemoptysis, 220, 310, 312
Hemorrhage, subarachnoid
assessment for, 765
headache due to, 268t–269t
Hemorrhagic stroke, 726, 728
Hemorrhoids
external, 621t
internal, 621t
during pregnancy, 931b
Hepatitis
A, 466, 466b
B, 466–467, 467b
C, 467–468
risk factors for, 461b, 466–468, 466b,  
467b
Hepatitis B immunization, 466–467, 467b
Hepatomegaly, 504t
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, 291t
Hernias
epigastric, 499t
examination techniques for, 553–555
in females, 594
femoral, 544, 561t
incisional, 499t
inguinal, 542, 554, 561t, 678
scrotal, 554–555, 558t
umbilical, 499t
ventral, examination techniques for, 487
Herniated disc, 671, 765
Herpes simplex virus (HSV), 290t
genital, 557t, 596t
Herpes zoster, 731–732
Herpetic stomatitis, 816t
Hinge joints, 629b, 630, 630f
HIPAA. See Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA)
Hip(s)
anatomy of, 674–676, 674f, 675f
examination techniques for, 676–681
ﬂexion deformity of, 680
motor assessment of
abduction, 746
adduction, 746
extension, 747
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
I n d e x  
1021
greeting patient and establishing rapport, 
75–76
identifying and responding to patient’s 
emotional cues, 78–79
inviting patient’s story, 77
self-reﬂection, 82
sharing treatment plan, 80–81
silent patient, 86–87
skilled, 68–73. See also Skilled interviewing, 
fundamentals of
talkative patient, 89
Intestinal obstruction, and constipation, 494t
Intima of artery, 510
Intracranial pressure, increased, in infants, 
 821
Intradermal nevi, 200t
Intraurethral pressure, 452
Introitus, 565f, 566
Intussusception, 494t
Inversion
of ankle, 693b
of foot, 922t
Involuntary movements
in health history, 725
motor assessment of, 741
types of, 782t–783t
Iris, 227, 227f
Iritis, red eyes in, 270t
Iron, food sources of, 143t
Irritable bowel syndrome, 491t, 494t
Ischemia, mesenteric, 488t–489t
Ischemic stroke. See also Stroke
deﬁnition, 726
Ischial (ischiogluteal) bursa, 676, 679, 679f
Ischial (ischiogluteal) bursitis, 679
Ischial tuberosity, 671, 671f, 675, 676
Ischiogluteal bursa, 676
Ischium, 674, 674f
Isolated clinic hypertension. See White coat 
hypertension
Isometric handgrip, 399
Isthmus, of uterus, 566
J
Jaundice, 460–461, 461b
in newborns, 817, 818b
Joint capsule, 628
Joint pain, 696t–697t
in health history, 630–635
monoarticular, 631
polyarticular, 631
systemic disorders related to, 633, 633b–634b
tips for assessing, 631b
types of, 631–632
Joint(s)
of ankle and foot, 690–691, 691f
cartilaginous, 628, 628b, 628f
condylar, 629b, 630, 630f
describing limited motion of, 694–695, 695f
of elbow, 656
ﬁbrous, 628b, 629, 629f
hinge, 629b, 630, 630f
of hip, 674–675
of knee, 682
of shoulder, 647
spheroidal, 629, 629b, 629f
of spine, 668
structure and function of, 626–630
synovial, 628, 628b, 628f
bursae and, 630
structure of, 630
of male genitalia, 551
of penis, 551
of scrotum, 552
of shoulder, 649
of spine, 668–669, 670b
of wrist and hand, 659–660
Inspiration, 309
Intention tremors, 782t
Intercarpal joints, 658, 658f
Interdental papillae, 252, 252f
Intermittent claudication, 517, 534t
Internal capsule, 713f, 714
Internal jugular vein, 258, 258f, 374, 375f
Internal rotation
of hip, 679b, 681, 681f
of knee, 688b
of shoulder, 652b, 653b, 655b
Interphalangeal joints
distal, 691
proximal, 691
Interpreter, guidelines for working with, 91
Interstitial lung diseases, diffuse
dyspnea in, 332t–333t
Intervertebral discs, 668
herniated, 671
Intervertebral foramen, 667, 667b
Interviewing, health history and, 65–105, 65f
advanced, 86–99
angry/disruptive patient, 89–90
behavior change, 81
clinician-centered, 66
confusing patient, 87
crying patient, 89
cultural context of, 73b, 82–86
collaborative partnerships, 86
cultural humility, 82–85, 83b, 84b, 85b
respectful communication, 85–86
self-awareness, 85
motivational, 81, 81b
patient-centered, 65–66, 66f
patient with altered cognition, 87–89
patient with hearing loss, 92
patient with impaired vision, 92
patient with language barrier, 90
patient with limited intelligence, 92–93
patient with low literacy/low health literacy, 
91–92
patient with personal problems, 93
preparation steps, 73b
adjusting environment, 74–75
reviewing clinical behavior and appearance, 74
reviewing clinical record, 74, 74f
setting goals for interview, 74
process, 66
seductive patient, 93
sensitive topics, 93–99
alcohol, 96–97
death and dying patient, 98–99
domestic violence, 97–98
guidelines for broaching, 94b
intimate partner violence, 97–98
mental health history, 95–96
physical and sexual abuse, 98, 98b
prescribed/illicit drugs, 96–97
sexual history, 94–95, 95b
sequence of, 73b, 75–86
closing interview and visit, 81–82
establishing agenda, 76–77
expanding and clarifying patient’s story, 79–80
exploring patient’s perspective, 77–78, 78b
generating and testing diagnostic hypotheses, 
80, 80f
ears, 825–826
eyes, 823–825
female genitalia, 841–842
general survey, 813–816
head, 820–823
heart, 832–838
hips, 843
male genitalia, 840–841
mouth and pharynx, 826–827
musculoskeletal system, 842–845
neck, 828–829
nervous system, 845–852
nose and sinuses, 826
rectal examination, 842
skin, 816–820, 818b–820b
somatic growth, 813–814
thorax and lungs, 829–832
vital signs, 814–816
health promotion and counseling and, 812,  
812b
health supervision visits for, 812b
liver size in healthy term, 839b
physical development of, 809
signs of hearing in, 826
social and emotional development, 809
visual milestones for, 825b
Infection. See also speciﬁc infections
constipation due to, 494t
diarrhea due to, 491t
umbilical hernia in, 499t
Inferior mesenteric artery, 513
Inferior vena cava, 344, 513
Inﬂamed seborrheic keratosis, 201t
Inﬂammation
in joint pain, 632
meningeal, 764–765
Inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD), diarrhea due to, 
492t–493t
Inﬂammatory diarrhea, 491t
Inﬂuenza, 316
vaccine
for older adults, 979b–980b
recommendations, 316b
Information and vocabulary, 165
Infraclavicular lymph nodes, 441
Infraspinatus muscle, 647
examination technique for, 652b
Inguinal canal, 543
Inguinal hernia, 542, 554, 561t, 881
in females, 594
Inguinal ligament, 678, 678f
Inguinal lymph nodes, 515–516, 516f, 524, 543
Inguinal ring, 543
Inguinal structures, 678
Insight, in mental status examination, 154b, 155, 
164
Inspection
of abdomen, 471–472, 471f
in infants, 838–839
of axillae, 440
of breast, female, 434–436, 435f, 436f
chest, 319, 327
deﬁnition, 18b
of elbow, 656
female genitalia
cervix, 588–589
external, 586
vagina, 590
of heart, in infants, 832–833
of hip, 676–677
of inguinal hernia, 554
of knee, 684
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
1022 
Index
disease of
risk factors for, 461b
enlargement of, 504t
examination techniques for, 475–478
palpation, 476–478, 477f, 478f, 504t
percussion, 475–476, 476f
span of dullness, 475–476, 476f
normal size of, 479
Liver size, in healthy term infants, 839b
Lobar pneumonia, physical ﬁndings, 339t
Lobes
of brain, 711f
of breast, 420
Loss of consciousness, in health history, 724
Loss of sensation, in health history, 724
Low back pain, in health history, 634–635
lumbosacral radiculopathy and, 765–766
Low blood pressure, 131
Low-dose computed tomography (LDCT), for 
screening for lung cancer, 315–316
Lower abdominal pain, during pregnancy, 931b
Lower motor neurons, damage to, 718
Lubricant use, in pelvic or rectal examinations, 594b
Lumbar spinal stenosis, 699t
Lumbar vertebrae, anatomy of, 667b
Lumbosacral junction, 668
Lumbosacral radiculopathy, assessment for, 
765–766
Lung abscess, cough in, 334t
Lung cancer, 315–316
cough in, 334t
Lung excursion, 319
Lungs, 307. See also Thorax
anatomy and physiology of, 303–309
examination techniques for, 317–329
in children, 876–877
in infants, 829–831, 829–832
in older adults, 993
during pregnancy, 943
ﬁssures and lobes, 307, 307f
in health history, 310–313
in physical examination, 21
physical examination of, 22
recording ﬁndings, 329
Lung sounds, 338t
Lymphadenopathy, 524
in children, 875, 917t
Lymphangitis, acute, 534t
Lymphatic system, 515–516
Lymphedema, 533t
Lymph node(s)
anatomy and physiology of, 515–516
axillary, 515
of breast area, 421–422, 441
epitrochlear, 515, 523
of female genitalia, 569
functions of, 515
inguinal, 515–516, 524, 543
of male genitalia, 543
of neck, 259, 259f
examination of, 259–261, 260f, 261f
in physical examination, 22
recording ﬁndings, 266b
superﬁcial, 515–516
M
Macrocephaly, 822
Macrosomia, fetal, 933
Macula, 227, 228f
degeneration of, 222, 242
inspection of, 242
Language, in mental status examination, 155b, 
160, 160b
Language development
of children, 854
of infants, 809
Lanugo, 816
LaPlace, law of, 511
Large for gestational age (LGA), 807, 807b, 808f
Laryngeal sounds, 326
Laryngitis, cough in, 334t
Lateral collateral ligament (LCL), 684, 686, 689b
Lateral compartment, 686
Lateral condyle, of tibia, 682, 682f
Lateral epicondyle, of femur, 656, 682, 682f
Lateral epicondylitis, 657, 702t
Lateral lymph nodes, 421, 422f, 441
Lateral malleolus, 691
Lateral meniscus, 682f, 684–685
Latissimus dorsi muscle, 668, 668f
Law of LaPlace, 511
LCL. See Lateral collateral ligament (LCL)
Lead-pipe rigidity, 788t
Learning ability, in mental status examination,  
165
Left ventricle, 344, 344f
Leg(s)
arteries of, 513, 513f
in coordination assessment, 749
edema of, 528
length measurement, 694, 694f
peripheral vascular system, examination 
techniques, 524–529
shortening, in children, 886
venous system, 513–514, 514f
Length, of infants, 813, 814f
Leopold’s maneuvers, 948–950, 949f–950f
Lesbian sexual orientation, 545–546, 573
Lesser tubercle, of humerus, 646f, 647, 648
Lethargy, 769b
Leukoplakia, 223, 294t, 298t
Leukorrhea, 569
of pregnancy, 930
Levator palpebrae, 226, 226f
Level of consciousness
in comatose patient, 768, 769b
in general survey, 120
in mental status examination, 159
Libido, 546
Lid lag, 236
Lid retraction, 274t
Lifestyle habits, in health history, 11
Ligaments
of ankle and feet, 691
deﬁnition, 626b
of knee, 682–684, 682f
of spine, 666
Light, pupillary reactions to, 736
Light-headedness, 722
Lighting
perpendicular, 15
for physical examination, 15
tangential, 15
Light reaction, pupil, 229, 229f
Likelihood ratios, 50–51, 51b
Limbus, 226, 226f
Linea nigra, 930
Lingual frenulum, 254, 254f
Lipoma, 196t, 499t
Lips, 252
abnormalities of, 290t–291t
Liver
anatomic considerations, 450f, 451
Joint (continued)
temporomandibular, 644–645, 644f, 645f
types of articulation, 628–629, 628b
of wrist and hand, 658, 658f
Judgment, in mental status examination, 154b, 164
Jugular venous hum, 355
Jugular venous pressure (JVP), 354
assessment of, 374–378, 375f
elevated, 377–378
oscillation point of, 375–376, 375f
steps for measurement of, 376b–377b
and volume status, 376
Jugular venous pulsations, 354, 354f, 378–379, 
379f
and carotid pulsations, 377b
Justice, in patient care, 100b
JVP. See Jugular venous pressure (JVP)
K
Kaposi sarcoma, in AIDS, 293t
Kappa scores, 53–54, 54b, 54f
Kayser-Fleischer ring, 276t
Keloid, 286t
Keloids, 196t
Keratosis
actinic, 197t
seborrheic, 196t
Keratotic scale, 197t
Kernig’s sign, 765, 876
Kidneys
anatomic considerations, 451, 451f
enlargement of, 481–482
examination techniques for, 481–482
pain in, 463, 464f
Knee
anatomy of, 682–684, 682f, 683f
assessment of reﬂexes in, 761, 761f
examination techniques for, 684–689, 
689b–690b
for ﬂuid detection, 687–688
inspection, 684
maneuvers for, 689, 689b–690b
palpation, 685–688
range of motion, 688, 688b
extension of, testing, 747, 747f
ﬂexion of, testing, 747, 747f
movements of, 688b
Knock-knee pattern, 885
Koplik spots, 294t
Korotkoff sounds, 128, 131, 398
in children, 864
Kussmaul breathing, 335t
Kyphosis, 960
L
Labial adhesion, 883
Labial frenulum, 252, 252f
Labial mucosa, 252, 252f
Labia majora, 565, 565f
Labia minora, 565, 565f
Labrum, 646
Lachman test, 690b
Lacrimal gland, 227, 227f
Lacrimal puncta, 227, 227f
Lacrimal sac, 227, 227f
Lactobacillus acidophilus, 930
Lactose intolerance, 493t
Lamina, 667, 667b
Landau reﬂex, 851b
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
I n d e x  
1023
Midsternal line, 306, 306f
Midsystolic murmurs, 394, 408t–409t
innocent murmur, 408t
pathologic murmur, 409t
physiologic murmur, 408t
Migraine, 216–217, 267t
Migraine headache, 722
Milia, 819b
Miliaria rubra, 819b
Million hearts initiative, 367
Mindfulness, 82
Mini-Cog assessment, of dementia, 1002t
Mini-mental state examination (MMSE), 167, 167b
10-Minute Geriatric Screener, 973, 986b
Miosis, 235
Missed periods, during pregnancy, 931b
Mitral regurgitation, 961
Mitral stenosis
cough in, 334t
detection of, 391, 391f
Mitral valve, 345, 345f
MMSE. See Mini-mental state examination (MMSE)
Molluscum contagiosum, 912t
Monoarticular joint pain, 631
Mononeuritis multiplex, 724
Mononeuropathy, peripheral nerve, 775t
Mons pubis, 565, 565f
Montreal cognitive assessment (MoCA), of 
dementia, 1003t
Mood, in mental status examination, 155, 155b,  
161
Mood disorders, 156–157
Moro reﬂex, 850b
Morton’s neuroma, 693, 706t
Motion, limited, in joint pain, 631
Motivational interviewing, 81, 104t
Motor activity, in general survey, 122
Motor (efferent) ﬁbers, 715
Motor function, 159
Motor neurons, 717
damage to lower, 718
damage to upper, 717–719
Motor pathways, 717–719, 717b–718b, 718f
Motor system
examination of, 741–752
body position, 741
coordination, 748–752, 887
involuntary movements, 741
muscle bulk, 741–742
muscle strength, 743–748, 743b
muscle tone, 742
of older adults, 964
in physical examination, 23
recording ﬁndings for, 773, 773b
Motor tone, in newborn, 846, 846f
Mouth
anatomy and physiology of, 252–254, 252f, 
253f, 254f
examination techniques for, 255–256
in children, 872–875, 872b
gums and teeth, 255
in infants, 826–827
lips, 255
oral mucosa, 255, 255f
roof of mouth, 255
tongue and ﬂoor of mouth, 256
in health history, 221
during pregnancy, 943
Movements, involuntary
in health history, 725
motor assessment of, 741
types of, 782t–783t
with blue-black areas, 202t
risk factors for, 177b
screening for
ABCDE rule, 178, 178b–180b
in situ, 200t
Melanonychia, 211t
Melasma, 942
Melena, 460, 495t
Memory
long-term, 154b
in mental status examination, 154b, 155, 165
recent, 165
remote, 165
short-term, 154b
Menarche, 569, 570, 570b
Ménière’s disease, 739
Meningeal inﬂammation, assessment, 764–765
Meningitis, 923t
assessment for, 764–765
headache due to, 268t–269t
Meningomyelocele, 842
Meniscus, of knee, 682f, 685
tear of, 685, 686, 689
Menopause, 570b, 571–572
health promotion and counseling, 582
Menorrhagia, 571b
Menstruation, 569–570, 570b
Mental health disorders
personality disorders, 152–153, 152b–153b
prevalence of, 147
in primary care, 150b
psychotic disorders, 161, 162
somatoform disorders, 149
unexplained symptoms and, 149, 150b
Mental health screening, patient identiﬁcation for, 
150–153, 151b
Mental status
examination of, 147f, 158–168
appearance and behavior, 158–159
cognitive function, 164–167
in health histories, 153–156, 154b–155b
health promotion and counseling and, 156–158
mini-mental state examination (MMSE), 167, 
167b–168b
mood, 161
physical examination, 23
speech and language, 160, 160b
thoughts and perceptions, 154b, 155, 
161–164
in newborn, 846
in older adults, 963–964
recording ﬁndings for, 773, 773b
Mesenteric ischemia, 488t–489t
Metabolic conditions, constipation related to, 494t
Metabolic syndrome, and cardiovascular disease, 
370, 370b
Metacarpophalangeal joints, of ﬁngers, 658, 658f, 661
Metaplasia, 599t
Metatarsalgia, 693
Metatarsophalangeal joints, of toes, 691, 691f, 694
Metatarsus adductus, 845
in child, 922t
Methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), 
precautions regarding, 17
Metrorrhagia, 571b
Microaneurysms, eye, 282t
Microcephaly, 822
Micrognathia, 822
Micturition syncope, 778t
Midaxillary line, 306, 306f
Midbrain, 714, 715f
Midclavicular line, 306, 306f
Macules, 191t
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), breast, 431, 
432b
Malabsorption syndrome, 493t
Male genitalia
anatomy and physiology of, 541–543
examination techniques for, 550–556
in adolescents, 898–899
in children, 881–882
hernias, 553–555
in infants, 840–841
in older adults, 996
penis, 551
scrotum, 552–553
testicular self-examination, 555, 555b–556b
in health history, 544–547, 544b
health promotion and counseling and, 547–550
recording ﬁndings, 556, 556b
in review of systems, 13b
sexually transmitted infections of, 547–549, 557t
Malleus
handle of, 243, 243f
short process of, 243, 243f
Malnutrition, signs of, 114
Malocclusion, 873
Mammography, 430–431
Mandible, 224, 225f
condyle of, 644
Manner, in mental status examination, 159
Manubrium, 646, 646f
Marcus Gunn pupil, 265
Marginal gingivitis, 295t
Masked hypertension, 126
Masseter muscles, 644–645
Mastalgia, 422
Mastectomy patient, breast examination in, 441
Mastication, muscles of, 645
Mastoiditis, acute, 868
Mastoid process, 243, 243f
Maxillary sinuses, 249, 251, 251f
McBurney point, 486, 486f
MCL. See Medial collateral ligament (MCL)
McMurray test, 689b
Measles, 923t
Mechanical low back pain, 699t
Media
of artery, 511
of vein, 513
Medial collateral ligament (MCL), 682f, 683, 683f, 
684–686, 689b
Medial compartment of knee, 685, 685f
Medial condyle, of tibia, 682, 682f
Medial epicondyle, of femur, 656, 657, 682, 682f
Medial epicondylitis, 657, 702t
Medial malleolus, 691
Medial meniscus, 682f, 685, 689b
Median nerve, 656, 659
Mediastinal crunch, 338t
Medications
constipation due to, 494t
diarrhea due to, 491t
in health history, 10
urinary incontinence due to, 498t
Mediterranean diet, 371
Medulla, 714, 715f
Meibomian gland, 226, 226f
Melanin, 174
Melanocytic nevi, benign, 196t
Melanoma, 176, 200t–203t
acral, 202t
amelanotic, 200t
benign mimics of, 200t–202t
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
1024 
Index
central, 713–714
brain, 713–714
spinal cord, 714
central
disorders of, 774t–775t
diagnosis, challenges of, 712–713
examination techniques for, 733–734, 
734b–735b
adolescents, 906
asterixis, 766–767
children, 887–889
comatose patient, 767–772
cranial nerves, 735–741
cutaneous stimulation reﬂexes, 763–764
deep tendon reﬂexes, 758–763
guidelines for, 734, 734b–735b
guiding questions, 712b
infants, 845–852
lumbosacral radiculopathy, 765–766
meningeal signs, 764–765
motor system, 741–752
muscle stretch reﬂexes, 758–763
older adults, 997
sensory system, 752–757
winging of scapula, 767
in health histories, 721–725
health promotion and counseling and,  
726–733
motor pathways, 717–719, 717b–718b, 718f
parasympathetic, 714
peripheral, 714–717, 716b
cranial nerves, 715, 716b. See also Cranial 
nerves (CNs)
peripheral nerves, 715, 717
physical examination of, 23
recording ﬁndings for, 773, 773b
in review of systems, 13b
sensory pathways, 719–720, 719f
somatic, 714
spinal reﬂexes, 720–721
cutaneous stimulation, 721b
deep tendon, 720–721, 721b
muscle stretch, 721b
sympathetic, 714
Neuralgia, trigeminal, 268t–269t
Neurocardiogenic syncope, 724
Neuroﬁbromatosis, 670
in infants, 911t
Neurologic disorders, constipation related to, 494t
Neurologic examination, 733–734, 734b–735b
asterixis, 766–767
in comatose patient, 767–772
cranial nerves, 735–741
cutaneous stimulation reﬂexes, 763–764
deep tendon reﬂexes, 758–763
guidelines for, 734, 734b–735b
lumbosacral radiculopathy, 765–766
meningeal signs, 764–765
mental status examination, 733–735
motor system, 741–752
recording ﬁndings for, 773, 773b
sensory system, 752–757
winging of scapula, 767
Neuromuscular junction, lesions of, 775t
Neurons
components of, 713
motor, 717
damage to lower, 718
damage to upper, 717–719
Neuropathic pain, 136b
Neuropathic ulcer, 538t
of feet, 707t
Mydriatic drops, contraindications for, 238
Myocardial contractility, 353
Myocardial infarction, chest pain in, 330t–331t
Myoclonus, 781t
Myomas, of uterus, 602t
Myopathy, 746
Myopia, 217, 231, 240
Myositis, 723
Myxedema, facies in, 272t
N
Nabothian cysts, 599t
Nails
anatomy of, 175
changes, 176
ﬁndings in or near, 211t–212t
of older adults, 959
Terry, 212t
transverse depressions of, 212t
Narcissistic personality disorders, 152b
Narrow-angle glaucoma, 235
Nasal congestion, 220
Nasal ﬂaring, in infants, 829
Nasal mucosa, 250
Nasal polyps, 251, 251f
Nasal septum, 249, 249f, 250
Nasolacrimal duct, 227, 227f
obstruction of, 264, 264f
National Lung Screening Trial (NLST), 315
Natural frequencies, 53, 53b
Nausea, 457
during pregnancy, 931b
Navicular bone, 691, 691f
Near reaction, pupil, 230, 230f
Nearsightedness. See Myopia
Neck
accessory muscles in, 309f
anatomy and physiology of, 257–259, 257f, 258f
examination techniques for, 259–264
adolescents, 895
carotid arteries and jugular veins, 264
children, 875–876
infants, 828–829
lymph nodes, 259–261, 260f, 261f
older adults, 991–993
during regnancy, 942–943
trachea and thyroid gland, 261–264
in health history, 221
lymph nodes of, 259, 259f
mobility/nuchal rigidity, 764–765
movements of, 672b
nodes and cysts of, 828f
in physical examination, 21
recording ﬁndings, 266b
in review of systems, 12b
Neck mobility
in children, 875
in meningitis, 764–765
Neck pain, 634, 698t
Neck vessels, 960
Neer’s impingement test, 654b
Negative infrapatellar space, 684, 684f
Negative predictive value (NPV), 48–49, 49b
Neologisms, 162b
Neonatal acne, 911t
Neonates. See Newborn(s)
Neovascularization, eye, 282t
Nephrotic syndrome, facies in, 272t
Nervous system
anatomy and physiology of, 713–721
Mucopurulent cervicitis, 600t
Mucosal rings/webs, 490t
Mucous patch of syphilis, 298t
Mucus plug, 930
loss of, during pregnancy, 931b
Murphy’s sign, 486
Muscle(s). See also speciﬁc muscle
of ankle and feet, 691
of elbow, 656
of hip, 675–676, 675f–676f
of knee, 682–684
lesions of, 775t
of mastication, 645
motor assessment of
bulk, 741–742
strength, 743–748, 743b
tone, 742
of shoulder, 647–648
of spine, 668
surrounding knee, 683, 683f
of temporomandibular joint, 644–645
of wrist and hand, 659
Muscle strength, motor assessment of, 743–748, 
743b
grading system for, 743b
Muscle tone
assessment of, in comatose patient, 770–772, 771f
disorders of, 788t
motor assessment of, 742
Muscle wasting
hypothenar atrophy, 704t, 741–742
thenar atrophy, 704t, 741–742
Muscular atrophy, 741–742
Muscular dystrophy, 767
Duchenne, 741
Muscular hypertrophy, 741–742
Musculoskeletal pain, 310
Musculoskeletal system. See also Joint(s); Muscle(s)
algorithm for diagnosis of complaints, 627f
anatomy of
ankle and foot, 690–691, 691f
elbow, 656, 656f
hip, 674–676
spine, 666–668
temporomandibular joint (TMJ), 644, 644f
wrist and hand, 658–659, 658f
approach to disorders, 626–630
common health complaints related to, 625
examination techniques for
adolescents, 901–905
ankle and foot, 692–695
approach to, 627f, 643
children, 885–887, 922t
elbow, 656–657
hip, 676–681
joint motion description, 694–695, 695f
knee, 684–689, 689b–690b
leg length measurement, 694, 694f
older adults, 996, 996b
shoulder, 649–653, 651b–652b, 653b–655b
spine, 668–669, 670b, 671–674, 672b–673b
temporomandibular joint, 645
tips for successful, 642b–643b
wrist and hand, 659–665
in health history, 630–635
health promotion and counseling and, 636–641
in physical examination, 22, 23
recording ﬁndings, 695, 695b
in review of systems, 13b
Myalgia, 631
Myasthenia gravis, 723
Mydriasis, 235
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
I n d e x  
1025
recording ﬁndings, 998, 998b–999b
skin, 990–991
thorax and lungs, 993
urinary incontinence, 987
vital signs, 989–990
frailty in, 955, 975
health history in, 965–976
content and pace of visit, 965–966
cultural considerations, 968–970, 968b
eliciting symptoms and, 966–967
environment for, 965
health promotion and counseling and, 976–985
cancer screening, 981, 981b
dementia, 982–984, 983b
depression, 982
elder abuse, 984–985
exercise, 978, 978b
falls prevention, 978
household safety, 978, 978b
immunizations, 979, 979b–980b
screening, timing of, 976–977
vision and hearing, 977–978
health status disparities by race and ethnicity, 969
hearing loss in, 223, 978
hospitalization of, 972b
interviewing, 1000t
mammography in, 430–431
medications and, 971–972
10-Minute Geriatric Screener, 973, 986b
nutrition in, 974–975
pain and, 972–973, 972b–973b
palliative care and, 975–976
self-care abilities in, 970, 971b
smoking in, 973
visual impairment in, 222–223
Olecranon bursa, 656
Olecranon bursitis, 702t
Olecranon process, 657
Olfactory nerve, 715, 715f, 716b
examination of, 736
Oligomenorrhea, 571b
Omohyoid muscle, 257, 257f
Onycholysis, 211t
Onychomycosis, 212t
Open-angle glaucoma, 235
Ophthalmoscopic examination, 238–240
in infants, 825
PanOptic ophthalmoscope, 238
use of ophthalmoscope, steps for, 239
Optic atrophy, 280t
Optic blink reﬂex, 825
Optic disc, 227, 228f, 240
abnormalities of, 280t
examination of, steps for, 240–241
medullated/myelinated nerve ﬁbers, 279t
normal variations of, 279t
physiologic cup, 279t
rings and crescents, 279t
Optic fundus, 227, 228f, 736
Optic nerve, 227, 228f, 715, 715f, 716b
examination of, 736
Optic radiation, 229
Oral candidiasis, 916t
Oral–facial dyskinesias, 782t
Oral hairy leukoplakia, 297t
Oral health, 223–224
Oral temperatures, 133
Orchitis, acute, 559t
Orgasm, 546
Orientation, in mental status examination, 154b, 
155, 164
Oropharyngeal dysphagia, 490t
O
Obesity
in adolescents, 894, 900
blood pressure assessment in patient with, 131
body mass index and, 116, 116b
cardiovascular disease and, 370
deﬁnition, 113
healthy eating and weight loss for prevention of, 
371–372, 371b–372b
incidence, 115, 115b
related health conditions, 139t
stages of change model in, 142t
Objective data, 24
vs. subjective data, 6, 7b
Obsessions, 163b
Obsessive-compulsive disorder, 153b, 155, 159
Obstipation, 460
Obstructive sleep apnea, 313
Obtundation, 769b
Obturator sign, 486
Occipital lobe, 711f, 713
Ocular movement, assessment of, in comatose 
patient, 769
Oculocephalic reﬂex, assessment of, in comatose 
patient, 770, 770f
Oculomotor nerve, 715, 715f, 716b
examination of, 736–737
palsy of, 736
Oculomotor nerve (CN III) paralysis, 236, 277t
Oculovestibular reﬂex, assessment of, in comatose 
patient, 770
Odor
body, in general survey, 121–122
breath
in general survey, 121–122
Odynophagia, 456, 458–459
Older adults
abdominal aortic aneurysm in, 483
activities of daily living and, 970, 971b
advanced directives and, 975–976
alcohol use in, 974, 974b
anatomy and physiology of aging, 957–965
abdomen, 962
breasts and axillae, 962
cardiovascular system, 960–961
genitalia and prostate, 962–963
head and neck, 959–960
musculoskeletal system, 963
nervous system, 963–965
peripheral vascular system, 961–962
skins, nails, and hair, 958–959
thorax and lungs, 960
vital signs, 957–958
communication with, effective, 967b–968b
culturally appropriate care for, 969
delirium, dementia, and depression in, 732–733, 
1001t
examination techniques for, 985–997
abdomen, 994
breast and axillae, 994
cardiovascular system, 993–994
female genitalia, 994–996
functional status, 985–989
general survey, 989
head and neck, 991–993
male genitalia, 996
musculoskeletal system, 996, 996b
nervous system, 997
pelvic examination, 994–996
peripheral vascular system, 994
prostate, 996
Neuropathy
mononeuropathy, peripheral nerve, 775t
peripheral, 754
diabetes and, 731
polyneuropathy, 731, 746, 752, 753
peripheral nerve, 775t
Nevus simplex, 818
Newborn(s)
ability to do, 808b–809b
assessment, 803–809
at birth, 803f, 804–807
several hours after birth, 808–809
tips for, 803b
birthmarks, 819b
breasts of, 838
breech, 808
classiﬁcation of, 805b, 807b
estrogenized hymen of, 841f
feet of, 844–845
female genitalia of, 842
hands, 842
hips of, 843–844
legs of, 844
liver size in healthy term, 839b
mouth of, 827
testes of, 840
umbilical cord of, 838
Nicotine, 315. See also Smoking
Night sweats, 112
Nipple
anatomy of, 419f, 420–421, 420f
assessment of, 435, 435f, 440, 944
discharge from, 423, 439f, 443
Paget’s disease of, 445t
retracted, 445t
Nociceptive pain, 136b
Nocturia, 462, 496t
Nocturnal back pain, 699t
Nocturnal hypertension, 126
Nodules, 194t
Nonmaleﬁcence/primum non nocere, in patient 
care, 100b
Nonverbal communication, 71
Normal blood pressure, 130, 130b
Nose
anatomy and physiology of, 248–249, 248f,  
249f
examination techniques for, 250–251
in children, 871
in infants, 826
in health history, 220–221
in physical examination, 21
during pregnancy, 943
recording ﬁndings, 266b
in review of systems, 12b
NPV. See Negative predictive value (NPV)
Nuchal rigidity, 764–765, 876
Nuclear cataract, 276t
Nucleus pulposus, 668
Numbness, in health history, 723–724
Numeric Rating Scale, 135
Nursing-bottle caries, 873, 917t
Nutrition. See also Diet
counseling about, 117, 117f, 143t
health promotion and counseling for, 114–119, 
115b, 636–637
in older adults, 974–975
during pregnancy, 935–936
screening, 141t
steps to maintain optimal, 115b–116b,  
116–117
Nystagmus, 236, 737, 785t–786t
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
1026 
Index
Paronychia, 211t
Parotid duct, 225, 225f, 254, 254f
Parotid gland, 224, 225f
enlargement of, 272t
Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea (PND), 310, 357
Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (PSVT), 
910t
Pars ﬂaccida, 243, 243f
Pars tensa, 243, 243f
Partial lobar obstruction, physical ﬁndings, 339t
Partnering, 72
Past history, of patient, 8b, 10
Patches, 191t
Patella, ballotting of, 688, 688f
Patellar tendon, 682, 685–686
Patellofemoral compartment, 686
Patellofemoral grinding test, 686
Patellofemoral joint, 682
Patellofemoral syndrome, 686
Patent ductus arteriosus, 412t, 920t
Pathologic process, in clinical reasoning, 27
Pathophysiologic problems, 27
Patient assessment
scope of, 5–6
subjective vs. objective data of, 6–7
Patient-centered interviewing, 65–66, 66f
Patient comfort, during physical examination, 
16–17
Patient data, 30
Patient empowerment, 72–73, 73f
Patient record, 29–30
Patient’s perspective
exploring of, 78
on illness, 78
PCL. See Posterior cruciate ligament (PCL)
Pectoralis major muscle, 419f, 420
Pectoral lymph nodes, 421, 422f, 441
Pectus carinatum, 336t
Pectus excavatum, 336t
Pedicles, 667, 667b
Pediculosis pubis, 586
Pelvic diaphragm, 568
Pelvic examination, 583–584, 584b
approach to, 583–584
bimanual examination, 591–592
equipment for, 585
external genitalia, 586
indications for, 583
lubricant use in, 594b
ovaries, 591–592
patient positioning, 586
pelvic muscles, 592–593
rectovaginal examination, 593–594, 593f
speculum use in, 587–588
tips for successful, 584b
uterus, 591
vagina, 590
Pelvic ﬂoor, 568
examination of, 592–593, 593f
during pregnancy, 947
Pelvic inﬂammatory disease (PID), 603t
Pelvic muscles, examination of, 592–593, 593f
Pelvic pain
acute, 574
chronic, 574
Pelvic tilt, 670
Pemberton sign, 263
Penile discharge, 546–547
Penis
abnormalities of, 558t
anatomy and physiology of, 541–543
cancer of, 558t
of axillae, 440–441, 440f
of breast, female, 437–439, 437f–439f
chest, 319–320, 327–328, 327f, 328f
deﬁnition, 19b
of elbow, 657, 657f
of female genitalia, 591–592
of heart
in infants, 833–834
during pregnancy, 943
of hip, 677–679, 677b–678b
of inguinal hernia, 554
of kidneys, 481–482
of knee, 685–688
of liver, 476–478, 477f, 478f, 504t
of lungs
in infants, 831
of male genitalia, 551–555
of prostate gland, 618–619, 619f
of shoulder, 649–650, 650f
of spine, 669, 671, 671f
of spleen, 480–481, 480f, 481f
of temporomandibular joint, 645, 645f
of testes, 552, 552f
of wrist and hand, 660–661, 660f
Palpebral conjunctiva, 226, 226f
Palpebral ﬁssure, 226
Palpitations, in health history,  
356–357
Pancreas
anatomic considerations, 450f, 451
cancer of, 488t
Pancreatitis
acute, 488t, 503t
chronic, 488t
Panic disorder, 155
Pannus, 500t
PanOptic ophthalmoscope, 238
Pansystolic murmurs, 394, 410t
Papanicolaou (Pap) smear
in cervical cancer screening, 575–578, 576b, 577b
classiﬁcation of, 577b
guidelines for, 575–576, 576b
specimen collection, 589, 589b–590b
Papilledema, 241, 241f, 280t
Papilloma, 439f
Pap smear specimen collection, 589, 589b–590b
Papules, 192t
Parachute reﬂex, 851b
Paradoxical pulse, 381
Paralysis
deﬁnition, 743
facial, 787t
ﬂaccid, 770
Paranasal sinuses, anatomy and physiology, 
248–249, 249f
Paranoid personality disorder, 152b
Paraphasias, 160
Paraphimosis, 551
Paraplegia, deﬁnition, 743
Parasternal intercostal muscles, 309
Parasympathetic nervous system, 714
Paratonia, 788t
Paraurethral glands
anatomic considerations, 565f, 566
examination of, 594
Paravertebral muscles, 669
Paresis, deﬁnition, 743
Paresthesias, 311
Parietal lobe, 711f
Parietal pain, 454
Parkinsonian gait, 789t
Parkinson’s disease, facies in, 272t
Orthopnea, 310, 357
Orthostatic hypotension, 131, 957
syncope in, 778t
Ortolani test, 843, 843f
Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome, 291t
Osmotic diarrhea, 493t
Os of cervix, 567, 600t
Osteoarthritis, 696t. See also Arthritis
of hand, 660–661, 703t
Osteomyelitis, 213t
Osteopenia, 639b
Osteoporosis
anabolic agents and, 641
antiresorptive agents and, 641
bone density and, 638–639, 639b
calcium and vitamin D in, 639–640
deﬁnition, 638b
fracture risk assessment for, 639
health promotion and counseling, 637–641
incidence, 637
risk factors for, 638b
screening for, 638
treatment and prevention, 639–641
Otitis externa, 219
acute, 246, 246f
chronic, 246f
Otitis media, 219, 916t
with purulent effusion, 288t
with serous effusion, 288t
Otoscope, pneumatic, 870, 870f
Otoscopic examination, of children, 869–870, 869b
Ottawa ankle and foot rules, 692
Ovaries
anatomic considerations, 567–568
cancer of, 603t
risk factors, 578–579
screening for, 578–579
symptoms, 592
cysts of, 603t
functions of, 568
Overbite, 873
Overﬂow incontinence, 463, 498t
Overuse headache, 217
Overweight, deﬁnition, 113
Oxyhemoglobin, 174
P
Paget’s disease, of nipple, 445t
Pain, 134–137. See also speciﬁc site
acute, 134–137
assessment of, 111, 135
assessment tools for, 135
chronic, 134–137
deﬁnition, 134
in health history, 114
management of, 137, 137b
radicular, 634
sensory pathway for, 719–720
assessment of, 754
trigeminal nerve and, 738
types of, 135, 136b
Palate, soft, 740
Pallor, 318
Palmar grasp reﬂex, 849b
Palpation
of abdomen, 473–475, 474f
in children, 879–881
in infants, 818, 839–840
during pregnancy, 944–945
of ankle and feet, 692–693, 692f–693f
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
I n d e x  
1027
clear instructions, 16–17
draping patient, 16, 16b
environment, 15, 15f
equipment checking, 15–16, 15b–16b
examining from patient’s right side, 20
examining patient at bedrest, 20–21
keeping patient informed, 17
lighting, 15
patient privacy and comfort, 16
sequence of examination, 19
standard and universal precautions, 17–18
Physical symptom, 148
PID. See Pelvic inﬂammatory disease (PID)
Pigeon chest, 336t
Pigmentation, skin, in newborns, 816
Pilar cyst, 196t, 286t
Pillars, 254, 254f
Pinguecula, 275t
Pitcher’s elbow, 657, 702t
Pitting, 212t
Pitting edema, 528, 533t
Pityriasis rosea, 912t
Placing and stepping reﬂexes, 851b
Plagiocephaly, 822
Plan for care
assessment and, 24, 24f, 29
example, 35b–36b
overview, 24
Plantar fasciitis, 692
Plantar ﬂexion, 691
Plantar grasp reﬂex, 849b
Plantar reﬂex, 764, 764f
Plantar warts, 707t, 912t
Plaque, 295t
Plaques, 192t–193t
Plateau murmur, 396b
Pleurae, 308–309
parietal pleura, 308, 309
visceral pleura, 308–309
Pleural effusions, 308, 322
physical ﬁndings in, 339t
Pleural ﬂuid, 308
Pleural rub, 326, 338t
Pleural space, 308
Pleurisy, acute, 502t
Pleuritic pain, 330t–331t
Pleximeter ﬁnger, 320, 320f
Plexor ﬁnger, 321, 321f
PMI. See Point of maximal impulse (PMI)
PMS. See Premenstrual syndrome (PMS)
PND. See Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea (PND)
Pneumatic otoscope, 870, 870f
Pneumococcal vaccine, for older adults,  
980b
Pneumonia
aspiration, 308
bacterial, cough in, 334t
in children, 876
dyspnea in, 332t–333t
lobar, physical ﬁndings, 339t
streptococcal, 317
viral, cough in, 334t
Pneumothorax
physical ﬁndings in, 340t
spontaneous
dyspnea in, 332t–333t
Poikiloderma, 206t
Point localization test, 756
Point of maximal impulse (PMI), 344, 355, 385–387
Polio, 923t
Polyarticular joint pain, 631
Polycystic kidney disease, 482
Perpendicular lighting, 15, 15f
Perseveration, 162b
Personal and social history, of patient, 8b, 11
Personal hygiene
in general survey, 121
in mental status examination, 159
Personality disorders, 152–153, 152b–153b
anxious/fearful disorders, 153b
borderline, 152b, 153
dramatic, emotional/erratic disorders, 152b
odd/eccentric disorders, 152b
Pertussis, 923t
Petechia, 205t, 294t
Petersen speculum, 585, 585f
Peutz–Jeghers syndrome, 291t
Peyronie’s disease, 558t
Phalen’s sign, 664, 664f
Pharyngitis, 221, 292t
Pharynx
anatomy of, 253, 253f, 254, 254f
assessment of, 740
examination techniques for, 257
in children, 872–875
in infants, 826–827
Phimosis, 551
Phobias, 155, 163b
Physical abuse, 98, 98b
Physical activity
cardiovascular disease and, 372–373
health promotion and counseling for, 636–637, 
636f, 637b
Physical dependence, 96b
Physical development
of adolescents, 890
of children, 854, 854b
of infants, 809
Physical examination
cardinal techniques for, 18–19
of children, 800–801, 804
comprehensive, 5–7, 5b
comprehensive vs. focused, 5b
as diagnostic tests, 46–47
documentation, 138b
equipment for, 15b–16b
focused (problem-oriented), 5–7, 5b
head to toe
abdomen, 22
anterior thorax and lungs, 22
axillary nodes, 22
back, 21
breasts, 22
cardiovascular system, 22
epitrochlear nodes, 22
general survey, 21
head, eyes, ears, nose, throat (HEENT), 21
lower extremities, 22–23
lungs, 21
neck, 21
nervous system, 23
posterior thorax, 21
rectal and genital examinations, 23–24
skin, 21
vital signs, 21
of infants, 809–811
of newborn, 804–809, 804f
periodic, 6
with practice, 111f
sequence and positioning for, 19–20
stage of, 14–21
steps in preparing for, 14b
approach to patient, 14–15
cardinal techniques of examination, 18–19
examination techniques for, 551
lesions of, 546–547
Peptic ulcer, 488t
Perception(s)
abnormalities of, 163b
in mental status examination, 154b, 163
Percussion
of abdomen, 473
in infants, 839–840
chest, 320–323, 328
deﬁnition, 19b
expected liver span of children and, 880b
of kidneys, 482, 482f
of liver, 475–476, 476f
notes, 321–323, 323b
of spleen, 479, 479f, 480f
Perforating veins, 514, 514f
Performance bias, 56b
Pericardial friction rub, 412t
Pericarditis, chest pain in, 330t–331t
Perimenopause, 571
Perineal membrane, 568
Perineum, 565f, 566
Periodic physical examination, 6
Periodontal disease, 223
Perioral cyanosis, 918t
Peripheral arterial disease, 509, 517–518, 518b
atherosclerotic, 517, 527, 534t
risk factor for lower extremity, 519b
Peripheral cataract, 276t
Peripheral cyanosis, 918t
Peripheral nerves, 714, 715, 717
Peripheral nervous system, 714–717, 716b
anatomic considerations, 775t
cranial nerves, 715, 716b, 735b. See also Cranial 
nerves (CNs)
disorders of, 775t
peripheral nerves, 715, 717
Peripheral neuropathies, 754
diabetes and, 731
mononeuropathy, 775t
polyneuropathy, 775t
Peripheral vascular disease
arterial, 509, 517–518, 518b
painful, 534t
risk factors for, 519b
screening for, 520b
venous, 510, 534t
Peripheral vascular system
anatomy and physiology of, 510–516
arteries, 510–513
veins, 513–514
examination techniques for, 521–532, 522b, 528b
arms, 522–523
arterial insufﬁciency, 530–531
arterial supply to hand, 529–530
legs, 524–529
mapping varicose veins, 531
in older adults, 994
venous valve competency, 532
in health history, 517–518
health promotion and counseling and, 519–521, 
520b
in physical examination, 23
recording ﬁndings, 532, 532b
in review of systems, 13b
Peripheral vertigo, 271t
Peritoneal inﬂammation, 503t
Peritonitis, 454
assessment for, 475
Peritonsillar abscess, 874
Periumbilical pain, 454, 454f
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
1028 
Index
Proptosis, 237, 237f, 264
Prostate, examination techniques for, in older 
adults, 996
Prostate gland
abnormalities of, 623t
anatomic considerations, 608
cancer of, 623t
chemoprevention, 611
incidence and mortality rates, 611f
prevention from, 611–612
resources about, 614, 615b
risk factors for, 610, 611b
screening for, 612–615, 612b, 614b, 615b
normal, 623t
palpation of, 618–619, 619f
Prostate-speciﬁc antigen (PSA) testing, 612–614
Prostatic hyperplasia, benign, 610, 620t, 623t
Prostatic pain, 462
Prostatitis, 623t
Proximal interphalangeal joints
of ﬁngers, 658, 658f, 661
of toes, 691
Proximal weakness, 723
Pseudogynecomastia, 421
Pseudohypertrophy, muscular, 741
Pseudoseizures, 781t
Psoas bursa, 676
Psoas sign, 486
Psoriatic arthritis, 661
PSVT. See Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia 
(PSVT)
Psychiatric considerations, in review of systems, 13b
Psychogenic pain, 136b
Psychopathologic problems, 27
Psychotic disorders, 161, 162
Pterygium, 276t
Pterygoid muscles, 644–645
Ptosis, 274t, 737
Puberty, delayed, 586
Pubic hair, 901b
Pubic symphysis, 449f, 674
Pubic tubercle, 449f, 678, 678f
Pulmonary alveoli, 308
Pulmonary artery, 343, 343f, 344, 344f
Pulmonary embolism
cough in, 334t
dyspnea in, 332t–333t
syncope in, 778t
Pulmonary ﬂow murmur
in adolescents, 895–896, 896b
in children, 879b
Pulmonary function, clinical assessment of, 329
Pulmonary tuberculosis, cough in, 334t
Pulmonary valve stenosis, 919t
Pulmonic valve, 345, 345f
Pulse. See also Arterial pulses
in abdomen, 512–513, 512f
brachial, 512, 512f, 523
in children, 865
in infants, 815
Pulse pressure, 353
Pulsus alternans, 381
Punctate depressions, of nail plate, 212t
Punctum, 227, 227f
Pupillary reactions, 229
to light, 736
light reaction, 229, 229f, 235–236
near reaction, 230, 230f, 236
Pupil(s)
abnormalities of, 277t
assessment of, in comatose patient, 769
in comatose patient, 792t
general survey, 941
genitalia, 945–947
head and neck, 942–943
heart, 943
Leopold’s maneuvers, 948–950, 949f–950f
positioning for, 940–941
recording ﬁndings, 951, 951b–952b
rectum and rectovaginal septum, 947
thorax and lungs, 943
vital signs, 942
expected date of delivery, 934, 934b
expected weeks of gestation, 934b
fetal movements during, 944
gravida para system for past, 572, 572b
in health history, 572, 932–935
gestational age and expected date of delivery, 
determining, 934, 934b
initial prenatal history, 932–934
initial visit, conclusion of, 934
health promotion and counseling and, 935–940
mask of, 942
murmurs detected during, 394
prenatal visits
follow-up, 934–935
initial, 932–934
ruptured ectopic, 603t
symptoms of, 932
Pregnancy tumor, 295t
Prehypertension, 130b
Preload, 352–353
Premature ejaculation, 546
Premature thelarche, 838
Premenstrual syndrome (PMS), 570b, 571
Prenatal multivitamin, 935
Prepatellar bursa, 684, 686–687
Prepatellar bursitis, 684, 687
Prepuce, 542, 551, 565, 565f
Preretinal hemorrhage, 282t
Presbycusis, 223
Presbyopia, 217, 959, 991
Present illness, in health history, 8b, 9–10
Pressure sores, 189
Pressure ulcers, 213t
Presyncope, 271t, 722, 724
near, 724
Prevalence of disease, 49–50
Primary headaches, 216, 267t
Primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG), 222–223
PRIME-MD screening tool, 150–151, 151b
Primitive reﬂexes, in newborn, 849, 849b–851b
Probability of diagnosis, 46f, 47
Problem list, 37
Problem-oriented assessment, 5–7, 5b
Problems and diagnoses, steps for identifying
clustering of clinical ﬁndings, 26–27
establish working diagnosis, 28–29
generating clinical hypotheses, 27–28
identify abnormal ﬁndings, 25
localizing ﬁndings, 25–26
probable cause of ﬁndings, search for, 27
test your hypotheses, 28
Proctitis, 609
Prolapse, of uterus, 602t
Pronation
of elbow, 657, 657b, 657f
of feet in toddler, 922t
Pronator drift
deﬁnition, 751
test for, 751, 752f
Pronator teres muscle, 656
Propionibacterium acnes, 204t
Proprioception, assessment of, 754–755, 754f
Polymenorrhea, 571b
Polymyalgia rheumatica, 696t
Polyneuropathy, 746, 752, 753
distal symmetric sensorimotor, 731
peripheral nerve, 775t
Polyps
cervical, 599t
nasal, 251, 251f
rectal, 622t
rectum, 622t
Polyuria, 462, 496t
Pons, 714, 715f
Popliteal artery, pulse assessment at, 513, 527
Popliteal cyst, 687
Position sense
assessment of, 754–755
motor assessment of, 741
in older adults, 964
Romberg test for, 751
Positive predictive value (PPV), 48–49, 49b
Positive support reﬂex, 851b
Postconcussion headache, 268t–269t
Posterior axillary line, 306, 306f
Posterior column, of spinal cord, 719–720, 719f
diseases of, 754–755
Posterior cruciate ligament (PCL), 682f, 684, 690b
Posterior drawer sign, 690b
Posterior taloﬁbular ligament, 691, 691f
Posterior tibial (PT) artery, 513
Posterior triangle, of neck, 257, 257f
Postmenopausal bleeding, 570b, 572
Postnasal drip, cough in, 334t
Postpartum contraception, plan for, 933–934
Posttraumatic arthritis, 661
Posttraumatic stress disorder, 155
Postural hypotension, syncope in, 778t
Postural tremors, 782t
Posture
abnormalities of, 789t
in comatose patient, 770–772, 771f, 793t
in general survey, 122
in mental status examination, 159
Potassium, food sources of, 143t
Pouch of Douglas, 568
PPV. See Positive predictive value (PPV)
Preauricular cysts, 828
Preauricular nodes, 260, 260f
Precision, deﬁnition, 54–55
Precocious puberty
in females, 882, 883
in males, 881
Preeclampsia, 942, 942b
Pregnancy, 500t
adolescent, 581
anatomy and physiology of, 927–931
adnexae, 930
breasts, 928
cervix, 930
external abdomen, 930, 932
hormonal changes, 927–928
uterus, 929
vagina, 930
concerns and attitudes toward, 932–933
conﬁrmation of, 932
contractions during, 944
domestic violence and, 939, 939b
examination techniques for, 940–950
abdomen, 944–945
anus, 947
breasts, 943–944
equipment for, 941, 941b
extremities, 948
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
I n d e x  
1029
Renal artery disease, screening for, 520
Resonant percussion note, 323b
Respectful communication, 85–86, 85b
Respiration. See also Breathing
assessment of
in comatose patient, 769
in infants, 830b
Respiratory distress, signs of, 318
Respiratory rate
assessment of, 132
in children, 865
in infants, 815
normal, 132
in older adults, 958
Respiratory system, in review of systems, 12b
Resting tremors, 782t
Restless legs syndrome, 725
Rest pain, 534t
Retching, 457
Retention cysts, 599t
Reticular activating (arousal) system, 714
Retina, examination of, 241–242
Retinal arteries
in hypertension, 281t
normal, 281t
Retinal hemorrhages
deep, 282t
superﬁcial, 282t
Retraction signs, in breast cancer, 431t
Retroﬂexion, of uterus, 601t
Retrograde ﬁlling (Trendelenburg) test, 532
Retrosternal goiters, 263
Retroversion, of uterus, 601t
Review of systems, in health history, 8b, 11–13, 
12b–13b
tips for eliciting, 11b
Rheumatic fever, 631, 643
Rheumatoid arthritis, 631, 632, 643
acute, 703t
chronic, 703t
in feet, 692
hand deformities in, 703t
joint pain in, 696t
Rheumatoid nodules, 286t
of elbow, 702t
Rhinitis, allergic, 220
Rhinorrhea, 220
Rhinosinusitis, 220
Rhonchi, 325–326, 325b, 338t
in infants, 832
Ribs, 304–305
fractured, identiﬁcation of, 329
Riedel’s lobe, 504t
Right ventricle (RV), 343, 343f
Right ventricular hypertrophy, 344
Rigidity, 742, 788t
abdominal, 475b
Rinne test, 248, 248f, 289t, 739
Ritualistic behavior, 155
Romberg test, 751
Rooting reﬂex, 850b
Rotation
external
of hip, 679b, 681, 681f
of knee, 688b
of shoulder, 652b, 653b, 654b
internal
of hip, 679b, 681, 681f
of knee, 688b
of shoulder, 652b, 653b, 655b
of neck, 672b
of spine, 673b
for motor system, 773
for musculoskeletal system, 695
for neck, 266b
for nervous system, 773
for neurologic examination, 773
for nose, 266b
for older adults, 998, 998b–999b
for pregnancy, 951, 951b–952b
for reﬂexes, 773b
for sensory system, 773
for thorax, 329
Rectal examination
in children, 885
digital, 612, 612b, 616–619
female, 619
for infants, 842
lubricant use in, 594b
male, 616–618
in men, 24
during pregnancy, 947
in women, 24
Rectal temperature, 133
Rectal thermometers, 815f
Rectocele, 597t
Rectouterine pouch, 568
Rectovaginal examination, 593–594, 593f
Rectum
abnormalities of, 621t–622t
anatomy and physiology of, 607–608, 607f, 608f
cancer of, 622t. See also Colorectal cancer
examination techniques for
female, 24, 619
male, 24, 616–618
polyps of, 622t
prolapse of, 621t
rectovaginal examination, 593–594, 593f
shelf, 622t
Rectus abdominis muscle, 449f
Red eyes, 218, 270t
Redness, in joint examination, 643b
Red reﬂex, 239
Referred pain, abdominal, 454
Reﬂex(es)
in comatose patient
oculocephalic, 770, 770f
oculovestibular, 770, 770f
corneal, 738, 738f
deep tendon, 720–721, 721b
achilles (ankle), 762, 762f
ankle, 762, 762f
assessment of, 758–763
biceps, 759, 759f
brachioradialis, 760, 760f
knee, 761, 761f
quadriceps (patellar), 761, 761f
triceps, 760, 760f
deﬁnition, 720
gag, 740
grading system for, 758b
hyperactive, 758
hypoactive, 758
in physical examination, 23
recording ﬁndings for, 773, 773b
spinal, 720–721, 721b
Reﬂex hammer, 758
Refraction, errors of, 240, 268t–269t
Regurgitation, 456, 458
Reinforcement, in deep tendon reﬂexes assessment, 
759, 759f
Relative risk, treatment assessment, 58
Relative risk difference, treatment assessment, 58
Remote memory, 165
Pustular melanosis, 819b
Pustules, 194t
P wave, 352, 352f
Pyelonephritis, 482
Pyloric stenosis, 840
Pyrexia. See Fever
Q
Quadriceps femoris muscles, 683, 683f
Quadriplegia, deﬁnition, 743
Q wave, 352, 352f
R
Race and ethnicity
alcohol, prescription drugs and substance abuse, 
157–158
breast cancer in women, 425
cardiovascular disease, 727
fracture risk, 639
in health care delivery, 135
obesity/overweight, 109b
osteoporosis screening, 638
prostate cancer screening, 610, 612, 613
stroke risk prevalence and mortality, 727–728
suicide, 157
Radial artery, pulse assessment at, 512, 512f, 523
Radial nerve, 656
Radicular pain, 634
Radiculopathy, lumbosacral, assessment for, 765–766
Radiocarpal joint, 658, 658f
Radiohumeral joint, 656
Radioulnar joint, 656
Radius, bone of forearm, 656
Rales, 325–326, 325b
Range of motion
active, deﬁnition, 642
examination techniques for
ankle and feet, 693–694
elbow, 657b
ﬁngers and thumbs, 664–665
hip, 679, 679b, 680–681
knee, 688, 688b, 689, 689b–690b
shoulder, 651, 651b–652b
spine, 672b–673b
temporomandibular joint, 645
of wrist, 662–664
in joint examination, 642
passive, deﬁnition, 642
Rapport, establishing, with children, 858
Raynaud’s disease, 523, 523f, 534t
Reassurance, 71–72
Rebound tenderness, 475b
Recent memory, 165
Recession of gums, 296t
Recording of ﬁndings
for abdomen, 487, 487b
for adolescents, 906, 906b–909b
for anus, 619
for breasts, 443, 443b
for cardiovascular system, 399
for children, 906, 906b–909b
for ear, 266b
for eyes, 266b
for female genitalia, 595, 595b
for head, 266b
for lungs, 329
for lymph nodes, 266b
for male genitalia, 556, 556b
for mental status, 773
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
1030 
Index
Shortness of breath. See Dyspnea
in health history, 357
Short stature, 122
Shoulder girdle, 646
Shoulder(s)
anatomy of, 645–648
bony structures, 646, 646f
bursae, 648
joints of, 647
muscle groups of, 647–648
examination techniques for, 649–655
inspection, 649
maneuvers, 652–653, 653b–655b
movements of, 651b–652b
palpation, 649–650
range of motion, 651, 651b–652b
frozen, 701t
painful, 700t–701t
Sighing respiration, 335t
Sigmoidoscopy, 469, 469b
Silk sign, 841
Silver wiring, 281t
Sinuses
examination techniques for
in children, 871
in infants, 826
in health history, 220–221
in physical examination, 21
Sinusitis, headache due to, 268t–269t
Situs inversus, 385
Skene’s glands, 565f, 566
Skilled interviewing, fundamentals of
active listening, 68
empathic responses, 69
empowering patient, 72–73, 73f
guided questioning, 69–71, 69f
nonverbal communication, 71
partnering, 72
reassurance, 71–72
summarization, 72
transitions, 72
validation, 71
Skin
anatomy of, 173–174, 174f
dermis, 174, 174f
epidermis, 173, 174f
cancer. See Skin cancer
color of, 121, 174
conditions and joint pain, 633b–634b
examination techniques for, 180–188
in adolescents, 895
bedbound patient, 189
in children, 865
full-body skin examination, 180–181
infants, 816–820, 818b–820b
in older adults, 990–991
patient seated, 183–186
patient supine and prone, 186–187
preparing for examination, 181–182
self skin-examination, 187, 187b–188b
in health history, 175–176
health promotion and counseling and,  
176–180
skin cancer prevention, 176–177
skin cancer screening, 178–180
lesions
acne vulgaris, 204t
benign, 196t
brown, 200t–203t
ﬂat spots, 191t
ﬂuid-ﬁlled, 193
pink, 198t–199t
Selection bias, 56b
Self-awareness, 85, 85b
Self-neglect, 985
Self-reﬂection, 82
Self skin-examination, for skin cancer, 187, 
187b–188b
Semicircular canals, 243f, 244
Semilunar valves, 345, 345f
Semimembranosus bursa, 684
Seminal vesicles, 542, 608
Senile ptosis, 991
Sensation, loss of, in health history, 724
Sensitive subjects, guidelines for broaching, 94
Sensitivity, of diagnostic tests, 48, 48b, 49, 49b, 
50b
Sensorineural hearing loss, 244, 248, 289t, 739
Sensory ataxia, 789t
Sensory cortex, lesions of, 755–756
Sensory (afferent) ﬁbers, 715, 720
Sensory function, of newborn, 846
Sensory pathways, 719–720
damage to, 720
Sensory system
assessment of, 752–757
in children, 887
dermatomes, 756–757, 756f, 757f
discriminative sensations, 755–756
light touch, 754
pain, 754
proprioception, 754–755, 754f
temperature, 754
testing patterns, 753, 753b
vibration, 754, 754f
in physical examination, 23
recording ﬁndings for, 773, 773b
Sentinel leak headache, 216
Septic arthritis, 632
Serous effusions, 288t
Serratus anterior muscle, 419f, 420
Sexual abuse, child, 98, 98b, 885
physical signs of, 921t
Sexual dysfunction
female, 573
male, 546
Sexual history, taking
female, 573
male, 544–547, 544b
Sexually transmitted infections (STI)
in females, 574–575, 579–581
health promotion and counseling, 547–549, 
579–581, 615
incidence, 548b, 579, 580
in male, 547–549, 557t
Sexual maturity, Tanner stages for, 569, 586
Sexual maturity ratings
in boys, 899b
in girls, 897b, 901b
Sexual orientation, 545–546, 573
Sexual response
female, 573
male, 546
S1 heart sound, 404t
in infants, 835
S2 heart sound, 405t
apparent gallop, 836
in infants, 835
S3 heart sound, 385, 388
in infants, 836
in older adults, 961
S4 heart sound, 385, 388
in infants, 836
in older adults, 961
Rotator cuff
compression, 652
examination techniques for, 653b–654b
tear, 649, 650, 650f, 652, 700t
tendinitis, 700t
Routine clinical check-up, 6
Rovsing’s sign, 486
Rrectum examination, during pregnancy, 947
Rubella, 923t
Rubor, 531
R wave, 352, 352f
S
Sacroiliac joint, 669, 669f, 675, 678
Sacroiliac notch, 671
Sacrosciatic notch, 671
Sacrum, 675f
Salivary glands, 224
Salmon patch, 818, 819b
Salpingitis, acute, 502t
Saphenous vein
great, 514, 514f
small, 514, 514f
Scabies, 912t
Scalenes, 309
Scaphoid fracture, 661
Scapula, 646, 646f
winging of, 767, 767f
Scapular line, 306, 306f
Scapulohumeral muscle group, 647, 647f
Scapulothoracic articulation, 646
Scarring alopecia, 210t
Schizoid personality disorder, 152b
Schizophrenia, 161, 162
Schizotypal personality disorder, 152b
Sciatica, 635, 699t
assessment for, 765–766
Sciatic nerve, examination techniques for, 671, 
671f
Scissors gait, 789t
Sclera, 226, 226f
Scleroderma, 490t
Scoliosis, 649, 670, 694
in adolescents, 902
Screening
for cardiovascular risk factors, 363–370
for diabetes, 367, 368b
in health history, 10
for lung cancer, 315–316
Scrotal edema, 558t
Scrotal hernia, 554–555, 558t
Scrotum
abnormalities of, 558t
anatomy of, 542
examination techniques for, 552–553
lesions of, 546–547
swelling of, 554, 555
Sebaceous glands, 175
Sebaceous hyperplasia, 198t
Seborrhea, in infants, 911t
Seborrheic keratosis, 196t, 197t, 201t
inﬂamed, 201t
Secondary headaches, 216, 268t–269t
Secretory diarrhea, 493t
Seizures, 780t–781t
acute symptomatic, 724–725
focal, 780t
generalized, 780t, 781t
in health history, 724–725
pseudoseizures, 781t
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
I n d e x  
1031
Stapes, 243, 243f
Startle reﬂex, 850b
Static stabilizers, of shoulder, 646
Static tremors, 782t
STEADI (Stopping Elderly Accidents, Deaths, and 
Injuries) falls prevention toolkit, 987
Stenosis
aortic
syncope in, 778t
spinal, 517
Stensen duct. See Parotid duct
Steppage gait, 789t
Steps to accurate blood pressure measurement, 
127–130, 127b
average two or more readings, 129
cuff and arm, position of, 128
diastolic pressure identiﬁcation, 129
measure in both arms at least once, 130
position tethoscope bell over brachial artery, 
128, 128f
systolic pressure
estimation and add 30 mm Hg, 128
identiﬁcation, 129, 129f
Stereognosis, 755, 755f
Sternal angle, 304, 304f, 375
Sternoclavicular joint, 646–647, 646f
palpation of, 649–650
Sternocleidomastoid muscle, 257, 257f, 668f, 
669
Stethoscopes, 390–391
Stiffness, in joint pain, 631, 632
Still’s murmur, in children, 878, 879b
Stomach, cancer of, 488t
Stools
acholic, 461
black and bloody, 495t
in jaundice, 461
melena, 460, 495t
nonbloody, 495t
quality of, 459–460
with red blood, 495t
Strabismus, 916t
in children, 866
in infants, 824
Straight-leg test, 765–766, 766f
Stranger anxiety, 856
Streptococcal pharyngitis, 874, 917
Streptococcal pneumonia, 317
Stress disorder
posttraumatic, 155
Stress incontinence, 462, 497t
Striae gravidarum, 930
Stridor, 262, 318, 326, 338t
Stroke, 726–731
clinical features of, 776t
deﬁnition, 726
facts about, 727b
hemorrhagic, 726, 728
ischemic, 726, 776t
prevention, health promotion and counseling 
for, 726–731
primary prevention, 728, 729b–730b
risk factors for, 729b–730b
secondary prevention, 730–731
types of, 776t–777t
vascular territories of, 776t
warning signs of, 728b
Stroke volume, 352
Stupor, 769b
Stye, 275t
Subacromial bursa, 648
Subacromial bursitis, 650
Spermatic cord
abnormalities of, 560t
anatomy of, 542
palpation of, 553, 553f
torsion of, 560t
varicocele of, 560t
Spermatocele, 560t
Spheroidal joints, 629, 629b, 629f
Sphygmomanometer, selection of, 126, 127b
Spider angioma, 205t
Spider vein, 205t
Spina biﬁda, 670
Spina biﬁda occulta, 842
Spinal accessory nerve, 715, 715f, 716b
examination of, 740
Spinal cord
anatomy of, 714, 714f
lesions of, 775t
segments of, 714
Spinal cord syndromes, 752
Spinal nerves, 715, 717
Spinal reﬂexes, 720–721
cutaneous stimulation reﬂexes, 721b, 763–764
abdominal, 763, 763f
anal, 764
plantar, 764, 764f
deep tendon reﬂexes, 720–721, 721b
ankle, 762, 762f
assessment of, 758–763
biceps, 759, 759f
brachioradialis, 759, 759f
knee, 761, 761f
triceps, 760, 760f
Spinal roots, lesions of, 775t
Spinal stenosis, 517
Spine
anatomy of, 666–668, 667b
examination techniques for, 668–674
movements of, 672b–673b
Spinothalamic tract, 719, 719f
Spinous process, 667, 667b, 668, 668f, 669, 671, 
671f, 675f
Spleen, 840
anatomic considerations, 450, 450f, 451
examination techniques for, 479–481
in children, 881
palpation, 480–481, 480f, 481f
percussion, 479, 479f, 480f
Splenic percussion sign, 479, 480f
Splenius capitis muscle, 668, 668f
Splenomegaly, 479, 480
Spondylolisthesis, 669
Spondylosis, 698t
Spontaneous pneumothorax, dyspnea in, 
332t–333t
Spontaneous venous pulsations (SVPs), 241
Sports preparticipation screening, 903, 
903b–905b
Sputum, 312
foul-smelling, 312
mucoid, 312
purulent, 312
Squamocolumnar junction, 567
Squamous cell carcinoma, 197t, 199t
in situ, 198t
Squamous epithelium, 567, 599t
Stance
in coordination assessment, 751–752
examination technique for, 676
in gait, 676
Standard precautions, in physical examination, 17–18
Standing and squatting maneuver, 397
purpuric, 205t
raised spots, 192t
rough, 197t
terminologies for, 182, 182b–183b
vascular, 205t
in physical examination, 21
recording ﬁndings, 189, 190b
in review of systems, 12b
signs of sun damage, 206t
Skin cancer
basal cell carcinoma, 176, 198t
examination techniques for, 180–188
melanoma, 176
avoiding ultraviolet radiation and tanning 
beds, 177
risk factors for, 177b
screening for, 178, 178b–180b
screening, 178–180
squamous cell carcinoma, 176,197t, 199t, 207t
sunscreen to prevent, 177
systemic diseases and associated ﬁndings of, 
207t–208t
Skin tags, 200t
Skull symmetry, of infants, 821–822, 821f
Slate blue patches, 816, 820
Sleep, disordered, 313
Sleep diary, 971
Sleepiness, daytime, 313
Small for gestational age (SGA), 807, 807b, 808f
Smoking, 313–315
abstinence from, 371
adverse effects of, 314b
cardiovascular disease and, 370
and disease risk, 313, 314
in older adults, 973
readiness to quit, assessment of, 314b
in stroke, 729b
Smooth tongue, 297t
Snoring, 313
Social development
of adolescents, 890
of children, 854, 854b
of infants, 809
Social history, in health history, 8b, 11
Social phobia, 151b
Sodium, food sources of, 143t
Sodium intake, blood pressure and, 118–119
Soft palate, assessment, 740
Solar elastosis, 206t
Solar lentigines, 196t
Solar lentigo, 200t, 206t
Soleus muscle, 688
Somatic growth
of adolescents, 894
of children, 862–863
of infants, 813–814
Somatic nervous system, 714
Somatic pain, 136b
Somatic symptom and related disorders, 169t
Somatoform disorders, 148, 149
Sore throat, 221
Sore tongue, 221
Spastic hemiparesis, 789t
Spasticity, 742, 788t
Speciﬁcity, of diagnostic tests, 48, 48b, 49, 49b, 
50b
Specula, for pelvic examination
procedure for, 587–588
types of, 585
Speech
disorders of, 784t
in mental status examination, 155, 160, 160b
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
1032 
Index
with peritoneal inﬂammation, 503t
rebound, 475b
Tendinitis, 631, 643
Achilles, 688
bicipital, 655, 701t
calciﬁc of shoulder, 700t
rotator cuff, 700t
Tendons, deﬁnition, 626b, 630
Tenesmus, 459
Tennis elbow, 657, 702t
Tenosynovitis, 631, 661
acute, 705t
de Quervain’s, 661–662, 663, 664, 745
gonococcal, 661
Tension headaches, 216, 267t
Teres major muscle, 668f
Teres minor muscle, 647, 650, 668f
Terminal hair, 174
Terry nails, 212t
Testes, 841
abnormalities of, 559t
anatomy of, 542
cancer of, 559t
palpation of, 552, 552f
small, 559t
tumor of, 559t
Testicular self-examination, 555, 555b–556b
Testosterone, 542
Tetanus, 923t
Tetanus/diphtheria/pertussis (Tdap) vaccine, for 
older adults, 980b
Tetanus/diphtheria (Td) vaccine, for older adults, 
980b
Tetralogy of Fallot, 919t
Thalamus, 713
Thenar atrophy, 660, 704t, 741–742
Thermometers
electronic, 133
glass, 133
Thoracic kyphoscoliosis, 336t
Thoracic kyphosis, 670
Thoracoabdominal paradox, 831
Thorax
anatomy and physiology of, 303–309
deformities of, 336t
examination techniques for, 317–329
in children, 876–877
in infants, 829–831, 829–832
in older adults, 993
during pregnancy, 943
in health history, 310–313
normal adult, 336t
in physical examination, 21
physical examination of, 22
recording ﬁndings, 329
Thought content, in mental status examination, 
154b, 162, 162b–163b
Thought processes, in mental status examination, 
154b, 162, 162b–163b
Throat
examination techniques for
in adolescents, 895
in health history, 221
in physical examination, 21
in review of systems, 12b
Thromboangiitis obliterans, 534t
Thrombophlebitis, 534t
Thrush on palate, 293t
Thumb
movement evaluation, in carpal tunnel 
syndrome, 664–666
opposition of, testing, 746, 746f
bursae and, 630
structure of, 630
types of, 629–630, 629b
Synovial membrane, 628
Synovitis, 643
Syphilis, 579, 579b
on female genitalia, 596t
on male genitalia, 557t
primary, 557t
secondary, 596t
Systemic lupus erythematous (SLE), 632, 633
Systole, 345
identiﬁcation of, 392
Systolic aortic murmur, 961
Systolic blood pressure
estimation and add 30 mm Hg, 128
identiﬁcation, 129, 129f
Systolic hypertension
isolated, 130
in older adults, 957
Systolic murmurs, 394b, 397
maneuvers for identiﬁcation of, 398b
T
Tachypnea, 318, 335t
Tactile fremitus, 320, 337t
assessment of, 328
Taloﬁbular ligament
anterior, 691, 691f
posterior, 691, 691f
Talus, 691, 691f
Tangential lighting, 15, 15f
Tanner sex maturity rating stages, 896, 897b
Tanner stages for sexual maturity, 569
Tarsal plate, 226, 226f
Tavistock principles, 102b
Teeth, 295t
abrasion of, 296t
age of eruption, 873b
attrition of, 296t
of children
dental caries in, 872–873
examination techniques for, 872–873
staining in, 873, 917t
erosion of, 296t
types of, 873b
Telogen efﬂuvium, 188, 209t
Temperature, body
assessment of, 133–134
in children, 865
in infants, 815–816
in older adults, 958
oral temperatures, 133
rectal temperatures, 133
temporal artery, 134
tympanic membrane, 134
Temperature sensation
assessment of, 738, 754
sensory pathway for, 719–720
Temporal artery
superﬁcial, 225, 225f
temperature of, 134
Temporal bone, 644
Temporal lobe, 713
Temporal muscles, 645
Temporomandibular joint, 644–645, 644f, 645f
Tenderness
abdominal, 502t–503t
elbow, 702t
in joint examination, 643b
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
assessment for, 765
headache due to, 268t–269t
and thunderclap headaches, 216
Subclavian lymph nodes, 419f
Subclavian vein, 419f
Subconjunctival hemorrhage, red eyes in, 270t
Subcutaneous mass/cyst, 195t
Subdeltoid bursitis, 650
Subjective data, of patient assessment, 24
vs. objective data, 6–7, 7b
Submandibular duct, 225, 225f
Submandibular gland, 224, 225f
ducts of, 254, 254f
Submandibular nodes, 261, 261f
Subscapularis muscle, 647, 650
Subscapular lymph nodes, 421, 422f, 441
Substance abuse. See also Alcohol use
during pregnancy, 938
screening for, 151b, 157–158
Subtalar (talocalcaneal) joint, 691, 691f, 693
Suicide risk
questions to ask, 161
screening for, 157
Summarization, in skilled interviewing, 72
Superﬁcial veins, of leg, 514, 514f
Superﬁcial xerosis, 197t
Superior mesenteric artery, 513
Superior vena cava, 344, 344f, 513
Supernumerary teeth, 827
Supination
of elbow, 657, 657b, 657f
of forearm, 654b
Supinator muscle, 656
Supraclavicular lymph nodes, 441
Supraclavicular node
enlargement of, 260
palpation of, 261, 261f
Supracondylar fracture, of elbow, 657, 657f
Suprapatellar pouch, 684, 686–687
Suprapubic pain, 454, 462
Supraspinatus muscle, 647, 650
Supraspinatus tendon, 648
Supraventricular tachycardia, in infants, 910t
Sutures, of skull, in infants, 820, 821f
Swallowing, assessment of, 739
Swan neck deformity, 703t
S wave, 352, 352f
Sweat glands, 175
Swelling, 357
in joint examination, 643b
in joint pain, 632
Swinging ﬂashlight test, 265, 265f
Swing phase, of gait, 676–677, 677f
Symmetric weakness, 723
Sympathetic nervous system, 714
Symphysis pubis, 449f, 674
Symptoms
attributes of, 9, 79, 79b, 80, 80f
somatic and related disorders, 169t
somatoform, 148
understanding, 148–149
unexplained and mental health disorders, 149, 
150b
Syncope, 358, 778t–779t, 958
cough, 778t
in health history, 724
micturition, 778t
vasovagal, 724, 778t
Synovial cavity, 628
Synovial ﬂuid, 628
Synovial joints, 628, 628b, 628f, 629b
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
 
I n d e x  
1033
Underbite, 873
Undescended testicle, 922t
Unequal pupils. See Anisocoria
Unilateral headache, 216
United States Preventive Services Task Force 
(USPSTF), 59, 61t, 62t
Universal precautions, in physical examination, 
17–18
Upper motor neurons, damage to, 717–719
Ureteral colic, 463, 464f
Ureteral pain, 463, 464f
Urethra
anatomy of, 542
bulges and swelling of, 597t
Urethral caruncles, 597t
Urethral meatus, 565f, 566
Urethral mucosa, prolapse of, 597t
Urethral sphincter, anatomic considerations, 452, 
452f
Urethritis, 551, 594
Urge incontinence, 462, 497t
Urinary frequency, 462, 496t
during pregnancy, 931b
Urinary incontinence, 463
functional, 463, 498t
in older adults, 987
overﬂow, 463, 498t
stress, 462, 497t
urge, 462, 497t
Urinary system
in health history, 462–464
in review of systems, 13b
Urinary urgency, 462
Urination, pain with, 462
Urine
blood in, 463
in jaundice, 461
Urogenital diaphragm, 569
Urticaria (hives), 912t
USPSTF. See United States Preventive Services Task 
Force (USPSTF)
Uterus
abnormal bleeding, 570b, 571, 571b
abnormalities of, 602t
anatomic considerations, 567
palpation of, 591, 591f
positions of, 601t
postmenopausal bleeding, 570b, 572
during pregnancy, 929, 947
retroﬂexion of, 601t
retroversion of, 601t
Uvula, 874
V
Vaccine-preventable diseases, 923t
Vagina, 565, 565f
bulges and swelling of, 597t
small oriﬁce, 587b
vulvovaginal symptoms, 572
Vaginal discharge, 572, 590, 598t
in adolescents, 900
in early childhood, 883
during pregnancy, 931b
Vaginismus, 574
Vagus nerve, 715, 715f, 716b
examination of, 739–740
Valgus stress test, 689b
Validation, in skilled interviewing, 71
Valsalva maneuver, 398
Values, deﬁnition, 85
Transformation zone, 567, 567f
Transgender sexual orientation, 545–546
Transient arterial occlusion, 399
Transient ischemic attack (TIA), 723, 726–731.  
See also Stroke
deﬁnition, 726
prevention, 730–731
health promotion and counseling for, 726–731
Transposition of great arteries, 920t
Transverse depressions, of nails, 212t
Transverse foramen, 667, 667b
Transverse process, 667b
Transverse tarsal joint, 694, 694f
Trapezius muscle, 257, 257f, 668, 668f, 740
Traube’s space, 479
Traumatic ﬂail chest, 336t
Tremors
in health history, 725
types of, 782t
Trendelenburg test, 532, 887, 887f
Treponema pallidum, 914t
Triceps reﬂex, assessment of, 760, 760f
Trichomonal vaginitis, 598t
Tricuspid valve, 345, 345f
Trigeminal nerve, 715, 715f, 716b
examination of, 737–738
Trigeminal neuralgia
headache due to, 268t–269t
Trigger ﬁnger, 704t
Trochanteric bursa, 674f, 675f, 676, 678, 679, 679f
Trochanteric bursitis, 631, 635, 678
Trochlear groove, 682, 686
Trochlear nerve, 715, 715f, 716b
examination of, 737
Trochlear nerve (CN IV) damage, and diplopia, 231
Trunk incurvation reﬂex, 850b
Tuberculous epididymitis, 560t
Tug test, 188, 245
Tuning fork tests, 247–248
Turbinates, 249, 249f
T wave, 352, 352f
Two-point discrimination test, 755–756, 755f
Tympanic membrane, 243, 243f, 868
temperature of, 134
Tympanitic percussion note, 323b
Tympanosclerosis, 287t
Tympany, in abdomen, 473
U
Ulcerative colitis
diarrhea due to, 492t
Ulcerative gingivitis, acute necrotizing, 295t
Ulcers
aphthous, 221, 255f, 298t
in arterial insufﬁciency, 538t
neuropathic, 538t, 707t
peptic, 488t
in venous insufﬁciency, 538t
Ulna, bone of forearm, 656
Ulnar artery, pulse assessment at, 512, 512f
Ulnar nerve, 656
disorders of, 704t
Ulnar pulse, 529, 529f
Umbilical cord, of newborn, 838
Umbilical granuloma, 838
Umbilical hernia, 499t, 839
Umbilicus, 449f
Umbilicus amnioticus, 838
Umbilicus cutis, 838
Umbo, 243, 243f
range of motion and maneuvers for, 665–666, 
665f, 666f
Thunderclap headache, 216, 268t–269t
Thyroglossal duct cysts, 828
Thyroid cartilage, 258, 258f
Thyroid function, evaluation of, 221
Thyroid gland, 258–259, 258f, 262, 262f
diffuse enlargement, 299t
dysfunction, symptoms and signs of, 299t
enlargement and function, 299t
with goiter at rest, 262f
with goiter while swallowing, 262f
multinodular goiter, 299t
palpation of, 263, 263f
position at rest, 262f
during pregnancy, 943
single nodule, 299t
Thyroiditis, 263
Thyrotoxicosis (Graves disease), 915t
TIA. See Transient ischemic attack (TIA)
Tibia, 682, 682f, 683–684, 691, 691f
lateral condyle of, 682, 682f
medial condyle of, 682, 682f
Tibial artery, posterior, pulse assessment at, 513, 
528
Tibial tuberosity, 682, 682f, 686
Tibiofemoral joint, 682, 685–686
Tibiotalar joint, 691, 691f, 693
Tics, 783t
Tinea capitis, 210t, 912t
Tinea corporis, 912t
Tinel’s sign, 664, 664f
Tinnitus, 219
Tobacco cessation, 313–315
Tobacco use, in health history, 10
Toenail, ingrown, 707t
Toes, abnormalities of, 707t
Tolerance, deﬁnition, 96b
Tongue, 253–254, 253f, 254f
cancer of, 256, 256f
of children, 874
ﬁndings in, 297t–298t
geographic, 874
inspection of, 256
Tonic–clonic seizure, 781t
Tonic pupil, 236, 277t
Tonsillar fossa, 254
Tonsillar node, 260
Tonsillitis, 874
exudative, 292t
Tonsils
examination techniques for
in children, 874
normal, 292t
Tooth, 253, 253f
Tophaceous gout, 696t, 703t
Tophi, 286t
Tori mandibulares, 298t
Torsion of spermatic cord, 560t
Torticollis, 669, 672
Torus palatinus, 293t
Total-body skin examination, for skin cancer, 
180–181
Touch
light, assessment of, 754
sensory pathway for, 719–720
trigeminal nerve and, 738
Trachea, 308
and bronchi, 308, 308f
Tracheal rings, 258
Tracheobronchial tree, 308, 308f
Tragus, 242, 242f
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
1034 
Index
Weber test, 247–248, 247f, 289t, 739
Weight
body mass index (BMI) and
calculation of, 122–123, 123t
in children, 863, 863b
classiﬁcation by, 116, 116b
obesity and, 116, 116b
of children, 863
in general survey, 122
in health history, 113–114
health promotion and counseling and, 114–119, 
115b, 636–637
of infants, 814
physical activity and, 636–637, 637b
steps to maintain optimal, 115b–116b, 116–117
Weight gain
drugs associated with, 113
in health history, 113
during pregnancy, 936, 937b
Weight loss
causes of, 113, 122
recommendations for, 117–118, 117b
Wernicke’s aphasia, 784t
Wharton ducts, 254, 254f
Wheal, 195t
Wheezes, 311, 318, 325–326, 325b, 338t
Whiplash, 698t
Whispered pectoriloquy, 327
Whispered voice test, 246–247
Whisper test, 223
White coat hypertension, 124b, 126, 131
Whiteley Index, 151b
White matter
of brain, 713, 713f
of spinal cord, 717
Wilson disease, 276t
Winging of scapula, 767, 767f
Women
African Americans, 362
American Heart Association cardiovascular risk 
categories for, 362b
cardiovascular disease in, 360–363, 360b
hypertension in, 360
Wong–Baker FACES Pain Rating Scale, for pain, 135
Working diagnosis, 28–29
Wrinkles, 206t
Wrist
anatomy of, 658–659, 658f
examination techniques, 659–665
extension at, testing, 744, 744f
movements of, 662, 662b
X
Xanthelasma, 275t
Xiphoid process, 449f, 450f, 451
Z
Zoster vaccine, for older adults, 980b
Zygomatic arch, 644
Visual ﬁelds, 228, 228f
defects in, 273t, 736
examination techniques for
in children, 867
optic nerve and, 736
Visual impairment, in infants, 824
Visual loss, 217–218
Visual pathways, 229–230, 229f, 230f
Vital signs, 111, 123–134. See also Heart rate; Heart 
rhythms; Hypertension; Respiratory rate; 
Temperature, body
blood pressure, 124–132
documentation, 138, 138b
examination techniques for
in adolescents, 895
in children, 863–865
in infants, 814–816
in older adults, 989–990
during pregnancy, 942
heart rate, 132
heart rhythm, 132
pain, 134–137
in physical examination, 21
respiratory rate, 132
respiratory rhythm, 132
temperature, 133–134
Vitamin D
food sources of, 143t
osteoporosis and, 639–640
recommended dietary intake for, 640b
Vitreous body, 227, 228f
Vitreous ﬂoaters, 242
Vocabulary and information, 165
Voice assessment, 739
in children, 874, 875b
Voice sounds, transmitted, 326–327, 337t
Voluminous diarrhea, 493t
Vomiting, 457–458
hematemesis, 458
Vulva, 565
bulges and swelling of, 597t
carcinoma of, 596t
lesions of, 596t
vulvovaginal symptoms, 572
Vulvovaginal pruritis, 882
Vulvovaginal symptoms, 572
W
Waist circumference, 123
6-minute walk test, 329
Warmth, in joint examination, 643b
Warts, 197t
genital, 557t, 596t
plantar, 707t
Weakness
asymmetric, 723
distal, 723
in health history, 112, 723
proximal, 723
symmetric, 723
Valves of Houston, 607f, 608, 608f
Varicella, 923t
Varicocele, 553, 560t
Varicose veins, 298t, 531, 531f
Varus stress test, 689b
Vasa vasorum, 511
Vascular markings, in newborns, 818
Vas deferens, anatomy of, 542
Vasodepressor (vasovagal) syncope, 778t
Vasovagal syncope, 724
Veins
anatomy and physiology of, 513–514
of legs, 513–514
perforating, 514, 514f
varicose, 531, 531f
venous, competency assessment of, 532
Vellus hair, 174
Venereal warts, 557t, 596t
Venous hum, 412t, 501t
in children, 878, 879b
Venous insufﬁciency, chronic, 533t, 534t, 537t, 
538t
Venous valve, competency assessment, 532
Ventral hernias, assessment techniques for,  
487
Ventricular failure, left, 334t
Ventricular septal defect, 920t
Vernix caseosa, 817
Verruca plana, 912t
Verruca vulgaris, 912t
Vertebrae
anatomy of, 667b
spinous process of, 667, 667b, 669,  
671, 675f
Vertebral arch, 667, 667b
Vertebral body, 667, 667b
Vertebral column. See Spine
Vertebral foramen, 667, 667b
Vertebral line, 306, 306f
Vertigo, 219–220, 271t, 722
central, 271t
peripheral, 271t
Vesicles, 193t
Vestibule, 248, 248f, 249, 565–566,  
565f
Vestibulocochlear nerve, 244
Vibration sense
assessment of, 754
Vibratory sense, in older adults, 964
Violence, family
ACOG screening approach for, 939b
during pregnancy, 939, 939b
Viral pneumonias, 334t
Visceral pain, abdominal, 453–454, 454f
Visceral tenderness, abdominal, 502t
Vision, loss of, 222–223
Visual acuity
examination techniques for
in children, 866–867, 867b, 867f
in infants, 824
Visual Analog Scale, for pain,  
135
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
