Instructions for online access
Thank you for your purchase. Please note that your purchase of this
Elsevier eBook also includes access to an online version. Please click
here (or go to hĴp://ebooks.elsevier.com) to request an activation
code and registration instructions in order to gain access to the web
version.
Cellular and Molecular
Immunology
TENTH EDITION
Abul K. Abbas, MBBS
Professor Emeritus, Department of Pathology, University of California
San Francisco, San Francisco, California
Andrew H. Lichtman, MD, PhD
Professor of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Brigham and Women’s
Hospital, Boston, MassachuseĴs
Shiv Pillai, MBBS, PhD
Professor of Medicine and Health Sciences and Technology, Harvard
Medical School, MassachuseĴs General Hospital, Boston, MassachuseĴs
Table of Contents
Instructions for online access
Cover image
Title page
Copyright
Dedication
Preface
Online Resources for Instructors and Students
Chapter 1. Properties and Overview of Immune Responses
Innate and Adaptive Immunity
Innate Immunity
Adaptive Immunity
Summary
Chapter 2. Cells and Tissues of the Immune System
Cells of the Immune System
Anatomy and Functions of Lymphoid Tissues
Summary
Chapter 3. Leukocyte Circulation and Migration Into Tissues
Overview of Leukocyte Migration
Adhesion Molecules on Leukocytes and Endothelial Cells
Involved in Leukocyte Recruitment
Chemokines and Chemokine Receptors
Leukocyte-Endothelial Interactions and Leukocyte Recruitment
into Tissues
Migration of Neutrophils and Monocytes to Sites of Infection or
Tissue Injury
Migration and Recirculation of T Lymphocytes
Migration of B Lymphocytes
Summary
Chapter 4. Innate Immunity
Overview of Innate Immunity
Recognition of Microbes and Damaged Tissue by the Innate
Immune System
Cellular Pattern Recognition Receptors
Cellular Components of the Innate Immune System
Soluble Effector Molecules of Innate Immunity
The Inflammatory Response
The Antiviral Response
Stimulation of Adaptive Immunity
Mechanisms that Limit Innate Immune Responses
Summary
Chapter 5. Antibodies and Antigens
Antibody Structure
Synthesis, Assembly, and Expression of Immunoglobulin
Molecules
Antibody Binding of Antigens
Structure-Function Relationships in Antibody Molecules
Summary
Chapter 6. Antigen Presentation to T Lymphocytes and the
Function of Major Histocompatibility Complex Molecules
Properties of Antigens Recognized by T Lymphocytes
Antigen Capture and the Functions of Antigen-Presenting Cells
The Major Histocompatibility Complex
Processing of Protein Antigens
Presentation of Nonprotein Antigens to T Cells
Summary
Chapter 7. Immune Receptors and Signal Transduction
Overview of Signal Transduction
The Immune Receptor Family
The T Cell Receptor Complex and T Cell Signaling
The B Lymphocyte Antigen Receptor Complex
The Attenuation of Immune Receptor Signaling
Cytokine Receptors and Signaling
Summary
Chapter 8. Lymphocyte Development and Antigen Receptor Gene
Rearrangement
Overview of Lymphocyte Development
Rearrangement of Antigen Receptor Genes in B and T
Lymphocytes
B Lymphocyte Development
T Lymphocyte Development
Summary
Chapter 9. Activation of T Lymphocytes
Overview of T Lymphocyte Activation
Signals for T Lymphocyte Activation
Functional Responses of T Lymphocytes
Decline of T Cell Responses
Summary
Chapter 10. Diﬀerentiation and Functions of CD4+ Eﬀector T Cells
Overview of CD4+ T Cell–Mediated Immune Responses
Subsets of CD4+ Effector T Cells
The Th1 Subset
The Th2 Subset
The Th17 Subset
Functions of Other HELPER T Cell Subsets
Summary
Chapter 11. Diﬀerentiation and Functions of CD8+ Eﬀector T Cells
Differentiation of CD8+ T Cells Into Cytotoxic T Lymphocytes
Effector Functions of CD8+ Cytotoxic T Lymphocytes
Cytokine Production by CD8+ Effector T Cells
Roles of CD8+ Cytotoxic T Lymphocytes in Host Defense
Summary
Chapter 12. B Cell Activation and Antibody Production
Overview of Humoral Immune Responses
Antigen Recognition and Antigen-Induced B Cell Activation
Helper T Cell–Dependent Antibody Responses to Protein
Antigens
Antibody Responses to T-Independent Antigens
Antibody Feedback: Regulation of Humoral Immune Responses
By Fc Receptors
Summary
Chapter 13. Eﬀector Mechanisms of Humoral Immunity
Overview of Humoral Immunity
Neutralization of Microbes and Microbial Toxins
Antibody-Mediated Opsonization and Phagocytosis
The Complement System
Summary
Chapter 14. Specialized Immunity at Epithelial Barriers and in
Immune Privileged Tissues
General Features of Immunity at Epithelial Barriers
Immunity in the Gastrointestinal System
Immunity in Other Mucosal Tissues
The Cutaneous Immune System
Immune-Privileged Tissues
Immunity in the Mammalian Fetus and Newborn
Summary
Chapter 15. Immunologic Tolerance and Autoimmunity
Overview of Immunologic Tolerance
T Lymphocyte Tolerance
B Lymphocyte Tolerance
Tolerance to Commensal Microbes and Other Foreign Antigens
Mechanisms of Autoimmunity
Summary
Chapter 16. Immunity to Microbes
Overview of Immune Responses to Microbes
Immunity to Extracellular Bacteria
Immunity to Intracellular Bacteria
Immunity to Fungi
Immunity to Viruses
Immunity to Parasites
Strategies for Vaccine Development
Summary
Chapter 17. Transplantation Immunology
General Principles of Transplantation Immunology
Immune Responses to Allografts
Patterns and Mechanisms of Allograft Rejection
Prevention and Treatment of Allograft Rejection
Xenogeneic Transplantation
Blood Transfusion and the Abo and Rh Blood Group Antigens
Hematopoietic Stem Cell (HSC) Transplantation
Summary
Chapter 18. Tumor Immunology
Overview of Tumor Immunity
Tumor Antigens
Immune Responses To Tumors
Evasion of Immune Responses by Tumors
Immunotherapy For Tumors
Summary
Chapter 19. Hypersensitivity Disorders
Causes of Hypersensitivity Diseases
Mechanisms and Classification of Hypersensitivity Reactions
Diseases Caused by Antibodies and Antigen-Antibody
Complexes
Diseases Caused by T Lymphocytes
Therapeutic Approaches for Immunologic Diseases
Selected Immunologic Diseases: Pathogenesis and Therapeutic
Strategies
Summary
Chapter 20. Allergy
Overview of IgE-Dependent Allergic Reactions
Production of IgE
Cells Involved in Allergic Reactions
Reactions Dependent on IgE and Mast Cells
Genetic Susceptibility to Allergic Disease
Allergic Diseases in Humans: Pathogenesis and Therapy
The Protective Roles of Immune Reactions Mediated by IgE and
Mast Cells
Summary
Chapter 21. Primary and Acquired Immunodeﬁciencies
Overview of Immunodeficiency Diseases
Primary (Congenital) Immunodeficiencies
Secondary (Acquired) Immunodeficiencies
Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immunodeficiency
Syndrome
Summary
Glossary
Appendix I. Principal Features of Selected CD Molecules
Appendix II. Cytokines
Appendix III. Laboratory Techniques Commonly Used in
Immunology
Index
Copyright
Elsevier
1600 John F. Kennedy Blvd.
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19103-2899
CELLULAR AND MOLECULAR IMMUNOLOGY, TENTH
EDITION
   ISBN: 978-0-323-75748-5
INTERNATIONAL EDITION
   ISBN: 978-0-323-75749-2
Copyright © 2022 by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Cover image courtesy of Dr. Michael Gerner, University of
Washington, SeaĴle.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmiĴed in
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval
system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Details
on how to seek permission, further information about the
Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements with
organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the
Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website:
www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are
protected under copyright by the Publisher (other than as may be
noted herein).
Notice
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own
experience and knowledge in evaluating and using any
information, methods, compounds or experiments described
herein. Because of rapid advances in the medical sciences, in
particular, independent veriﬁcation of diagnoses and drug
dosages should be made. To the fullest extent of the law, no
responsibility is assumed by Elsevier, authors, editors or
contributors for any injury and/or damage to persons or property
as a maĴer of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from
any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or
ideas contained in the material herein.
Previous editions copyrighted 2018, 2015, 2012, 2007, 2005, 2003,
2000, 1997, 1994, and 1991.
International Standard Book Number: 978-0-323-75748-5
Publisher: Jeremy Bowes
Director, Content Development: Rebecca Gruliow
Publishing Services Manager: Julie Eddy
Book Production Specialist: Clay Broeker
Design Direction: Ryan Cook
Printed in India
Last digit is the print number:
   9
   8
   7
   6
   5
   4
  
3
   2
   1
Dedication
To Our Students, Our Colleagues, and Our Families
Preface
This tenth edition of Cellular and Molecular Immunology includes
substantial revisions, reﬂecting recent scientiﬁc advances and
clinical applications of the science, while at the same time we have
maintained the clear and readable style that has been typical of
previous editions. Our presentation of new information focuses
primarily on the important concepts and has not signiﬁcantly
increased the length of the book. We have also rewriĴen many
sections for increased clarity, accuracy, and completeness.
The ﬁeld of immunology has moved beyond establishing
fundamental principles of the mechanisms of immune responses to
applying these principles to understand and develop therapies for
human disease. The revolution in immunological therapies over the
last 20 years has been extraordinary. It is especially satisfying for
immunologists that some of the most innovative and eﬀective
immunotherapies have been developed because the basic science
has matured and the complex mechanisms of immune activation
and regulation have been elucidated in increasing detail. Nowhere
has the link between basic science and clinical medicine been
demonstrated more forcefully than in the development of new
cancer immunotherapies. Throughout the book, we have paid
special aĴention to the clinical relevance of immunology and the
scientiﬁc underpinnings of human disease and therapies. As we
write this preface, the SARS CoV-2 pandemic has spread
throughout the entire world. The science of immunology is of
critical importance to the way we confront this challenge, and
immunologists are front and center in learning how the virus
causes disease, how we can treat it, and how we can develop
eﬀective vaccines.
In addition to these translational aspects of immunology, we
have also updated basic concepts wherever there has been
signiﬁcant 
new 
understanding. 
Some 
examples 
of 
these
fundamental advances include a beĴer understanding of tissue
resident macrophages and memory T cell subsets, mechanisms by
which inﬂammasomes and nucleic acid sensors stimulate innate
immune responses, the sequences of events in T cell–dependent
antibody responses, and mechanisms by which tumor evasion of
immune aĴack can be overcome
As in previous editions, each chapter is wriĴen so that it can be
read and understood on its own, without referring to other
chapters. To do this, it is often necessary to repeat some basic
concepts and general principles that are covered in other chapters.
We feel such repetition is valuable because it enables the reader to
consolidate learning and understand the content of each chapter
independently of the others. We also feel this is helpful for faculty
teaching from the book because they can consider each chapter as
the topic of one or two lectures.
We have also continued to improve our illustration program.
Many illustrations have been revised to provide more visual depth
and clarity. New ﬁgures have been added, and previously used
ﬁgures have been reviewed and often changed for accuracy. We
have kept design features such as the use of bold italic text to
highlight “take-home messages” to make the book easy to read. We
have tried to make the nomenclature more consistent by using the
conventions for human genes and proteins wherever possible. The
lists of suggested readings continue to emphasize recent review
articles that provide in-depth coverage of particular topics for the
interested reader. We have divided the lists into sections based on
themes to help readers ﬁnd the most useful articles for their needs.
In this edition, we have added some classic primary research
publications and links to the lectures of Nobel laureates in
immunology. This edition also includes a listing of the online
resources available to instructors and students (pages ix-x).
Individuals who have helped us with speciﬁc topics are (in
alphabetical order) Drs. Bruce Bochner, Michael Carroll, Jason
Cyster, Gaurav Gaiha, Michael Gerner, Florent Ginhoux, Amy Klion,
Ari Molofsky, Robert Ohgami, and Andrea Radtke; all were
generous with advice and images. Our illustrator, David Baker of
DNA Illustrations, remains a full partner in the book and provides
invaluable suggestions for clarity and accuracy. Several members of
the Elsevier staﬀ played critical roles. Our editor, Jeremy Bowes,
has been a source of support and encouragement. Our managing
editor, Rebecca Gruliow, shepherded the book through its
preparation and into production. Ryan Cook was responsible for
managing the design, and Clay Broeker was invaluable throughout
the production stage. We also owe a debt of gratitude to our
families for their unﬂagging support and their tolerance of our
absences. Finally, our students were the original inspiration for the
ﬁrst edition of this book, and we remain continually grateful to
them because from them we learn how to think about the science of
immunology and how to communicate knowledge in the clearest
and most meaningful way.
Abul K. Abbas
Andrew H. Lichtman
Shiv Pillai
Online Resources for Instructors
and Students
Resources for Instructors
The following resources for instructors are available for use via
Elsevier’s Evolve website. Please contact your local sales
representative for more information or go directly to the Evolve
website to request access: hĴps://evolve.elsevier.com . Note: It may
take 1 to 3 days for account access setup and veriﬁcation.
Image Collection
All ﬁgures from Cellular and Molecular Immunology, edition 10, are
available as an image collection in three formats (PowerPoint, JPEG,
and PDF), with labels on and oﬀ. Figures may be downloaded
individually or by chapter.
Test Bank
Instructors can access and download 251 UMSLE-style multiple-
choice and matching questions from the test bank for use in
classroom presentations and testing.
Resources for Students
The following resources are available online to students with the
purchase of Cellular and Molecular Immunology, edition 10, on
StudentConsult.com .
Textbook Online
The complete textbook is available online at StudentConsult.com .
The online version is fully searchable and provides all ﬁgures from
the print book, with enhanced functionality for many, including
clickable enlargements and slideshow views of multiple-part
images.
Glossary
The 
complete 
book 
glossary 
is 
available 
online 
at
StudentConsult.com , with searchable terms linked to their
discussion in the text. Readers may click on boldface highlighted
key terms in the text to view pop-up deﬁnitions from the Glossary
as they read the chapters online.
Clinical Cases
Five clinical cases are available online and linked via icons from the
corresponding textbook discussion, indicated by the icon 
 in the
margin. These clinical cases cover various diseases involving the
immune system and are meant to show how the basic science of
immunology contributes to our understanding of human diseases.
Each case illustrates typical ways in which a disease manifests, what
tests are used in diagnosis, and common modes of treatment. Each
case poses questions and provides answers with explanations to
increase understanding.
Self-Assessment Questions
Students can test and score themselves with 142 interactive
multiple-choice questions available on StudentConsult.com .
Chapter 1: Properties and
Overview of Immune Responses
Innate and Adaptive Immunity,
Innate Immunity,
Adaptive Immunity,
Cardinal Features of Adaptive Immune
Responses,
Overview of Humoral and Cell-Mediated
Immunity,
Initiation and Development of Adaptive Immune
Responses,
Humoral Immunity,
Cell-Mediated Immunity,
Summary,
The term immunity is derived from the Latin word immunitas,
which referred to the protection from legal prosecution oﬀered to
Roman senators during their tenures in oﬃce. Historically,
immunity meant protection from disease and, more speciﬁcally,
infectious disease. The cells and molecules responsible for
immunity constitute the immune system, and their collective and
coordinated response to the introduction of foreign substances is
called the immune response.
The physiologic function of the immune system is defense against
infectious microbes; however, even noninfectious foreign substances
and products of our own damaged and malignant (tumor) cells can
elicit immune responses. Furthermore, mechanisms that normally
protect individuals from infection and eliminate foreign substances
also are capable of causing tissue injury and disease in some
situations. In some situations, even self molecules can elicit
immune responses (so-called autoimmune responses). Therefore, a
more inclusive deﬁnition of the immune response is a reaction to
microbes and to molecules that are recognized as foreign or
abnormal, regardless of the physiologic or pathologic consequence
of such a reaction. Immunology is the study of immune responses
in this broader sense and of the cellular and molecular events that
occur after an organism encounters microbes and other foreign
macromolecules.
Historians often credit Thucydides, in the ﬁfth century BC in
Athens, as having ﬁrst mentioned immunity to an infection that he
called “plague” (but that was probably not the bubonic plague we
recognize today). The concept of protective immunity may have
existed long before, as suggested by the ancient Chinese custom of
making children resistant to smallpox by having them inhale
powders made from the skin lesions of patients recovering from the
disease. Immunology, in its modern form, is an experimental
science in which explanations of immunologic phenomena are
based on experimental observations and the conclusions drawn
from them. The development of immunology as an experimental
discipline has depended on our ability to manipulate the function
of the immune system under controlled conditions.
y
Historically, the ﬁrst clear example of this manipulation, and one
that remains among the most dramatic ever recorded, was Edward
Jenner’s successful vaccination against smallpox. Jenner, an English
physician, was aware of an observation in rural England that
milkmaids who had recovered from cowpox did not contract the
more serious smallpox. On the basis of this observation, he injected
the material from a cowpox pustule into the arm of an 8-year-old
boy. When this boy was later intentionally inoculated with
smallpox, the disease did not develop. Jenner’s landmark treatise
on vaccination (Latin vaccinus, of or from cows) was published in
1798. The principles of infectious diseases and vaccination were
ﬁrmly established by the work of Louis Pasteur and Robert Koch a
hundred years later. These advances led to the widespread
acceptance of the method for inducing immunity, and vaccination
remains the most eﬀective strategy for preventing infections (Table
1.1). An eloquent testament to the importance of immunology was
the announcement by the World Health Organization in 1980 that
smallpox was the ﬁrst disease that had been eradicated worldwide
by a program of vaccination. The signiﬁcance of the immune system
has been dramatically and tragically highlighted by the AIDS
(acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome) epidemic, caused by HIV
(human immunodeﬁciency virus), that started in the 1980s, and the
COVID-19 pandemic caused by the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, that
started in 2019. Both have caused severe morbidity and many
deaths, and have had a devastating impact on society. The
development of eﬀective vaccines for both diseases is a high
priority.
TABLE 1.1
This table illustrates the striking decrease in the incidence of selected infectious diseases in
the United States for which effective vaccines have been developed.
Data from Orenstein WA, Hinman AR, Bart KJ, Hadler SC.
Immunization. In: Mandell GL, BenneĴ JE, Dolin R, eds. Principles
and Practices of Infectious Diseases. 4th ed. New York, NY: Churchill
Livingstone; 1995; and Nationally Notiﬁable Infectious Diseases and
Conditions, United States: 2018 Annual Tables.
Since the 1960s, there has been a remarkable transformation in
our understanding of the immune system and its functions.
Advances in cell culture techniques (including monoclonal
antibody production), immunochemistry, recombinant DNA
methodology, 
next-generation 
DNA 
sequencing, 
x-ray
crystallography, and creation of genetically altered animals
(especially 
transgenic 
and 
knockout 
mice) 
have 
changed
immunology from a largely descriptive science into one in which
diverse immune phenomena can be explained in structural and
biochemical terms. Some of the most important advances in
immunology have come since the 1990s, with the development of
therapies targeting diﬀerent components of the immune system
that are based on fundamental science and are dramatically altering
the progression of human inﬂammatory diseases and cancers.
In this chapter, we outline the general features of immune
responses and introduce the concepts that form the cornerstones of
modern immunology and that recur throughout this book.
Innate and Adaptive Immunity
Defense against microbes is mediated by sequential and coordinated
responses that are called innate and adaptive immunity (Fig. 1.1 and
Table 1.2). Innate immunity (also called natural immunity or native
immunity) is essential for defending against microbes in the ﬁrst
few hours or days after infection, before adaptive immune
responses have developed. Innate immunity is mediated by
mechanisms that are in place even before an infection occurs
(hence innate) and are capable of reacting rapidly to invading
microbes.
In contrast to innate immunity, there are other immune
responses that are stimulated by exposure to infectious agents and
increase in magnitude and defensive capabilities with each
successive exposure to a particular microbe. Because this form of
immunity develops as a response to infection and thus adapts to
the infection, it is called adaptive immunity (also called speciﬁc
immunity or acquired immunity). The adaptive immune system
recognizes and reacts to a large number of microbial and
nonmicrobial 
substances, 
called 
antigens. 
Although 
many
pathogens have evolved to resist the innate immune response, the
stronger and more specialized adaptive immune responses are
capable of eradicating many of these infections. There are also
numerous connections between innate and adaptive immune
responses. The innate immune response to microbes provides early
danger signals that stimulate adaptive immune responses.
Conversely, adaptive immune responses often work by enhancing
the protective mechanisms of innate immunity, making them more
capable of eﬀectively combating microbes.
FIGURE 1.1  Innate and adaptive immunity.The
mechanisms of innate immunity provide the initial
defense against infections. Adaptive immune
responses develop later and require the activation
of lymphocytes. The kinetics of the innate and
adaptive immune responses are approximations
and may vary in different infections. Only selected
cell types are shown. ILCs, Innate lymphoid cells;
NK, natural killer.
TABLE 1.2
Many of the components of innate immunity also serve important functions in adaptive immune
responses, as we will discuss in later chapters.
Every individual’s immune system is able to recognize, respond to,
and eliminate many foreign (nonself) antigens but does not usually
react against that individual’s own (self) antigens and tissues.
Diﬀerent mechanisms are used by the innate and adaptive immune
systems to prevent reactions against healthy host cells.
Mechanisms for defending the host against microbes are present
in all multicellular organisms. The phylogenetically oldest
mechanisms of host defense are those of innate immunity, which
are present even in plants and insects. Approximately 500 million
years ago, jawless ﬁsh, such as lampreys and hagﬁsh, developed an
immune system containing lymphocyte-like cells that may function
like lymphocytes in more advanced species and even respond to
immunization. The antigen receptors on these cells are proteins
with limited variability that are capable of recognizing many
antigens but are distinct from the highly variable antibodies and T
cell receptors that appeared later in evolution. The more specialized
defense mechanisms that constitute adaptive immunity are found
only in vertebrates. Most of the components of the adaptive
immune system, including lymphocytes with diverse antigen
receptors, antibodies, and specialized lymphoid tissues, evolved
coordinately within a short time in jawed vertebrates (e.g., sharks)
approximately 360 million years ago.
Innate Immunity
The innate immune system responds almost immediately to
microbes and injured cells, and repeated exposures induce virtually
identical innate immune responses. The receptors of innate
immunity are speciﬁc for structures that are common to groups of
related microbes and do not distinguish ﬁne diﬀerences among
microbes. The principal components of innate immunity are (1)
physical and chemical barriers, such as epithelia and antimicrobial
chemicals produced at epithelial surfaces; (2) phagocytic cells
(neutrophils, macrophages), dendritic cells (DCs), mast cells,
natural killer (NK cells), and other innate lymphoid cells; and (3)
blood proteins, including components of the complement system
and other mediators of inﬂammation. Many innate immune cells,
such as DCs, some macrophages, and mast cells, are tissue
resident, and they function as sentinels to keep watch for microbes
that may invade the tissues. The innate immune response combats
microbes by two main strategies—by recruiting phagocytes and
other leukocytes that destroy the microbes, in the process called
inﬂammation; and by blocking viral replication or killing virus-
infected cells by mechanisms distinct from inﬂammatory reactions.
We will discuss the features, mechanisms, and components of
innate immunity in Chapter 4.
Adaptive Immunity
The adaptive immune response is mediated by cells called
lymphocytes and their products. Lymphocytes express highly
diverse receptors that are capable of recognizing a vast number of
antigens. There are two major populations of lymphocytes, called B
lymphocytes and T lymphocytes, which mediate diﬀerent types of
adaptive immune responses. We will ﬁrst summarize the important
properties of the adaptive immune system and then describe the
diﬀerent types of adaptive immune responses.
Cardinal Features of Adaptive Immune
Responses
The fundamental properties of the adaptive immune system reﬂect
the properties of the lymphocytes that mediate these responses.
• Speciﬁcity and diversity. Immune responses are speciﬁc for
distinct antigens and often for diﬀerent portions of a single
complex protein, polysaccharide, or other macromolecule
(Fig. 1.2). The parts of complex antigens that are speciﬁcally
recognized by lymphocytes are called determinants or
epitopes. This ﬁne speciﬁcity exists because individual
lymphocytes express membrane receptors that can
distinguish subtle structural diﬀerences between distinct
epitopes. Clones of lymphocytes with diﬀerent speciﬁcities
are present in unimmunized individuals and are able to
recognize and respond to foreign antigens (Fig. 1.3). This
fundamental concept is called clonal selection. It was clearly
enunciated by Macfarlane Burnet in 1957 as a hypothesis to
explain how the immune system could respond to a large
number and variety of antigens. According to this
hypothesis, which is now a proven feature of adaptive
immunity, antigen-speciﬁc clones of lymphocytes develop
before and independent of exposure to antigen. An
introduced antigen binds to (selects) the cells of the
preexisting antigen-speciﬁc clone and activates them,
leading to an immune response speciﬁc for that antigen.
The total number of antigenic speciﬁcities of the
lymphocytes in an individual, called the lymphocyte
repertoire, is extremely large. It is estimated that the
immune system of an individual can discriminate 107 to 109
distinct antigenic determinants. This ability of the
lymphocyte repertoire to recognize a very large number of
antigens, called diversity, is the result of variability in the
structures of the antigen-binding sites of lymphocyte
receptors for antigens. In other words, there are many
diﬀerent clones of lymphocytes and each clone has a unique
antigen receptor and therefore a singular antigen
speciﬁcity, contributing to a total repertoire that is
extremely diverse. The expression of diﬀerent antigen
receptors in diﬀerent clones of T and B cells is the reason
why these receptors are said to be clonally distributed. The
molecular mechanisms that generate such diverse antigen
receptors are discussed in Chapter 8. Diversity is essential if
the immune system is to defend individuals against the
many potential pathogens in the environment.
• Memory. Exposure of the immune system to a foreign
antigen enhances its ability to respond again to that
antigen. Responses to second and subsequent exposures to
the same antigen, called secondary immune responses, are
usually more rapid, greater in magnitude, and often
qualitatively diﬀerent from the ﬁrst, or primary, immune
response to that antigen (see Fig. 1.2). Immunologic
memory occurs because each exposure to an antigen
generates long-lived memory cells speciﬁc for the antigen.
There are two reasons why secondary responses are
typically stronger than primary immune responses—
memory cells accumulate and become more numerous than
the naive lymphocytes speciﬁc for the antigen that exist at
the time of initial antigen exposure, and memory cells react
more rapidly and vigorously to antigen challenge than do
naive lymphocytes. Memory enables the immune system to
mount heightened responses to persistent or recurring
exposure to the same antigen and thus to combat infections
by microbes that are prevalent in the environment and are
encountered repeatedly.
FIGURE 1.2  Specificity, memory, and
contraction of adaptive immune
responses.Antigens X and Y activate
different clones of B cells and induce the
production of different antibodies (specificity).
The secondary response to antigen X is more
rapid and larger than the primary response
(memory). Antibody levels decline with time
after each immunization (contraction, the
process that maintains homeostasis). The
same features are seen in T cell–mediated
immune responses.
FIGURE 1.3  Clonal selection.Each antigen (X)
selects a preexisting clone of specific
lymphocytes and stimulates the proliferation
and differentiation of that clone. The diagram
shows only B lymphocytes giving rise to
antibody-secreting effector cells, but the
same principle applies to T lymphocytes.
• Nonreactivity to self (self-tolerance). One of the most
remarkable properties of every normal individual’s immune
system is its ability to recognize, respond to, and eliminate
many foreign (nonself) antigens while not reacting
harmfully to that individual’s own (self) antigens.
Immunologic unresponsiveness is also called tolerance.
Tolerance to self antigens, or self-tolerance, is maintained
by several mechanisms. These include eliminating
lymphocytes that express receptors speciﬁc for some self
antigens, inactivating self-reactive lymphocytes, or
suppressing these cells by the actions of other (regulatory)
cells. Abnormalities in the induction or maintenance of
self-tolerance lead to immune responses against self
(autologous) antigens, which may result in disorders called
autoimmune diseases. The mechanisms of self-tolerance
and its failure are discussed in Chapter 15.
In addition to these cardinal features of adaptive immunity,
these responses have some other important properties.
• Because of the ability of lymphocytes and other immune cells
to circulate among tissues, adaptive immunity is systemic,
meaning that even if an immune response is initiated at one
site it can provide protection at distant sites. This feature is,
of course, essential for the success of vaccination—a vaccine
administered in the subcutaneous or muscle tissue of the
arm can protect from infections in any tissue.
• Immune responses are regulated by a system of positive
feedback loops that amplify the reaction and by control
mechanisms that prevent inappropriate or pathologic
reactions. When lymphocytes are activated, they trigger
mechanisms that further increase the magnitude of the
response. This positive feedback is important to enable the
small number of lymphocytes that are speciﬁc for any
microbe to generate the large response needed to eradicate
that infection. Many control mechanisms become active
during immune responses, which prevent excessive
activation of lymphocytes that could cause collateral
damage to normal tissues, and also prevent responses
against self antigens.
FIGURE 1.4  Types of adaptive immunity.In humoral
immunity, B lymphocytes secrete antibodies that
prevent infections and eliminate extracellular
microbes. In cell-mediated immunity, helper T
lymphocytes activate macrophages and
neutrophils to kill phagocytosed microbes or
cytotoxic T lymphocytes directly destroy infected
cells.
Overview of Humoral and Cell-Mediated
Immunity
There are two types of adaptive immunity, called humoral immunity
and cell-mediated immunity, which are mediated by diﬀerent types
of lymphocytes and function to eliminate diﬀerent types of microbes
(Figs. 1.4 and 1.5). Humoral immunity is mediated by molecules in
the blood and mucosal secretions, called antibodies, which are
produced by B lymphocytes. Antibodies recognize microbial
antigens, neutralize the infectivity of the microbes, and target
microbes for elimination by phagocytes and the complement
system. Humoral immunity is the principal defense mechanism
against microbes and their toxins located outside cells (e.g., in the
lumens of the gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts and in the
blood) because secreted antibodies can bind to these microbes and
toxins, neutralize them, and assist in their elimination.
Cell-mediated immunity, also called cellular immunity, is
mediated by T lymphocytes. Many microbes are ingested by but
survive within phagocytes, and some microbes, notably viruses,
infect and replicate in various host cells. In these locations the
microbes are inaccessible to circulating antibodies. Defense against
such infections is a function of cell-mediated immunity, which
promotes the destruction of microbes inside phagocytes and the
killing of infected cells to eliminate reservoirs of infection.
Diﬀerent classes of lymphocytes may be distinguished by the
expression of membrane proteins, many of which are designated by
CD numbers. These surface molecules are also involved in the
functions of the lymphocytes. We will introduce some of the surface
molecules that are used to identify lymphocyte classes in Chapter 2
and discuss them further in later chapters. A summary of the
molecules designated by CD numbers mentioned in the book is
provided in Appendix I.
Protective immunity against a microbe may be provided either by
the host’s response to the microbe or by the transfer of antibodies
that defend against the microbe (Fig. 1.6). The form of immunity
that is induced by exposure to a foreign antigen is called active
immunity because the immunized individual plays an active role in
responding to the antigen. Individuals and lymphocytes that have
not encountered a particular antigen are said to be naive, implying
that they are immunologically inexperienced. Individuals who have
responded to a microbial antigen and are protected from
subsequent exposures to that microbe are said to be immune.
q
p
FIGURE 1.5  Classes of lymphocytes.B lymphocytes
recognize many different types of antigens and
develop into antibody-secreting cells. Helper T
lymphocytes recognize antigens on the surfaces
of antigen-presenting cells and secrete cytokines,
which stimulate different mechanisms of immunity
and inflammation. Cytotoxic T lymphocytes
recognize antigens in infected cells and kill these
cells. Regulatory T cells suppress immune
responses (e.g., to self antigens).
Immunity also can be conferred on an individual by transferring
antibodies from an immunized individual into an individual who
has not encountered the antigen (see Fig. 1.6). The recipient of such
a transfer becomes immune to the particular antigen without ever
having been exposed to or having responded to that antigen.
Therefore, this form of immunity is called passive immunity. A
physiologically important example of passive immunity is the
transfer of maternal antibodies through the placenta to the fetus,
which enables newborns to combat infections for several months
before they develop the ability to produce antibodies themselves.
Passive immunization is also a medically useful method for
conferring resistance rapidly, without having to wait for an active
immune response to develop. Passive immunization against
potentially lethal toxins by the administration of antibodies from
immunized animals or people is a lifesaving treatment for rabies
infection 
and 
snake 
bites. 
Patients 
with 
some 
genetic
immunodeﬁciency diseases are passively immunized by transfer of
pooled antibodies from healthy donors.
The ﬁrst demonstration of humoral immunity was provided by
Emil von Behring and Shibasaburo Kitasato in 1890, using a passive
immunization strategy. They showed that if serum from animals
that had been immunized with an aĴenuated form of diphtheria
toxin was transferred to naive animals, the recipients became
speciﬁcally resistant to diphtheria infection. The active components
of the serum were called antitoxins because they neutralized the
pathologic eﬀects of the diphtheria toxin. This result led to the
treatment of otherwise lethal diphtheria infection by the
administration of antitoxin, an achievement that was recognized by
the award of the ﬁrst Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine to von
Behring. In the 1890s Paul Ehrlich postulated that immune cells use
receptors, which he called side chains, to recognize microbial toxins
and, subsequently, secrete these receptors to combat microbes. He
coined the term antibodies (antikörper in German) for the serum
proteins that bound foreign substances, such as toxins, and the
substances that generated antibodies were called antigens. The
modern deﬁnition of antigens includes molecules that bind to
speciﬁc lymphocyte receptors, whether or not they stimulate
immune responses. According to strict deﬁnitions, substances that
stimulate immune responses are called immunogens, but the term
p
g
antigen is often used interchangeably with immunogen. The
properties of antibodies and antigens are described in Chapter 5.
Ehrlich’s concepts were a remarkably prescient model for the
speciﬁcity of adaptive immunity. These early studies of antibodies
led to the general acceptance of the humoral theory of immunity,
according to which host defense against infections is mediated by
substances present in body ﬂuids (once called humors).
FIGURE 1.6  Active and passive immunity.Active
immunity is conferred by a host response to a
microbe or microbial antigen, whereas passive
immunity is conferred by adoptive transfer of
antibodies or T lymphocytes specific for the
microbe. Both forms of immunity provide
resistance to infection and are specific for
microbial antigens, but only active immune
responses generate immunologic memory.
Passive transfer of antibodies occurs during
pregnancy (from mother to fetus), and injection of
antibodies is used therapeutically to rapidly confer
passive protective immunity against lethal toxins.
Lymphocytes can be transferred only among
genetically identical animals; in humans,
lymphocytes from another individual would be
recognized as foreign and rejected.
Ilya Metchnikoﬀ initially championed the cellular theory of
immunity, which stated that host cells are the principal mediators
of immunity. His demonstration of phagocytes surrounding a thorn
stuck into a translucent starﬁsh larva, published in 1883, was
perhaps the ﬁrst experimental evidence that cells respond to
foreign invaders. Ehrlich and Metchnikoﬀ shared the Nobel Prize in
1908, in recognition of their contributions to establishing these
fundamental principles of immunity. Sir Almroth Wright’s
observation in the early 1900s that factors in immune serum
enhanced the phagocytosis of bacteria by coating the bacteria, a
process known as opsonization, lent support to the belief that
antibodies prepare microbes for ingestion by phagocytes. These
early cellularists were unable to prove that speciﬁc immunity to
microbes could be mediated by cells. The importance of cellular
immunity in host defense became ﬁrmly established in the 1950s,
when it was shown that resistance to an intracellular bacterium,
Listeria monocytogenes, could be transferred to animals with cells but
not with serum. We now know that the speciﬁcity of cell-mediated
immunity is due to T lymphocytes, which often function in concert
with other cells, such as phagocytes, to eliminate microbes.
In the clinical seĴing, immunity to a previously encountered
microbe is measured indirectly, either by assaying for the presence
of products of immune responses (such as serum antibodies
speciﬁc for microbial antigens) or by administering substances
puriﬁed from the microbe and measuring reactions to these
substances. A reaction to an antigen is detectable only in
individuals who have previously encountered the antigen, reﬂecting
memory for that antigen. These individuals are said to be sensitized
to the antigen, and the reaction is an indication of sensitivity. Such
a reaction to a microbial antigen implies that the sensitized
individual is capable of mounting a protective immune response to
the microbe.
Initiation and Development of Adaptive
Immune Responses
Adaptive immune responses develop in several steps, starting with
the capture of antigen, followed by the activation of speciﬁc
lymphocytes (Fig. 1.7).
FIGURE 1.7  Development of adaptive immune
responses.Adaptive immune responses consist of
distinct steps, the first three being the recognition
of antigen, the activation of lymphocytes, and the
elimination of antigen (the effector phase). The
response contracts (declines) as antigen-
stimulated lymphocytes die by apoptosis,
restoring homeostasis, and the antigen-specific
cells that survive are responsible for memory. The
duration of each phase may vary in different
immune responses. The y-axis represents an
arbitrary measure of the magnitude of the
response. These principles apply to humoral
immunity (mediated by B lymphocytes) and cell-
mediated immunity (mediated by T lymphocytes).
Most microbes and other antigens enter through epithelial barriers
and colonize tissues, and adaptive immune responses to these
antigens develop in secondary (peripheral) lymphoid organs. The
initiation of adaptive immune responses requires that antigens be
captured and displayed to speciﬁc lymphocytes. The cells that serve
this role are called antigen-presenting cells (APCs). The most
specialized APCs are dendritic cells (DCs), which capture microbial
antigens that enter from the external environment, transport these
antigens to lymphoid organs, and present the antigens to naive T
lymphocytes to initiate immune responses. Other cell types
function as APCs at diﬀerent stages of cell-mediated and humoral
immune responses. We will describe the functions of APCs in
Chapter 6.
Naive lymphocytes express antigen receptors but have not
responded to antigen. The activation of these lymphocytes by
antigen leads to the proliferation of these cells, resulting in an
increase in the size of the antigen-speciﬁc clones, called clonal
expansion. This is followed by diﬀerentiation of the activated
lymphocytes into cells capable of eliminating the antigen, called
eﬀector cells because they mediate the ultimate eﬀect of the
immune response, and memory cells that survive for long periods
and mount strong responses to repeat antigen encounter. Antigen
elimination often requires the participation of other, nonlymphoid
cells, such as macrophages and neutrophils, which are also
sometimes called eﬀector cells. These steps in lymphocyte
activation and diﬀerentiation into eﬀector cells typically take a few
days, which explains why the adaptive response is slow to develop
and innate immunity has to provide protection initially.
After the adaptive immune response has eradicated the infection,
the stimuli for lymphocyte activation dissipate and most of the
eﬀector cells die, resulting in the decline of the response. Memory
cells remain, ready to respond vigorously if the same infection
recurs.
The cells of the immune system interact with one another and with
other host cells via secreted proteins called cytokines. Such
interactions are essential during both the initiation and eﬀector
stages of innate and adaptive immune responses. Cytokines are a
large group of secreted proteins with diverse structures and
functions, which regulate and coordinate many activities of the cells
of innate and adaptive immunity. All cells of the immune system
p
y
y
secrete at least some cytokines and express speciﬁc signaling
receptors for several cytokines. Among the many functions of
cytokines we will discuss throughout this book are promoting the
growth and diﬀerentiation of immune cells, activating the functions
of lymphocytes and phagocytes that eliminate microbes (called
eﬀector functions), and stimulating directed movement of immune
cells from blood into tissues and within tissues. A large subset of
structurally related cytokines that regulate cell adhesion and
migration are called chemokines. Cytokines also are involved in
immunological diseases, and some of the most eﬀective drugs
developed to treat these diseases target cytokines. We will describe
the functions of individual cytokines when we discuss immune
responses in which these proteins play important roles. A list of
cytokines and a brief summary of their properties are provided in
Appendix II.
Humoral Immunity
B lymphocytes that recognize antigens proliferate and diﬀerentiate
into plasma cells that secrete diﬀerent classes of antibodies with
distinct functions. Each clone of B cells expresses a cell surface
antigen receptor, which is a membrane-bound form of antibody,
with a unique antigen speciﬁcity. Many diﬀerent types of antigens,
including proteins, polysaccharides, lipids, and small molecules,
are capable of eliciting antibody responses. The response of B cells
to protein antigens requires activating signals (help) from CD4+ T
cells (which is the historical reason for calling these T cells helper
cells). B cells can respond to many nonprotein antigens without the
participation of helper T cells. Each plasma cell secretes antibodies
that have the same antigen-binding site as the B cell surface antigen
receptor that ﬁrst recognized the antigen. Polysaccharides and
lipids stimulate secretion mainly of the antibody class (isotype)
called immunoglobulin M (IgM). Protein antigens induce the
production of antibodies of diﬀerent classes (IgG, IgA, IgE) from a
single clone of B cells, a process called heavy-chain class (or
isotype) switching. These diﬀerent antibody classes serve distinct
functions, mentioned later. Helper T cells also stimulate the
production of antibodies with increased aﬃnity for the antigen.
This process, called aﬃnity maturation, improves the quality of the
humoral immune response.
The humoral immune response combats microbes in many ways.
Antibodies bind to microbes and prevent them from infecting cells,
thus neutralizing the microbes. Antibody-mediated neutralization
is the only mechanism of adaptive immunity that stops an infection
before it is established; this is why eliciting the production of
potent neutralizing antibodies is a key goal of vaccination. IgG
antibodies coat microbes and target them for phagocytosis because
phagocytes (neutrophils and macrophages) express receptors for
parts of IgG molecules. IgG and IgM activate the complement
system, and complement products promote phagocytosis and
destruction of microbes. IgA is secreted from mucosal epithelia
and neutralizes microbes in the lumens of mucosal tissues, such as
the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts, thus preventing inhaled
and ingested microbes from infecting the host. Maternal IgG is
actively transported across the placenta and protects the newborn
until the baby’s immune system becomes mature. Most IgG
antibodies have half-lives in the circulation of approximately 3
weeks, whereas other classes of antibodies have half-lives of just a
few days. Some antibody-secreting plasma cells migrate to the bone
marrow or mucosal tissues and live for years, continuing to produce
low levels of antibodies. The antibodies that are secreted by these
long-lived plasma cells provide immediate protection if the microbe
returns to infect the individual. More eﬀective protection is
provided by memory cells that are activated by the microbe and
rapidly diﬀerentiate to generate large numbers of plasma cells.
Cell-Mediated Immunity
T lymphocytes, the cells of cell-mediated immunity, recognize the
antigens of cell-associated microbes, and diﬀerent types of T cells
help phagocytes to destroy these microbes or kill the infected cells. T
cells do not produce antibody molecules. Their antigen receptors
are membrane molecules distinct from but structurally related to
antibodies (see Chapter 7). T lymphocytes have a restricted
speciﬁcity for antigens; they recognize peptides derived from
foreign proteins that are bound to host proteins called major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules, which are expressed
on the surfaces of other cells. As a result, these T cells recognize
and respond to cell-associated but not soluble antigens (see
Chapter 6).
T lymphocytes consist of functionally distinct populations, the
best deﬁned of which are helper T cells and cytotoxic (or cytolytic)
T lymphocytes (CTLs). Helper T cells function mainly by secreted
cytokines and membrane molecules, which activate other cells to
kill microbes, whereas CTLs produce molecules that directly kill
infected host cells. Some T lymphocytes, which are called
regulatory T cells, function mainly to inhibit immune responses.
We will return to a more detailed discussion of the properties of
lymphocytes in Chapter 2 and in later chapters.
Upon activation in secondary lymphoid organs, naive T
lymphocytes diﬀerentiate into eﬀector cells, and many of them
leave the lymphoid organs and migrate to sites of infection. When
these eﬀector T cells again encounter cell-associated microbes, they
are activated to perform the functions that are responsible for
elimination of the microbes. Cytokines produced by CD4+ helper T
cells recruit leukocytes, and both cytokines and plasma membrane
proteins stimulate production of microbicidal substances in
phagocytes. Thus, these T cells help phagocytes to kill the
infectious pathogens. Other CD4+ helper T cells secrete cytokines
that help B cells to produce a type of antibody called IgE and
activate leukocytes called eosinophils, which are able to kill
helminths that may be too large to be phagocytosed. Some CD4+
helper T cells stay in the lymphoid organs and use membrane
molecules and cytokines to stimulate B cells to make highly
eﬀective and functionally specialized antibodies.
CD8+ CTLs kill cells harboring microbes in the cytoplasm. These
microbes may be viruses that infect many cell types or bacteria that
are ingested by macrophages but escape from phagocytic vesicles
into the cytoplasm (where they are inaccessible to the killing
machinery of phagocytes, which is largely conﬁned to vesicles). By
destroying the infected cells, CTLs eliminate the reservoirs of
infection. CTLs also kill tumor cells that express antigens that are
recognized as foreign.
In the remainder of the book, we describe in detail the
recognition, activation, regulation, and eﬀector phases of innate
and adaptive immune responses. The principles introduced in this
chapter recur throughout this book.
Summary
• Protective immunity against microbes is mediated by the
early reactions of innate immunity and the later responses
of adaptive immunity. Innate immune responses are
stimulated by molecular structures shared by groups of
microbes and by molecules expressed by damaged host
cells. Adaptive immunity is speciﬁc for diﬀerent microbial
and nonmicrobial antigens and is increased by repeated
exposures to antigen (immunologic memory).
• Many features of adaptive immunity are of fundamental
importance for its normal functions. These include
speciﬁcity for diﬀerent antigens, a diverse repertoire
capable of recognizing a wide variety of antigens, memory
of antigen exposure, and the ability to discriminate between
foreign antigens and self antigens.
• Immunity may be acquired by a response to antigens (active
immunity) or conferred by transfer of antibodies or eﬀector
cells (passive immunity).
• Lymphocytes are the only cells capable of speciﬁcally
recognizing antigens and are thus the principal cells of
adaptive immunity. The total population of lymphocytes
consists of many clones, each with a unique antigen
receptor and speciﬁcity. The two major subsets of
lymphocytes are B cells and T cells, and they diﬀer in their
antigen receptors and functions.
• The adaptive immune response is initiated by the
recognition of foreign antigens by speciﬁc lymphocytes.
Specialized antigen-presenting cells capture microbial
antigens and display these antigens for recognition by
lymphocytes. Lymphocytes respond by proliferating and by
diﬀerentiating into eﬀector cells, whose function is to
eliminate the antigen, and into memory cells, which show
enhanced responses on subsequent encounters with the
antigen. The elimination of antigens often requires the
participation of various eﬀector cells.
• Humoral immunity is mediated by antibodies secreted by B
lymphocytes and their diﬀerentiated progeny, plasma cells,
and is the mechanism of defense against extracellular
microbes. Antibodies neutralize the infectivity of microbes
and promote the elimination of microbes by phagocytes
and by activation of the complement system.
• Cell-mediated immunity is mediated by T lymphocytes and
their products, such as cytokines, and is important for
defense against intracellular microbes. CD4+ helper T
lymphocytes help macrophages to eliminate ingested
microbes and help B cells to produce antibodies. CD8+
cytotoxic T lymphocytes kill cells harboring intracellular
pathogens, thus eliminating reservoirs of infection.
Selected Readings
∗Indicates publications of historical interest, generally reporting
the discovery of a phenomenon or process that was later shown to
be of fundamental importance in the immune system. Many (but
not all) of these discoveries led to Nobel Prizes for the
discoverer(s). The nature of the discovery is summarized brieﬂy in
each reference.
Historical Ideas
∗Burnet FM. A modiﬁcation of Jerne’s theory of antibody production using the concept of
clonal selection. Aust J Sci. 1957;20:67–69. (A description of the clonal selection theory.
Burnet received the Nobel Prize for his contributions to the understanding of immune
recognition of self vs nonself. See 
hĴps://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/1960/burnet/speech/ .)
Cohn M, Mitchison N.A, Paul W.E, et al. Reﬂections on the clonal-selection theory.  Nat Rev
Immunol . 2007;7:823–830.
∗Ehrlich P. Croonian lecture: on immunity with special reference to cell life. Proc Royal Soc
Lond. 1900. Also Ehrlich, P., Nobel lecture: partial cell functions. (Ehrlich’s side-chain
theory was the ﬁrst idea about speciﬁc antigen receptors in the immune system. See 
hĴp://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/laureates/1908/ehrlich%5dlecture.pdf .)
Jerne N.K. The natural-selection theory of antibody formation.  Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
. 1955;41:849–857.
∗Metchnikoﬀ E. Nobel lecture: on the present state of the question of immunity in
infectious diseases. (The discovery of phagocytosis in defense against foreign invaders  See. 
hĴp://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/laureates/1908/mechnikov-lecture.html  ).
Silverstein A.M. Cellular versus humoral immunology: a century-long dispute.  Nat
Immunol . 2003;4:425–428.
Turk J.L. Almroth Wright: phagocytosis and opsonization.  J Roy Soc Med . 1994;87:576–
577.
∗von Behring E. Nobel lecture: serum therapy in therapeutics and medical science. (The
discovery of passive immunization with antibodies for the treatment of diphtheria and other
infectious diseases. See  hĴps://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/1901/behring/lecture. )
∗Wright AE. Studies on Immunisation. London: Constable; 1909. See also Turk JL. Almroth
Wright: phagocytosis and opsonization. J Roy Soc Med. 1994;87:576-577. (The discovery of
antibody-mediated opsonization for phagocytosis. Wright’s friendship with the playwright
George Bernard Shaw led to Shaw modeling a main character in his play The Doctor’s
Dilemma after Wright and aĴributing to him the proposed treatment for disease—“Stimulate
the phagocytes!”)
Evolution of the Immune System
Boehm T, Swann J.B. Origin and evolution of adaptive immunity.  Annu Rev Anim Biosci
. 2014;2:259–283.
Flajnik M.F. A cold-blooded view of adaptive immunity.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2018;18:438–
453.
Litman G.W, Rast J.P, Fugmann S.D. The origins of vertebrate adaptive immunity.  Nat Rev
Immunol . 2010;10:543–553.
Chapter 2: Cells and Tissues of
the Immune System 
Cells of the Immune System,
Phagocytes,
Mast Cells, Basophils, and Eosinophils,
Dendritic Cells (DCs),
Lymphocytes,
Natural Killer Cells and Cytokine-Secreting
Innate Lymphoid Cells,
Anatomy and Functions of Lymphoid Tissues,
Bone Marrow,
Thymus,
Lymphatic System,
Lymph Nodes,
Spleen,
Cutaneous and Mucosal Immune Systems,
Summary,
The cells of the innate and adaptive immune system are normally
present as circulating cells in the blood and lymph and as
extravascular cells in lymphoid organs and scaĴered in virtually all
tissues. The anatomic arrangement of these cells in lymphoid
tissues and their ability to circulate and exchange among blood,
lymph, and tissues are of critical importance for immune
responses. The immune system faces numerous challenges to
generate 
eﬀective 
protective 
responses 
against 
infectious
pathogens. First, the system must be able to respond rapidly to
small numbers of many diﬀerent microbes that may be introduced
at any site in the body. Second, in the adaptive immune response,
there are very few naive lymphocytes that can speciﬁcally recognize
and respond to any one antigen. Third, the eﬀector mechanisms of
the adaptive immune system (antibodies and eﬀector T cells) may
have to locate and destroy microbes at sites that are distant from
the site where the immune response was induced. The capacity of
the immune system to meet these challenges and to optimally
perform its protective functions is dependent on the remarkably
rapid and varied responses of immune cells, the way these cells are
organized in lymphoid tissues, and their ability to migrate from
one tissue to another.
This chapter describes the cells and tissues that make up the
immune system. In Chapter 3, we describe the traﬃc paĴerns of
lymphocytes throughout the body and the mechanisms of
migration of lymphocytes and other leukocytes.
Cells of the Immune System
The cells that serve specialized roles in innate and adaptive
immune responses are phagocytes, dendritic cells (DCs), antigen-
speciﬁc lymphocytes, and various other leukocytes that function to
eliminate antigens. These cells were introduced brieﬂy in Chapter
1. These cells are almost all derived from hematopoietic stem cells
(HSCs) in the bone marrow, which diﬀerentiate along branching
lineages. Based on their common precursors, immune cells are
broadly classiﬁed as either myeloid cells, which include phagocytes
and most DCs, or lymphoid cells, which include all lymphocytes.
The numbers of some of these cell types in the blood are listed in
Table 2.1. Although most of these cells are found in the blood, the
responses of lymphocytes to antigens usually occur in lymphoid
and other tissues and therefore may not be reﬂected by changes in
the numbers of blood lymphocytes.
The expression of various membrane proteins is used to distinguish
distinct populations of cells in the immune system. For instance,
most helper T cells express a surface protein called CD4, and most
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) express a diﬀerent surface protein
called CD8. These and many other surface proteins are often called
markers because they identify and discriminate between (mark)
diﬀerent cell populations. The function of most of these markers in
the cell on which they are expressed is now understood. The most
common way to determine if a particular marker is expressed on a
cell is to test if antibodies speciﬁc for the marker bind to the cell. In
this context, the antibodies are used by investigators or clinicians as
analytical tools. Hundreds of diﬀerent pure antibody preparations,
called monoclonal antibodies, are available, each speciﬁc for a
diﬀerent molecule and labeled with chemicals that can be readily
detected on cell surfaces by use of appropriate instruments.
(Monoclonal antibodies are described in Chapter 5, and methods to
detect labeled antibodies bound to cells are discussed in Appendix
III.) The cluster of diﬀerentiation (CD) nomenclature is a widely
adopted uniform method for naming cell surface molecules that are
sometimes 
characteristic 
of 
a 
particular 
cell 
lineage 
or
diﬀerentiation stage, and are recognized by a group (cluster) of
monoclonal antibodies. Thus, all antigenically distinguishable cell
surface proteins and some carbohydrates are given a CD number
designation (e.g., CD1, CD2). Although originally devised to deﬁne
circulating immune cell (leukocyte) subtypes, CD markers are
found on all cell types in the body. Cell surface molecules (now
identiﬁed by CD numbers) have important roles in immune
responses and are the targets of many therapeutic antibodies used
in the treatment of inﬂammatory diseases and cancer. Appendix I
provides a current list of leukocyte CD markers that are mentioned
in this book.
TABLE 2.1
Normal Blood Cell Counts
Mean Number (per
mm3)
Normal Range
White blood cells
(leukocytes)
7400
4500–
11,000/mm3
Neutrophils
4400
40%–60%
Eosinophils
200
1%–4%
Basophils
40
<1%
Lymphocytes
2500
20%–40%
Monocytes
300
2%–8%
Phagocytes
Phagocytes, including neutrophils and macrophages, are cells whose
primary function is to ingest and destroy microbes and remove
damaged tissues. The functional responses of phagocytes in host
defense consist of sequential steps: recruitment of the cells to the
sites of infection, recognition of and activation by microbes,
ingestion of the microbes by the process of phagocytosis, and
destruction of ingested microbes. In addition, through direct
contact and by secreting cytokines, phagocytes communicate with
other cells in ways that promote or regulate immune responses.
Blood neutrophils and monocytes, which diﬀerentiate into
macrophages after entering tissues, are produced in the bone
marrow, circulate in the blood, and are recruited to sites of
inﬂammation. Although both are actively phagocytic, they diﬀer in
signiﬁcant ways (Table 2.2). The neutrophil response is more rapid
and the lifespan of these cells after they enter tissues is short,
whereas macrophages in tissues can live for long periods so that
the macrophage response may last for a prolonged time.
Neutrophils mainly use cytoskeletal rearrangements and enzyme
activation 
to 
mount 
rapid, 
transient 
responses, 
whereas
macrophage responses rely more on induced gene transcription
and protein expression. In addition, as we discuss later, there are
subsets of macrophages that normally reside in healthy tissues, but
neutrophils do not. The functions of phagocytes are important in
innate immunity (see Chapter 4) and also in the eﬀector phase of
some adaptive immune responses (see Chapter 10). As a prelude to
more detailed discussions of the role of phagocytes in immune
responses in later chapters, here we will describe the development
and morphologic features of neutrophils and macrophages and
brieﬂy introduce their functional responses.
TABLE 2.2
This table lists the major differences between neutrophils and macrophages. The reactions
summarized above are described in the text. Note that the two cell types share many features,
such as phagocytosis, chemotaxis, and ability to migrate through blood vessels into tissues.
HSC, Hematopoietic stem cells; iNOS, inducible nitric oxide synthase; NET, neutrophil
extracellular trap.
Neutrophils
Neutrophils are the most abundant population of circulating white
blood cells and the principal cell type in acute inﬂammatory
reactions. Neutrophils circulate as spherical cells approximately 12
to 15 µm in diameter with numerous membranous projections. The
nucleus is segmented into three to ﬁve connected lobules (Fig.
2.1A). Because of their nuclear morphology, neutrophils are also
called polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs), to contrast them
with mononuclear cells (macrophages and lymphocytes), whose
nuclei are not multilobed. The cytoplasm contains two types of
membrane-bound granules. The majority of these granules, called
speciﬁc granules, are ﬁlled with enzymes, such as lysozyme,
collagenase, and elastase. These granules do not stain strongly with
either basic or acidic dyes (hematoxylin and eosin, respectively),
which distinguishes neutrophils from two other types of circulating
leukocytes with cytoplasmic granules, called basophils and
eosinophils. The remainder of the granules of neutrophils, called
azurophilic granules because they are stained by azure A dyes,
contain 
enzymes 
(e.g., 
myeloperoxidase) 
and 
microbicidal
substances, including defensins and cathelicidins, which we will
discuss in Chapter 4. Neutrophils are produced in the bone marrow
and arise from precursors that also give rise to circulating
monocytes. Production of neutrophils is stimulated by granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). An adult human produces
more than 1 × 1011 neutrophils per day, each of which circulates in
the blood for a few hours or up to 5 days before dying. Neutrophils
may migrate to sites of infection rapidly after the entry of microbes.
After entering tissues, neutrophils function for only 1 to 2 days and
most of them then die.
FIGURE 2.1  Morphology of neutrophils, mast cells,
basophils, and eosinophils. A, The light
micrograph of a Wright-Giemsa–stained blood
neutrophil shows the multilobed nucleus, because
of which these cells are also called
polymorphonuclear leukocytes, and the faint
cytoplasmic granules. B, The light micrograph of a
Wright-Giemsa–stained section of skin shows a
mast cell (arrow) adjacent to a small blood vessel,
identifiable by the red blood cell in the lumen. The
cytoplasmic granules in the mast cell, which are
stained purple, are filled with histamine and other
mediators that act on adjacent blood vessels to
promote increased blood flow and delivery of
plasma proteins and leukocytes into the tissue. C,
The light micrograph of a Wright-Giemsa–stained
blood basophil shows the characteristic blue-
staining cytoplasmic granules. D, The light
micrograph of a Wright-Giemsa–stained blood
eosinophil shows the characteristic segmented
nucleus and red staining of the cytoplasmic
granules. 
B, Courtesy of Dr. George Murphy, Department of Pathology,
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. C,
Courtesy of Dr. Jonathan Hecht, Department of Pathology, Brigham
and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
The major function of neutrophils is to phagocytose microbes,
especially opsonized microbes, and products of necrotic cells and
destroy these in phagolysosomes. In addition, neutrophils may
secrete granule contents and also extrude their nuclear contents,
forming neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs), which serve to
immobilize and kill extracellular microbes but also may damage
healthy tissues.
Mononuclear Phagocytes
The mononuclear phagocyte system includes circulating bone
marrow–derived cells called monocytes, many of which become
macrophages when they migrate into tissues, and tissue-resident
macrophages, which are initially derived from yolk sac or
hematopoietic precursors during fetal life.
Development of Macrophages and Monocytes
After birth, cells of the monocyte-macrophage lineage arise from
commiĴed precursor cells in the bone marrow, driven by a cytokine
called monocyte (or macrophage) colony-stimulating factor (M-
CSF). These precursors mature into monocytes, which enter and
circulate in the blood (Fig. 2.2), where they have a short life span of
approximately 1 to 7 days. Blood monocytes are eﬃciently recruited
into tissue sites of infection or injury, and therefore most
macrophages at sites of inﬂammation are monocyte-derived.
Most long-lived tissue-resident macrophages are derived not
from the bone marrow but from yolk sac or fetal liver precursors
during fetal development. These cells have self-renewal capacity, so
they can maintain stable numbers. They often assume specialized
phenotypes depending on the organ (see Fig. 2.2). Examples are
Kupﬀer cells lining the sinusoids in the liver, alveolar macrophages
in the lung, and microglial cells in the brain. In the steady state,
blood monocytes are recruited at a low rate into healthy tissues,
where they diﬀerentiate into tissue-resident macrophages. This
pathway of monocyte diﬀerentiation into tissue macrophages
supplements the self-renewal of the fetally derived cells, and
accounts for varying fractions of resident macrophages in diﬀerent
tissues.
Subsets of Monocytes
Monocytes are 10 to 15 µm in diameter, and they have bean-shaped
nuclei and ﬁnely granular cytoplasm containing lysosomes,
phagocytic vacuoles, and cytoskeletal ﬁlaments (Fig. 2.3). All
human monocytes express class II major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) molecules, CD11b, and CD86, and all mouse
monocytes express CD115, CD11b, and CD64. However, monocytes
are heterogeneous and consist of diﬀerent subsets distinguishable
by cell surface markers and functions but not by morphology. In
both humans and mice, the most numerous monocytes, called
classical or inﬂammatory monocytes, (comprising 90% to 95% of
blood monocytes in humans) produce inﬂammatory mediators, are
phagocytic, and are rapidly recruited to sites of infection or tissue
injury. The second type of circulating monocyte, called nonclassical
monocytes (5% to 10% of blood monocytes), are recruited into
tissues after infection or injury and may contribute to repair.
Classical/inﬂammatory monocytes are most often distinguished
from nonclassical monocytes by their relatively high expression of
CD14 (human) or Ly6C and CCR2 (mice). Some nonclassical
monocytes are known to crawl along endothelial surfaces
(described 
as 
patrolling), 
where 
they 
scavenge 
luminal
microparticles and may play a role in eliminating circulating
microbes and in repairing endothelial barrier defects. The
developmental relationship between monocyte subsets is not fully
understood.
FIGURE 2.2  Maturation of mononuclear
phagocytes. A, Pathways of macrophage
development. During inflammatory reactions,
precursors in the bone marrow give rise to
circulating monocytes, which enter peripheral
tissues and mature to form short-lived
macrophages, which are activated locally. Many
tissue-resident macrophages develop in fetal life
from primitive hematopoietic precursors in the yolk
sac and hematopoietic precursors in fetal liver and
bone marrow. Blood monocytes may contribute to
the tissue-resident pool of macrophages in
postnatal life, to varying degrees between
different tissues. B, The relative contributions of
precursors from the yolk sac, fetal liver, and
postnatal bone marrow to macrophages resident
in different tissues in the steady state, as
determined by cell fate mapping studies in mice. 
B, Courtesy of Florent Ginhoux and Svetoslav Chakarov. Modified
from Ginhoux F, Guillams M. Tissue-resident macrophage ontogeny
and homeostasis. Immunity. 2016;44:439-449, with permission of
the publisher.
FIGURE 2.3  Morphology of mononuclear
phagocytes. A, Light micrograph of a monocyte in
a peripheral blood smear. B, Electron micrograph
of a peripheral blood monocyte. C, Electron
micrograph of an activated tissue macrophage
showing numerous phagocytic vacuoles and
cytoplasmic organelles. 
Courtesy of Dr. Noel Weidner, Department of Pathology, University
of California, San Diego, California.
Functions of Macrophages
Macrophages play crucial roles in innate and adaptive immune
responses to infections and in repair of damaged tissues (Fig. 2.4).
• A major function of monocyte-derived macrophages in host
defense is to ingest microbes by the process of phagocytosis
and then to kill the ingested microbes. The mechanisms of
phagocytosis and killing, which we will discuss in Chapter
4, include formation of cytoplasmic membrane–bound
organelles that contain the microbes, the fusion of these
organelles with lysosomes, the enzymatic generation of
reactive oxygen and nitrogen species in the lysosome that
are toxic to microbes, and the digestion of microbial
proteins by proteolytic enzymes.
• Tissue-resident macrophages function as sentinel cells that
sense the presence of microbes and respond by secreting
cytokines that initiate and then amplify the protective
response against the microbes. Some of these cytokines act
on endothelial cells lining blood vessels to enhance the
recruitment of monocytes and other leukocytes from the
blood into sites of infections. Other cytokines made by
activated macrophages act on leukocytes and stimulate
their migration to tissue sites of infection or damage. Some
important macrophage-derived cytokines are discussed in
Chapter 4.
• Macrophages that have engulfed microbes can be induced
by microbial molecules to undergo an inﬂammatory form of
death called pyroptosis, which usually results from
activation of a cytoplasmic enzyme complex called the
inﬂammasome, which is discussed in Chapter 4. Pyroptosis
leads to the release of cytokines that enhance the host’s
inﬂammatory response to the infection.
• In addition to ingesting microbes, macrophages ingest
necrotic host cells, including cells that die in tissues
because of the eﬀects of toxins, trauma or interrupted blood
supply, and neutrophils that die after accumulating at sites
of infection. This is part of the cleaning-up process after
infection or sterile tissue injury. Macrophages can
speciﬁcally recognize and engulf cells that die by apoptosis
before the dead cells can release their contents and induce
inﬂammatory responses. This clearance by macrophages of
apoptotic cells, including apoptotic neutrophils, is a process
called eﬀerocytosis. Throughout the body and throughout
the life of an individual, unwanted cells die by apoptosis as
part of many physiologic processes, such as development
and renewal of healthy tissues and maintenance of cell
numbers (tissue homeostasis), and the dead cells are
eliminated by macrophages.
• Macrophages serve as antigen-presenting cells (APCs) that
display fragments of protein antigens to T lymphocytes and
p y
g
p
g
y
p
y
activate T cells recruited to sites of injury or infection. This
function is important in the eﬀector phase of T cell–
mediated immune responses (see Chapters 6 and 10).
• Macrophages promote the repair of damaged tissues by
stimulating new blood vessel growth (angiogenesis) and
synthesis of collagen-rich extracellular matrix (ﬁbrosis).
These functions are mediated by cytokines secreted by the
macrophages that act on various tissue cells.
FIGURE 2.4  Functions of
macrophages.Macrophages are activated by
microbial products such as lipopolysaccharide and
by natural killer cell–derived interferon-γ (IFN-γ).
The process of macrophage activation leads to
the activation of transcription factors, the
transcription of various genes, and the synthesis
of proteins that mediate the functions of these
cells. In adaptive cell-mediated immunity,
macrophages are activated by stimuli from T
lymphocytes (CD40 ligand and IFN-γ) and
respond in essentially the same way (see Fig.
10.7). Macrophages also may be activated by
other signals to promote tissue repair and fibrosis
(not shown). IgG, Immunoglobulin G; IL,
interleukin; iNOS, inducible nitric oxide synthase;
TIM4, T cell immunoglobulin 4.
Monocyte-derived macrophages may respond to microbes nearly
as rapidly as neutrophils do, but macrophages survive much longer
at sites of inﬂammation. Unlike neutrophils, macrophages can
undergo cell division at an inﬂammatory site. Therefore,
macrophages are the dominant eﬀector cells of the later stages in
the innate immune response, several days after an infection begins.
Macrophage Receptors and Activation
Macrophages are activated to perform their functions by recognizing
many diﬀerent kinds of microbial molecules, as well as host
molecules produced in response to infections and injury. These
various activating molecules bind to speciﬁc signaling receptors
located on the surface of the macrophage (see Fig. 2.4). Examples of
these receptors are the Toll-like receptors (TLRs), which are
important in innate immunity and will be discussed in detail in
Chapter 4. Macrophages are also activated when other plasma
membrane receptors bind opsonins on the surface of microbes.
Opsonins are substances that coat microbial cells or other particles
and tag them for phagocytosis. Examples of opsonin receptors are
complement receptors, which bind fragments of complement
proteins aĴached to microbial surfaces, and immunoglobulin G
(IgG) Fc receptors, which bind to one end of IgG antibody
molecules that already have microbes bound at the other end,
discussed in Chapter 13. Macrophage phagocytosis of healthy host
cells is prevented in part by an inhibitory receptor on the
macrophage called SIRPα, which recognizes CD47, a membrane
protein on healthy cells that functions as a “don’t eat me” signal.
When CD47 binds to SIRPα, inhibitory signals are generated in the
macrophage that prevent phagocytosis. In adaptive immunity,
macrophage antimicrobial functions are activated by some T
lymphocyte cytokines and membrane proteins that bind to
signaling receptors on the macrophage membrane (see Chapter 10).
Subsets of Macrophages
Macrophages can acquire distinct functional capabilities, depending
on the types of activating stimuli to which they are exposed. The
clearest example of this is the response of macrophages to diﬀerent
cytokines made by subsets of T cells. Some of these cytokines
activate macrophages to become eﬃcient at killing microbes, called
classical activation, and these cells are called M1 macrophages.
Other 
cytokines 
activate 
macrophages 
to 
promote 
tissue
remodeling and repair, called alternative activation, and these cells
are called M2 macrophages. These diﬀerent pathways of activation
and the cytokines involved are discussed in Chapter 10. The
relationship between blood monocyte subsets, discussed earlier,
and macrophage subsets is not well understood. Macrophages may
also assume diﬀerent morphologic forms after activation by
external stimuli, such as microbes. Some develop abundant
cytoplasm and are called epithelioid cells because of their
resemblance to epithelial cells of the skin. Activated macrophages
can fuse to form multinucleated giant cells, which occurs frequently
in certain types of microbial infections, such as with mycobacteria,
and in response to indigestible foreign bodies.
Mast Cells, Basophils, and Eosinophils
Mast cells, basophils, and eosinophils are three additional cell types
that play roles in innate and adaptive immune responses. All three
share the common property of having cytoplasmic granules ﬁlled
with various inﬂammatory and antimicrobial mediators, which are
released from the cells upon activation. Another common feature of
these cells is their involvement in immune responses that protect
against helminths and reactions that cause allergic diseases. We
will introduce the features of these cells in this section and discuss
their functions in more detail in Chapter 20.
Mast Cells
Mast cells are bone marrow–derived cells that are most abundant in
the skin and mucosal epithelia; upon activation, they release many
potent inﬂammatory mediators that defend against infections by
helminthic parasites or cause symptoms of allergic diseases. A
cytokine called stem cell factor (or c-KIT ligand) is essential for
mast cell development. Normally, mature mast cells are not found
in the circulation but are present in tissues, usually adjacent to
small blood vessels and nerves (Fig. 2.1B). Their cytoplasm contains
numerous membrane-bound granules, which are ﬁlled with
preformed inﬂammatory mediators, such as histamine, and acidic
proteoglycans that bind basic dyes, imparting a dark blue color to
the granules when special stains are used. Various stimuli can
activate mast cells to release the cytoplasmic granule contents into
the extracellular space, as well as to synthesize and release
cytokines and inﬂammatory lipid mediators. The released
histamine and other mediators promote changes in the blood
vessels that cause inﬂammation. Mast cells express high-aﬃnity
plasma membrane receptors for a type of antibody called IgE and
are usually coated with these antibodies. When the antibodies on
the mast cell surface bind antigen, signaling events are induced
that lead to mast cell activation. Mast cells are also activated when
they recognize microbial products, independent of IgE, and in this
way they function as tissue sentinels of the innate immune system.
Basophils
Basophils are blood granulocytes with many structural and
functional similarities to mast cells. Like other granulocytes,
basophils are derived from hematopoietic precursors, mature in the
bone marrow (from progenitors distinct from those of mast cells),
and circulate in the blood. Basophils constitute less than 1% of
blood leukocytes (see Table 2.1). Although they are normally not
present in tissues, basophils may be recruited to some
inﬂammatory sites. These cells also contain granules that bind
basic dyes (Fig. 2.1C), and they are capable of synthesizing many of
the same mediators as mast cells. Like mast cells, basophils express
IgE receptors, bind IgE, and can be triggered by antigen binding to
IgE. Because basophil numbers are low in tissues, their importance
in host defense and allergic reactions is uncertain.
Eosinophils
Eosinophils are granulocytes that express cytoplasmic granules
containing enzymes that are harmful to the cell walls of parasites
but also can damage host tissues. Eosinophil granules contain
mainly basic proteins that bind acidic dyes, such as eosin, and thus
appear red in stained blood smears and tissue sections (Fig. 2.1D).
Eosinophils are bone marrow–derived and circulate in the blood,
from where they may be recruited into tissues. The cytokines GM-
CSF, interleukin-3 (IL-3), and IL-5 promote eosinophil maturation
from myeloid precursors. Various membrane receptors on
eosinophils, including Fc receptors for IgA and IgG, TLRs, and IL-5
receptors, can generate signals that activate the cells to release their
granule contents Some eosinophils are normally present in
peripheral tissues, especially in mucosal linings of the respiratory,
gastrointestinal, and genitourinary tracts, and their numbers can
increase by recruitment from the blood in the seĴing of
inﬂammation.
Dendritic Cells (DCs)
DCs are tissue-resident and circulating cells that detect the presence
of microbes and initiate innate immune defense reactions, and they
capture microbial proteins for display to T cells to initiate adaptive
immune responses. These cells are named because of their long
membranous projections, reminiscent of the dendrites of neurons.
Most DCs are widely distributed in lymphoid tissues, mucosal
epithelium, and organ parenchyma (Fig. 2.5). The location of DCs in
epithelia and tissues where microbes enter, their ability to capture
antigens and take them to lymph nodes where naive T cells
circulate, and their rapid responses to microbes all place these cells
in a unique position in the immune system, serving as sentinels of
infection that begin the rapid innate response but also link innate
responses with the development of adaptive immune responses.
We will discuss the role of DCs as mediators of innate immunity
and as APCs in Chapters 4 and 6, respectively. Here we will
introduce the general properties of DCs.
Development and Features of Dendritic Cell Subsets
Subsets of DCs can be deﬁned on the basis of diﬀerent cell surface
markers, 
transcription 
factors, 
development 
from 
diﬀerent
precursor cells, tissue localization, and functions. We will describe
the major subsets that are important in immune responses and are
distinguished 
from 
one 
another 
by 
their 
functions 
and
development, and by expression of diﬀerent surface molecules and
transcription factors (Fig. 2.6 and Table 2.3). The common
properties of these DC subsets include developmental dependence
on the cytokine FLT3L, expression of the CD11c protein, and the
ability to present antigens to and activate naive T cells or induce T
cell tolerance.
• Classical DCs (also called conventional DCs [cDCs]) are the
major type of DC involved in capturing protein antigens of
microbes that enter through epithelial barriers and
presenting them to T cells. Classical DCs were ﬁrst identiﬁed
by their morphology and ability to stimulate strong T cell
responses and are the most numerous DC subset in
epithelia and lymphoid organs. They arise from bone
marrow HSCs through a developmental pathway that
includes a common precursor of both monocytes and
classical DCs, some of which develop into commiĴed
precursors for cDCs (called pre-cDCs). All of these steps
take place in the bone marrow. The pre-cDCs migrate to
peripheral tissues, where they mature into cDCs. Similar to
tissue macrophages, these DCs constantly sample the
environment in which they reside.
Classical DCs may be further divided into two main subsets
called major, or cDC2, and cross-presenting, or cDC1 (see Fig.
2.6 and Table 2.3). cDC2 is the most numerous subset and is
potent at capturing exogenous antigens and inducing CD4+ T
cell responses. The cDC1 subset is specialized to present
antigens to naive CD8+ T cells by a process called cross-
presentation, discussed in Chapter 6; this subset can also
present antigens to CD4+ cells.
• Plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs) produce the antiviral cytokine
type I interferon (IFN) in response to viruses and may
capture blood borne microbes and carry their antigens to the
spleen for presentation to T cells. These DCs are named
because after activation, they begin to resemble plasma
cells morphologically. They develop in the bone marrow
from a precursor distinct from that for classical DCs and are
found in the blood and in small numbers in lymphoid
organs. Plasmacytoid DCs are the body’s major producers
of cytokines called type I IFNs, which have potent antiviral
activities and play an important role in innate host defense
against viruses (see Chapter 4).
• Monocyte-derived DCs (MoDCs) include cells with functions
similar to those of cDCs but are derived from monocytes
that were recruited into tissue inﬂammatory sites. They
express CD11c, like all DCs, and also monocyte markers
such as CD11b and CCR2.
• Langerhans cells are DCs found in the epidermis that share
functions with cDCs but are developmentally related to
tissue-resident macrophages, arising from embryonic fetal
liver and yolk sac precursors (see Fig. 2.6) . They are
identiﬁed by their location and morphology in the skin, the
presence of tennis-racket– shaped cytoplasmic organelles
called Birbeck granules that are visible using electron
microscopy, and expression of various markers (see Table
2.3). Langerhans cells may function in the context of skin
infections to present antigens to and activate CD4+ T cells,
or in the absence of infection, to present self antigens to
CD4+ T cells and induce tolerance to these antigens.
FIGURE 2.5  Dendritic cells. A, Light micrograph of
cultured dendritic cells (DCs) derived from bone
marrow precursors. B, A scanning electron
micrograph of a DC showing extensive membrane
projections. C and D, DCs in the skin, illustrated
schematically (C) and in a section of the skin (D)
stained with an antibody specific for Langerhans
cells (which appear blue in this immunoenzyme
stain). E and F, DCs in a lymph node, illustrated
schematically (E) and in a section of a mouse
lymph node (F) stained with fluorescently labeled
antibodies against B cells in follicles (green) and
DCs in the T cell zone (red). 
A, B, and D, Courtesy of Dr. Y-J Liu, MD, Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas. F, Courtesy of Drs. Kathryn Pape and Jennifer
Walter, University of Minnesota School of Medicine, Minneapolis,
Minnesota
Another population of cells called follicular dendritic cells
(FDCs) have a dendritic morphology but are not derived from bone
marrow precursors, do not present protein antigens to T cells, and
should not be confused with DCs. FDCs are involved in B cell
activation in the germinal centers of secondary lymphoid organs
(see Chapter 12).
Lymphocytes
Lymphocytes, the unique cells of adaptive immunity, are the only
cells in the body that express clonally distributed antigen receptors,
each speciﬁc for a diﬀerent antigenic determinant. Each clone of T
and B lymphocytes expresses antigen receptors with a single
speciﬁcity, which is diﬀerent from the speciﬁcities of the receptors
in all other clones. As we shall discuss here and in later chapters,
there are millions of lymphocyte clones in the body, enabling any
individual to recognize and respond to millions of foreign antigens.
FIGURE 2.6  Maturation of dendritic cells.Dendritic
cells (DCs) arise from a common precursor cell of
the myeloid lineage in the bone marrow and
further differentiate into subsets, the major ones
being classical DCs (cDCs) and plasmacytoid
DCs (pDCs). Monocyte-derived DCs (Mo-DCs)
may arise from monocytes in inflamed tissues
Some plasmacytoid DCs may arise from the
common DC precursor.
The role of lymphocytes in mediating adaptive immunity was
established by several lines of evidence accumulated over decades
of research. One of the earliest clues came from the observation
that humans with congenital and acquired immunodeﬁciency states
had reduced numbers of lymphocytes in the peripheral circulation
and in lymphoid tissues. Experiments done in mice and rats
showed that depletion of lymphocytes impaired responses to
immunizations, and lymphocytes are the only cell type that can
transfer speciﬁc immunity to microbes from immunized to naive
animals. In vitro experiments established that stimulation of
lymphocytes with antigens leads to responses that show many of
the characteristics of immune responses induced under more
physiologic conditions in vivo. After the identiﬁcation of
lymphocytes as the mediators of humoral and cellular immunity,
many discoveries were made at a rapid pace about diﬀerent types of
lymphocytes, their origins in the bone marrow and thymus, their
roles in various immune responses, and the consequences of their
deﬁciency. Among the most important ﬁndings was that clonally
distributed, highly diverse, and speciﬁc receptors for antigens are
produced by lymphocytes but not by any other types of cells. More
recently, an enormous amount of information has accumulated
about lymphocyte genes, proteins, and functions.
One of the most fascinating aspects of lymphocyte biology is how
the extremely diverse repertoire of antigen receptors with diﬀerent
speciﬁcities is generated from the limited number of genes for
these receptors that are present in the germline. It is now known
that the genes encoding the antigen receptors of lymphocytes are
formed by recombination of DNA segments during the maturation
of these cells. There is a random aspect to these somatic
recombination events that results in the generation of millions of
diﬀerent recombined receptor genes and a highly diverse repertoire
of antigen speciﬁcities among diﬀerent clones of lymphocytes (see
Chapter 8).
The total number of lymphocytes in a healthy adult is
approximately 5 × 1011. Of these, approximately 2% are in the blood,
4% in the skin, 10% in the bone marrow, 15% in the mucosal
lymphoid tissues of the gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts, and
65% in lymphoid organs (mainly the spleen and lymph nodes). We
ﬁrst describe the properties of these cells and then their
organization in various lymphoid tissues.
TABLE 2.3
The major distinguishing markers and functions of human dendritic cell (DC) subsets are
listed. Note that all DCs express class II major histocompatibility complex molecules.
Unactivated DCs of all types may display self antigens and serve to maintain self-tolerance;
this postulated function is not listed in the table.
IL, Interleukin; IFN, interferon; TLRs, Toll-like receptors.
Classes of Lymphocytes
Lymphocytes consist of distinct classes with diﬀerent functions and
protein products (Table 2.4) . The major classes of lymphocytes were
introduced in Chapter 1 (see Fig. 1.5). Morphologically, all
lymphocytes are similar, and their appearance does not reﬂect their
heterogeneity or their diverse functions. B lymphocytes, the cells
that produce antibodies, were so called because in birds they were
found to mature in an organ called the bursa of Fabricius. In
mammals, no anatomic equivalent of the bursa exists, and the early
stages of B cell maturation occur in the bone marrow. Thus, the
name B lymphocytes now refers to bone marrow–derived
lymphocytes. T lymphocytes, the mediators of cellular immunity,
arise from precursor cells in the bone marrow, which migrate to
and mature in the thymus; T lymphocytes refer to thymus-derived
lymphocytes. There are subsets of B and T lymphocytes with
distinct phenotypic and functional characteristics.
Subsets of B Lymphocytes
The major subsets of B cells are follicular B cells, marginal zone B
cells, and B-1 cells, each of which is found in distinct anatomic
locations within lymphoid tissues. Follicular B cells, the most
numerous type of B cells in the body, are found in lymphoid tissues
and blood. They express highly diverse, clonally distributed sets of
antibodies that serve as cell surface antigen receptors and as the
key secreted eﬀector molecules of adaptive humoral immunity.
Follicular B cells give rise to most of the high-aﬃnity antibodies
and memory B cells that protect people from repeat infections by
the same microbes. In contrast, B-1 and marginal zone B cells make
up a minority of B cells and produce antibodies with limited
diversity. B-1 cells are found mainly in mucosal tissues and the
peritoneal and pleural cavities, whereas marginal zone B cells are
present only in the spleen in rodents but can be found in the
circulation of humans.
Subsets of T Lymphocytes
The two major T cell subsets are deﬁned by the cell surface
expression of the CD4 and CD8 proteins (Fig. 2.7). T cells are the
mediators of cellular immunity: CD4+ T cells are helper T
lymphocytes or their naive precursors, and CD8+ T cells are CTLs or
their precursors. Both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells express antigen
receptors called αβ T cell receptors (TCRs). CD4+ helper T cells
secrete cytokines that act on various other cells, including other T
lymphocytes, B cells, and macrophages. CD8+ CTLs recognize and
kill cells infected with viruses and other microbes that can live
inside host cells, and also kill cancer cells. CD4+ regulatory T cells
are a third subset of T cells expressing αβ receptors; their function
is to inhibit immune responses. In addition, natural killer T (NKT)
cells, mucosa-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells, and γδ T cells are
three numerically smaller subsets of T cells that express TCRs with
limited diversity, analogous to the antibodies made by B-1 cells.
The functions of these classes of B and T cells will be discussed in
later chapters.
TABLE 2.4
This table summarizes the major properties of the lymphocytes of the adaptive immune
system. Not included are natural killer cells and other innate lymphoid cells, which are
discussed in Chapter 4.
Ig, Immunoglobulin; MHC, major histocompatibility complex.
a  The percentages are approximations, based on data from human peripheral blood and
mouse lymphoid organs. In the liver, almost 50% of the lymphocytes are MAIT cells.
b  B-1 cells are a distinct subset in mice, but it is unclear if the same is true in humans.
c  In most cases the ratio of CD4+CD8 − to CD8+CD4 − is approximately 2:1 in steady state.
FIGURE 2.7  T cell subsets.A flow cytometry plot is
shown of human blood lymphocytes that have
been stained with reagents to detect the cell
surface expression of CD4 or CD8. Each dot
represents a single cell, and the location of the
dot within the plot reflects that cell’s expression of
CD4 and CD8. (Flow cytometry is explained in
Appendix III). Most T cells in blood and lymphoid
organs express CD4 or CD8 but not both, and in
healthy people, the ratio of CD4+ to CD8+ T cells
is about 2:1. 
Courtesy of Mariela Pauli and Robby Grewal, Department of
Dermatology, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco.
Development of Lymphocytes
Lymphocytes, like all blood cells, arise after birth from stem cells in
the bone marrow. The origin of lymphocytes from bone marrow
progenitors was ﬁrst demonstrated by experiments with radiation-
induced bone marrow chimeras. Lymphocytes and their precursors
are radiosensitive and are killed by high doses of γ-irradiation. If a
mouse of one inbred strain is irradiated and then injected with
bone marrow cells or small numbers of HSCs of another strain that
can be distinguished from the host, all the lymphocytes that
develop subsequently are derived from the bone marrow cells or
HSCs of the donor. Such approaches have proved useful for
examining the maturation of lymphocytes and other blood cells.
All lymphocytes go through complex maturation stages during
which they express antigen receptors and acquire the functional
and phenotypic characteristics of mature cells (Fig. 2.8). The
anatomic sites where the major steps in lymphocyte development
occur are called the generative (or primary, or central) lymphoid
organs. These include the bone marrow, where precursors of all
lymphocytes arise and B cells mature, and the thymus, where T
cells mature. We will discuss the processes of B- and T-lymphocyte
maturation in detail in Chapter 8.
Populations of Lymphocytes Distinguished by History of Antigen
Exposure
Naive lymphocytes that have matured in the bone marrow or
thymus migrate into secondary (peripheral) lymphoid organs, where
they are activated by antigens to proliferate and diﬀerentiate into
eﬀector and memory cells (Fig. 2.9 and Table 2.5) . The mature T cells
that emerge from the thymus are called naive T lymphocytes. B
cells undergo most of their development in the bone marrow, but
the ﬁnal steps that generate mature naive B lymphocytes occur in
the spleen. Naive lymphocytes are functionally quiescent, but after
activation by antigen, they proliferate and go through dramatic
changes in phenotype and functional activity. The activation of
naive lymphocytes follows a series of sequential steps beginning
with the synthesis of new proteins, such as cytokine receptors and
cytokines, which are required for many of the subsequent changes.
The cells then undergo proliferation, resulting in increased size of
the antigen-speciﬁc clones, a process called clonal expansion. In
some infections the number of microbe-speciﬁc T cells may
increase more than 50,000-fold within a week, and the number of
speciﬁc B cells may increase up to 5000-fold. This rapid clonal
expansion of microbe-speciﬁc lymphocytes is needed to keep pace
with the ability of microbes to rapidly replicate. Concurrently with
proliferation, antigen-stimulated lymphocytes begin to diﬀerentiate
into eﬀector cells whose function is to eliminate the antigen. Many
of the eﬀector cells migrate into tissue sites of infection, and some
stay in secondary lymphoid organs. Other progeny of antigen-
stimulated B and T lymphocytes diﬀerentiate into long-lived
memory cells, whose function is to mediate rapid and enhanced
(i.e., secondary) responses to subsequent exposures to antigens.
Naive, eﬀector, and memory lymphocytes can be distinguished by
several functional and phenotypic criteria (see Table 2.5).
The details of lymphocyte activation and diﬀerentiation, as well
as the functions of each of these populations, will be addressed
later in the book. Here we will summarize the phenotypic
characteristics of each population.
Naive Lymphocytes
Naive lymphocytes are mature T or B cells that have never
encountered foreign antigen. (The term naive refers to the idea that
these cells are immunologically inexperienced.) Naive lymphocytes
are found in the circulation and secondary lymphoid organs. Naive
and memory lymphocytes are both called resting lymphocytes
because they are not actively dividing or performing eﬀector
functions and are in a state of rest, or in the G0 stage of the cell
cycle, before antigenic stimulation. Naive (and memory) B and T
lymphocytes cannot be readily distinguished morphologically, and
both are often called small lymphocytes when observed in blood
smears. A small lymphocyte is 8 to 10 µm in diameter and has a
large nucleus with dense heterochromatin and a thin rim of
cytoplasm that contains a few mitochondria, ribosomes, and
lysosomes but no visible specialized organelles (Fig. 2.10). Naive
(and 
memory) 
lymphocytes 
rely 
mainly 
on 
oxidative
phosphorylation and faĴy acid oxidation to maintain their basal
energy requirements.
FIGURE 2.8  Maturation of
lymphocytes.Lymphocytes develop from bone
marrow stem cells, mature in the generative
lymphoid organs (bone marrow and thymus for B
and T cells, respectively), and then circulate
through the blood to secondary lymphoid organs
(lymph nodes, spleen, mucosal lymphoid tissues).
Fully mature T cells leave the thymus, but
immature B cells leave the bone marrow and
complete their maturation in secondary lymphoid
organs. Naive lymphocytes may respond to
foreign antigens in these secondary lymphoid
tissues or return by lymphatic drainage to the
blood and recirculate through other secondary
lymphoid organs.
FIGURE 2.9  Stages in the life history of
lymphocytes.In response to antigen, naive
lymphocytes in secondary lymphoid proliferate
and differentiate into effector cells, which function
to eliminate antigens. The effector cells of the B
lymphocyte lineage are antibody-secreting plasma
cells (some of which are long-lived). The effector
cells of the CD4 T lymphocyte lineage are
cytokine-producing helper T cells, and the effector
cells of the CD8 lineage (not shown) are cytotoxic
T lymphocytes. Most effector T cells leave
secondary lymphoid organs and migrate into
infected tissues. Some helper T cells remain in the
secondary lymphoid organs, where they help B
cells mount antibody responses. Other progeny of
the antigen-stimulated lymphocytes differentiate
into long-lived memory cells, which are located in
secondary lymphoid organs and nonlymphoid
tissues. See Table 2.5 for features of naive,
effector, and memory lymphocytes.
TABLE 2.5
Ig, Immunoglobulin; IL, interleukin.
Naive lymphocytes typically live for 1 to 3 months. Their survival
requires signals from antigen receptors and cytokines. The need for
antigen receptor expression to maintain the pool of naive
lymphocytes in secondary lymphoid organs was demonstrated in
studies with mice in which the genes that encode the antigen
receptors of B cells or T cells were deleted after the lymphocytes
had matured. In these studies, naive lymphocytes that lost their
antigen receptors died within 2 or 3 weeks. It has been shown that
the antigen receptor of naive B cells generates survival signals even
in the absence of antigen. Naive T lymphocytes recognize various
self antigens weakly, enough to induce survival signals but without
triggering the stronger signals that are needed to initiate
proliferation and diﬀerentiation into eﬀector cells.
Cytokines are also essential for the survival of naive lymphocytes,
and naive B and T cells express receptors for these cytokines. The
most important of these cytokines are IL-7, which promotes
survival and low-level cycling of naive T cells, and B cell–activating
factor (BAFF), a cytokine belonging to the tumor necrosis factor
(TNF) family, which is required for naive B cell survival.
In the steady state, or homeostasis, the pool of naive lymphocytes
is maintained at a fairly constant number because of a balance
between spontaneous death of these cells and the production of
new cells in the generative lymphoid organs. Any loss of
lymphocytes leads to a compensatory proliferation of the remaining
ones and increased output from the primary organs. This response
of the immune system to reestablish a normal total number of
lymphocytes is called homeostatic proliferation. If naive cells are
transferred into a host that is deﬁcient in lymphocytes (said to be
lymphopenic), the transferred lymphocytes begin to proliferate and
increase in number until they reach approximately the numbers of
lymphocytes in normal animals. Homeostatic proliferation appears
to be driven by the same signals that are required for the
maintenance of naive lymphocytes, namely weak recognition of
some self antigens in the case of T cells or spontaneous B cell
receptor signaling in B cells, and cytokines, mainly IL-7. This
phenomenon is exploited clinically in T cell therapy protocols, as in
the treatment of some leukemias—the transferred T cells
proliferate maximally if host T cell numbers are reduced, a process
called lymphodepletion (see Chapter 18).
FIGURE 2.10  Morphology of lymphocytes. A, Light
micrograph of a lymphocyte in a peripheral blood
smear. B, Electron micrograph of a small
lymphocyte. C, Light micrograph of a large
lymphocyte (lymphoblast). D, Electron micrograph
of a large lymphocyte (lymphoblast). 
A, Courtesy of Jean Shafer, Department of Pathology, University of
California, San Diego. Copyright 1995–2008, Carden Jennings
Publishing Co., Ltd. B, Courtesy of Dr. Noel Weidner, Department of
Pathology, University of California, San Diego. C, Courtesy of Jean
Shafer, Department of Pathology, University of California, San
Diego. Copyright 1995–2008, Carden Jennings Publishing Co., Ltd.
D, From Fawcett DW. Bloom and Fawcett: A Textbook of Histology.
12th ed. New York, NY: Chapman & Hall; 1994. With kind
permission of Springer Science and Business Media.
Effector Lymphocytes
In response to stimulation by antigen and other signals, naive
lymphocytes enter the G1 stage of the cell cycle before going on to
divide. Activated lymphocytes are larger (10 to 12 µm in diameter),
have more cytoplasm and organelles and increased amounts of
cytoplasmic 
RNA, 
and 
are 
called 
large 
lymphocytes 
or
lymphoblasts (see Fig. 2.10). These changes require more energy
and substrates for biosynthetic activities. The recently activated
lymphocytes use aerobic glycolysis for energy and the tricarboxylic
acid (TCA) cycle to generate the intermediary metabolites needed
for new synthesis of proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids.
Some of these activated lymphocytes diﬀerentiate into eﬀector
lymphocytes that have the ability to produce molecules capable of
eliminating foreign antigens. Eﬀector T lymphocytes include CD4+
helper T cells and CD8+ CTLs, and eﬀector B lymphocytes are
antibody-secreting cells, mainly plasmablasts and plasma cells.
Helper T cells activate B lymphocytes, macrophages, and DCs by
secreted cytokines that bind to receptors on these cells, and surface
molecules, such as CD40 ligand (CD154), which engages CD40 on
other cells. CTLs have cytoplasmic granules ﬁlled with proteins
that, when released, kill the cells that the CTLs recognize, which are
usually virus-infected cells or tumor cells. Both CD4+ and CD8+
eﬀector T cells usually express surface proteins indicative of recent
activation, including CD25 (a component of the receptor for the T
cell growth factor IL-2), and altered paĴerns of molecules that
mediate migration (selectins, integrins, and chemokine receptors,
discussed in Chapter 3). The majority of diﬀerentiated eﬀector T
lymphocytes migrate from secondary lymphoid organs, where they
were generated, into tissue sites of infections, and are short lived.
Many antibody-secreting B cells are morphologically identiﬁable
in stained tissue sections as plasma cells. They have characteristic
nuclei placed eccentrically in the cell with the chromatin
distributed around the nuclear membrane in a cartwheel paĴern;
abundant 
cytoplasm 
containing 
dense, 
rough 
endoplasmic
reticulum that is the site where antibodies (and other secreted and
membrane proteins) are synthesized; and distinct perinuclear Golgi
complexes, where antibody molecules are post-translationally
modiﬁed to their ﬁnal forms and packaged for secretion (Fig. 2.11).
It is estimated that half or more of the messenger RNA in these
cells codes for antibody proteins and a single plasma cell can
secrete thousands of antibody molecules per second. Plasma cells
develop in lymphoid organs and at sites of infection, and some of
them migrate to the bone marrow or mucosal tissues, where they
may live and secrete antibodies for long periods after the immune
response is induced and even after the antigen is eliminated.
Plasmablasts are antibody-secreting cells with features of plasma
cells but that are capable of proliferation; they are found in the
circulation and can be identiﬁed by expression of CD19 and low
levels of the typical B cell marker CD20 compared with naive and
memory B cells. Within a week after an infection, a large number of
plasmablasts can be detected in the blood, which secrete IgM, IgG,
or IgA antibodies and are derived from naive or memory B cells
that were recently activated in secondary lymphoid organs. Some of
these circulating plasmablasts are likely in transit from the
lymphoid organs to the bone marrow and mucosal tissues, where
they will remain as long-lived plasma cells.
Memory Lymphocytes
Memory cells are generated during infections but may survive in a
functionally quiescent or slowly cycling state for months or years
after the microbe is eliminated. Some memory cells recirculate
between blood and lymphoid tissues, similar to naive T cells, and
others remain within nonlymphoid tissues without reentering the
blood for long periods. Memory lymphocytes can be identiﬁed by
their expression of surface proteins that distinguish them from
naive and recently activated eﬀector lymphocytes, although it is still
not clear which of these surface proteins are deﬁnitive markers of
memory populations (see Table 2.5). Memory T cells, like naive but
not eﬀector T cells, express high levels of the IL-7 receptor. Memory
T cells also express molecules that regulate their migration into and
out of lymphoid organs or tissue sites of infection, and these vary
depending on the subset (see Chapter 3). In humans, most naive T
cells express a 200-kD isoform of a surface molecule called CD45
that contains a segment encoded by an exon designated A and is
therefore called CD45RA (for restricted A). In contrast, most
activated and memory T cells express a 180-kD isoform of CD45 in
which the A exon RNA has been spliced out; this isoform is called
CD45RO. However, this way of distinguishing naive from memory T
cells is not perfect, and interconversion between CD45RA+ and
CD45RO+ populations has been documented.
FIGURE 2.11  Morphology of plasma cells. A, Light
micrograph of a plasma cell in tissue. B, Electron
micrograph of a plasma cell. 
Courtesy of Dr. Noel Weidner, Department of Pathology, University
of California, San Diego, California.
FIGURE 2.12  Change in proportions of naive and
memory T cells with age.The proportions of naive
and memory T cells are based on data from
multiple healthy individuals. The estimate of thymic
output is an approximation. 
Courtesy of Dr. Donna L. Farber, Columbia University College of
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York.
The frequency of memory cells increases with age because
individuals are continually exposed to foreign antigens, such as
environmental microbes. Memory T cells make up less than 5% of
peripheral blood T cells in a newborn but 50% or more in an adult
(Fig. 2.12). As individuals age, the gradual accumulation of memory
cells compensates for the reduced output of new naive T cells from
the thymus, which involutes after puberty, as discussed later.
Memory B lymphocytes may express certain classes (isotypes) of
membrane Ig, such as IgG, IgE, or IgA, as a result of isotype
switching, whereas naive B cells express only IgM and IgD (see
Chapters 5 and 12). In humans, CD27 expression is a marker for
memory B cells.
Memory cells are heterogeneous and consist of subsets that diﬀer
especially with respect to their location and migratory properties.
Memory T and B cells will be discussed further in Chapters 9 and
12, respectively.
The distinguishing features of naive, eﬀector, and memory
lymphocytes reﬂect diﬀerent programs of gene expression that are
regulated by transcription factors and stable epigenetic changes,
including histone methylation and acetylation and chromatin
remodeling. For example, a transcription factor called Kruppel-like
factor 2 (KLF2) is required for maintenance of the naive T cell
phenotype. The phenotypes of functionally diﬀerent types of CD4+
eﬀector T cells, called Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells, depend on
transcription factors T-BET, GATA3, and RORγT, respectively, as
well as epigenetic changes in cytokine gene loci (see Chapter 10).
Other transcription factors are required for maintaining the
phenotypes of memory B and T cells. Our understanding of the
molecular 
determinants 
of 
lymphocyte 
phenotype 
is 
still
incomplete and evolving.
Natural Killer Cells and Cytokine-Secreting
Innate Lymphoid Cells
The innate immune system includes several developmentally related
subsets of bone marrow–derived cells with lymphoid morphology
and eﬀector functions similar to those of T cells but lacking T cell
antigen receptors. The major functions of these cells are to provide
early defense against infectious pathogens, to recognize stressed
and damaged host cells and help to eliminate these cells, and to
inﬂuence the nature of the subsequent adaptive immune response.
Natural killer (NK) cells have cytotoxic activity similar to that of
CD8+ CTLs. They circulate in the blood and are present in various
lymphoid tissues. Innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) produce cytokines
similar to those secreted by CD4+ helper T cells. ILCs can be
grouped into three major subsets based on the cytokines they
secrete, analogous to the three subsets of CD4+ helper T cells,
described in Chapter 10. ILCs are rare in the blood and are present
mostly in tissues, especially mucosal tissues such as the lung and
intestines. The common lymphoid progenitor in the bone marrow
that gives rise to T and B lymphocytes also gives rise to a precursor
of both NK cells and ILCs, and NK cells and ILCs share expression
of several lineage-speciﬁc markers and transcription factors.
Lymphoid tissue–inducer cells are a type of ILC that produces the
cytokines lymphotoxin and TNF and are essential for the formation
of organized secondary lymphoid tissues, described later in this
chapter. NK cells and ILCs are described in more detail in Chapter
4.
Anatomy and Functions of Lymphoid Tissues
The primary lymphoid organs, also called generative or central
lymphoid organs, include the bone marrow and thymus, and are the
sites where lymphocytes ﬁrst express antigen receptors and aĴain
phenotypic and functional maturity (see Fig. 2.8) . B lymphocytes
mature partially in the bone marrow; enter the circulation; migrate
to the spleen, where they complete their maturation; and then
populate secondary lymphoid organs. T lymphocytes mature in the
thymus, then enter the circulation, and migrate to secondary
lymphoid organs. Two important functions shared by the
generative organs are to provide growth factors and other
molecular signals needed for lymphocyte maturation and to
present self antigens for selection of maturing lymphocytes (see
Chapter 8).
Secondary (or peripheral) lymphoid organs, including the lymph
nodes, spleen, and components of the mucosal immune system, are
where lymphocyte responses to foreign antigens are initiated and
develop (see Fig. 2.8) . These organs are anatomically organized in
ways that optimize the cellular interactions necessary for initiation
of adaptive immune responses. Lymphocytes and APCs are
localized and concentrated in anatomically deﬁned areas of these
organs, which are also the sites where foreign antigens are
transported and concentrated. This ensures that antigens and
antigen-speciﬁc naive lymphocytes can come together to initiate
adaptive immune responses. The anatomy of lymphoid organs also
enables T cells and B cells to interact after they are activated by
antigens. As we will discuss in Chapter 3, many lymphocytes
constantly recirculate and exchange among the circulation,
secondary lymphoid organs, and tissues.
Bone Marrow
The bone marrow is the site of generation of circulating blood cells,
including red blood cells, granulocytes, and monocytes, and the site
of B cell maturation. The generation of all blood cells, called
hematopoiesis (Fig. 2.13), occurs initially during fetal development
in blood islands of the yolk sac and the para-aortic mesenchyme,
then shifts to the liver between the third and fourth months of
gestation, and ﬁnally shifts to the bone marrow. At birth,
hematopoiesis takes place in the bones throughout the skeleton,
but it becomes increasingly restricted to the marrow of the ﬂat
bones, so that by puberty, hematopoiesis occurs mostly in the
sternum, vertebrae, iliac bones, and ribs. The red marrow that is
found in these bones consists of a spongelike reticular framework
located between long bony trabeculae. The spaces in this
framework contain a network of blood-ﬁlled sinusoids lined by
endothelial cells aĴached to a discontinuous basement membrane.
Outside the sinusoids are clusters of the precursors of blood cells
in various stages of development, as well as fat cells. The blood cell
precursors mature and then migrate through the sinusoidal
basement membrane and between endothelial cells to enter the
vascular circulation. When the bone marrow is compromised or
there is an exceptional demand for production of new blood cells,
the liver and spleen often become sites of extramedullary
hematopoiesis.
Red blood cells, granulocytes, monocytes, DCs, mast cells,
platelets, B and T lymphocytes, and ILCs all originate from a
common HSC in the bone marrow (see Fig. 2.13). HSCs are
multipotent, meaning that a single HSC can generate all diﬀerent
types of mature blood cells. HSCs are also self-renewing because
each time they divide, at least one daughter cell maintains the
properties of a stem cell and the other can diﬀerentiate along a
particular lineage (called asymmetric division). HSCs can be
identiﬁed by the presence of surface markers, including the
proteins CD34 and c-KIT, and the absence of lineage-speciﬁc
markers that are expressed in mature cells. HSCs are maintained
within specialized microscopic anatomic niches in the bone
marrow. In these locations, nonhematopoietic stromal cells provide
contact-dependent signals and growth factors required for
continuous cycling of the HSCs. The common myeloid-lymphoid
progenitor gives rise to some myeloid cells and to commiĴed
precursors of T cell, B cell, and NK/ILC lineages. The common
myeloid-megakaryocyte-erythroid 
progenitors 
give 
rise 
to
commiĴed 
precursors 
of 
the 
erythroid, 
megakaryocytic,
granulocytic, and monocytic lineages, which give rise, respectively,
to mature red blood cells, platelets, granulocytes (neutrophils,
eosinophils, basophils), and monocytes. As discussed earlier, most
DCs arise from a precursor that also gives rise to monocytes.
Immature 
mast 
cell 
progenitors 
arise 
from 
a 
common
granulocyte/monocyte precursor, leave the bone marrow, and
mature into mast cells in peripheral tissues.
The proliferation and maturation of precursor cells in the bone
marrow are stimulated by cytokines. Many of these cytokines are
called colony-stimulating factors because they were originally
assayed by their ability to stimulate the growth and development of
various leukocytic or erythroid colonies from marrow cells.
Hematopoietic cytokines are produced by stromal cells and
macrophages in the bone marrow, thus providing the local
environment for hematopoiesis. They are also produced by antigen-
stimulated T lymphocytes and cytokine-activated or microbe-
activated macrophages, providing a mechanism for increasing
leukocyte production when needed for immune and inﬂammatory
reactions and for replenishing leukocytes that may be consumed
during these reactions. The names and properties of the major
hematopoietic cytokines are listed in Table 2.7.
p
y
In addition to self-renewing stem cells and their diﬀerentiating
progeny, the marrow contains numerous long-lived antibody-
secreting plasma cells. These cells are generated in secondary
lymphoid organs as a consequence of stimulation of B cells by
antigens and helper T cells, and then migrate to the bone marrow.
In addition, some long-lived memory T lymphocytes migrate to and
may reside in the bone marrow.
FIGURE 2.13  Hematopoiesis.The development of
the major lineages of blood cells is depicted in this
hematopoietic tree. The principal cytokines that
drive the maturation of different lineages are
described in Table 2.7. The development of
lymphocytes is described later in this chapter and
in Chapter 8. CFU, Colony-forming unit; CFU-Mc,
CFU mast cell; CFU-b, CFU B cell; CFU-eo, CFU
eosinophil; CFU-G, CFU granulocytes; CFU-M,
CFU macrophages; DC, dendritic cell; ILCs,
innate lymphoid cells; NK, natural killer.
TABLE 2.7
DC, Dendritic cells; G-CSF, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor; GM-CSF, granulocyte-
monocyte colony-stimulating factor; HSCs, hematopoietic stem cell; IL, Interleukin; M-CSF,
monocyte colony-stimulating factor.
Thymus
The thymus is the site of T cell maturation. It is a bilobed organ
situated in the anterior mediastinum, which involutes after puberty
so that it is not detectable in adults. Each lobe is divided into
multiple lobules by ﬁbrous septa, and each lobule consists of an
outer cortex and an inner medulla (Fig. 2.14). The cortex contains a
dense collection of bone marrow–derived T lymphocytes, and the
lighter staining medulla is more sparsely populated with
lymphocytes. The medulla also contains macrophages and DCs.
ScaĴered throughout the thymus are epithelial cells, which have
abundant cytoplasm. The epithelial component of the thymus is
derived from invaginations of the ectoderm in the developing neck
and chest of the embryo, forming structures called branchial
pouches. Thymic cortical epithelial cells produce IL-7, which is
required early in T cell development, and these cells also present
self antigens to developing T cells during their maturation. A
diﬀerent type of epithelial cell found only in the medulla, called
medullary thymic epithelial cells (MTECs), plays a special role in
presenting self antigens to developing T cells and causing their
elimination. This is one mechanism for ensuring that the immune
system remains tolerant to self antigens and is discussed in detail
in Chapter 15. In the medulla, there are structures called Hassall’s
corpuscles, which are composed of tightly packed whorls of
epithelial cells that may be remnants of degenerating cells. The
thymus has a rich vascular supply and eﬀerent lymphatic vessels
that drain into mediastinal lymph nodes.
An inherited disorder of T cell immunity caused by failure of
development of the thymus is called the DiGeorge syndrome.
These patients suﬀer from T cell deﬁciency because of a
chromosomal deletion that eliminates genes required for thymus
development (see Chapter 21). In the nude mouse strain, which has
been widely used in immunology research, a mutation in the gene
encoding a transcription factor called Tbx1 causes a failure of
diﬀerentiation of certain types of epithelial cells that are required
for normal development of the thymus and hair follicles.
Consequently, these mice lack T cells and hair; these mice have
been used for research studies analyzing the consequences of T cell
deﬁciency.
The lymphocytes in the thymus, also called thymocytes, are T
cells at various stages of maturation. The most immature cells from
the bone marrow enter the thymus via the blood, and their
maturation begins in the cortex. As thymocytes mature, they
migrate toward the medulla, so the medulla contains mostly mature
T cells. Only mature naive T cells exit the thymus and enter the
blood and peripheral lymphoid tissues. The details of thymocyte
maturation are described in Chapter 8. The thymus involutes after
puberty; hence, the output of mature T cells decreases
progressively with age.
Lymphatic System
The lymphatic system consists of specialized vessels, called
lymphatics, that drain ﬂuid from tissues, and lymph nodes
interspersed along the vessels (Fig. 2.15). Lymphatics are essential
for tissue ﬂuid homeostasis and for immune responses. Interstitial
ﬂuid is constantly formed in all vascularized tissues by movement
of a ﬁltrate of plasma out of capillaries, and the rate of local
formation can increase dramatically when tissue is injured or
infected. The skin, epithelia, and parenchymal organs contain
numerous lymphatic capillaries that absorb this ﬂuid from spaces
between tissue cells. Lymphatic capillaries are blind-ended vascular
channels lined by overlapping lymphatic endothelial cells without
the tight intercellular junctions or continuous basement membrane
that are typical of blood vessels. Lymphatic vessels are aĴached to
the extracellular matrix by elastin ﬁbers, which serve to pull them
open when there is excess ﬂuid accumulation and tissue swelling.
These vessels permit free uptake of the interstitial ﬂuid, and the
overlapping arrangement of the endothelial cells and one-way
valves within their lumens prevent backﬂow of the ﬂuid. The
absorbed ﬂuid, called lymph, is pumped into convergent,
progressively larger lymphatic vessels by the contraction of
perilymphatic smooth muscle cells and the pressure exerted by
movement of the musculoskeletal tissues. These vessels merge into
aﬀerent lymphatics that drain into lymph nodes, and the lymph
drains out of the nodes through eﬀerent lymphatics. Because lymph
nodes are connected in series by lymphatics, an eﬀerent lymphatic
exiting one node may serve as the aﬀerent vessel for another. The
eﬀerent lymph vessel at the end of a lymph node chain joins other
lymph vessels, eventually culminating in a large lymphatic vessel
called the thoracic duct. Lymph from the thoracic duct is emptied
into the superior vena cava, thus returning the ﬂuid to the blood
stream. Lymphatics from the right upper trunk, right arm, and
right side of the head drain into the right lymphatic duct, which
also drains into the superior vena cava. Approximately 2 liters of
lymph are normally returned to the circulation each day, and
disruption of the lymphatic system by tumors or some parasitic
infections may lead to severe tissue swelling because of ﬂuid
accumulation.
FIGURE 2.14  Morphology of the thymus. A, Low-
power light micrograph of a lobe of the thymus
showing the cortex and medulla. The darker
stained outer cortex and paler inner medulla are
apparent. B, High-power light micrograph of the
thymic medulla. The numerous small blue-staining
cells are developing T cells called thymocytes,
and the larger pink structure is a Hassall’s
corpuscle, uniquely characteristic of the thymic
medulla but whose function is poorly understood.
C, Schematic diagram of the thymus illustrating a
portion of a lobe divided into multiple lobules by
fibrous trabeculae.
FIGURE 2.15  The lymphatic system.The major
lymphatic vessels, which drain into the inferior
vena cava (and superior vena cava, not shown),
and collections of lymph nodes are illustrated.
Antigens are captured from a site of infection and
the draining lymph node to which these antigens
are transported and where the immune response
is initiated.
Lymphatic vessels collect microbial antigens from their portals of
entry and deliver the antigens to lymph nodes, where they can
stimulate adaptive immune responses. Microbes enter the body
most often through the skin and the gastrointestinal and
respiratory tracts. All of these tissues are lined by epithelial
barriers that contain DCs, and all are drained by lymphatic vessels.
The DCs capture microbial antigens and enter lymphatic vessels
through gaps in the basement membrane. The migration of DCs
into lymphatics, and then to speciﬁc locations in lymph nodes, is
guided by chemokines produced by lymphatic endothelial cells and
by stromal cells in the node, discussed in detail in Chapter 6. Other
microbes as well as soluble antigens may enter lymphatics
independently of DCs.
Lymph Nodes
Lymph nodes are encapsulated, vascularized secondary lymphoid
organs with anatomic features that favor the initiation of adaptive
immune responses to antigens carried from tissues by lymphatics
(Fig. 2.16) . Lymph nodes located along lymphatic vessels act as
ﬁlters that sample the lymph for soluble and DC-associated
antigens. The captured antigens can then be seen by cells of the
adaptive immune system (see Chapter 6). There are approximately
500 lymph nodes in the human body. A lymph node is surrounded
by a ﬁbrous capsule, beneath which is a system of sinuses lined by
reticular cells, cross-bridged by ﬁbrils of collagen and other
extracellular matrix proteins, and ﬁlled with lymphocytes,
macrophages, DCs, and other cell types. Aﬀerent lymphatics empty
into the subcapsular sinus, and lymph may drain from there
directly into the connected medullary sinus and then out of the
lymph node through the eﬀerent lymphatics. Macrophages in the
subscapular sinus provide an important function of phagocytosing
and removing infectious organisms, which they can recognize by a
wide variety of cell surface receptors. Beneath the inner ﬂoor of the
subcapsular sinus is the lymphocyte-rich cortex. The outer cortex
contains aggregates of cells called follicles that are populated
mainly by B lymphocytes. The cortex around the follicles, called the
parafollicular cortex, paracortex, or T cell zone, is organized into
cords, with abundant extracellular matrix proteins and ﬁbers, and is
populated mainly by T lymphocytes.
The development of lymph nodes, as well as of other secondary
lymphoid organs, depends on lymphoid tissue–inducer cells and the
coordinated 
actions 
of 
several 
cytokines, 
chemokines, 
and
transcription factors. During fetal life, lymphoid tissue–inducer
cells, which are a subset of ILCs discussed earlier, stimulate the
development of lymph nodes and other secondary lymphoid
organs. This function is mediated by various proteins expressed by
the inducer cells, the most thoroughly studied being the membrane
bound heterotrimeric molecule LTαβ2. Mice with genetic deletions
in either LT α or β do not develop lymph nodes or secondary
lymphoid tissues in the gut. Splenic white pulp development is also
disorganized in these mice. Lymphotoxin produced by the inducer
cells stimulates stromal cells in diﬀerent locations of a developing
secondary lymphoid organ to secrete chemokines that help to
organize the structure of the lymphoid organs.
Anatomic Organization of B and T Lymphocytes
B and T lymphocytes are sequestered in distinct regions of the cortex
of lymph nodes (Fig. 2.17) . B cells are found mainly in the follicles
in the cortex. Some follicles contain central areas called germinal
centers, which stain lightly with commonly used histologic stains.
Follicles without germinal centers, called primary follicles, contain
mostly mature, naive B lymphocytes. Follicles with germinal
centers, called secondary follicles, contain activated B cells.
Germinal centers develop in response to antigenic stimulation and
are sites of remarkable B cell proliferation, selection of B cells
producing high-aﬃnity antibodies, and generation of memory B
cells and long-lived plasma cells. Each germinal center consists of a
dark zone packed with proliferating B cells called centroblasts and
a light zone containing cells called centrocytes that have stopped
proliferating and are being selected to survive and diﬀerentiate
further. The germinal center reaction during humoral immune
responses is described in Chapter 12.
FIGURE 2.16  Morphology of a lymph node. A,
Schematic diagram of a lymph node illustrating the
T cell–rich and B cell–rich zones and the routes of
entry of lymphocytes and antigen (shown
captured by a dendritic cell). B, Light micrograph
of a lymph node illustrating the T cell and B cell
zones. 
Courtesy of Robert Oghami, MD, PhD, and Kaushik Sridhar,
Department of Pathology, University of California San Francisco.
T lymphocytes are located mainly beneath and more central to
the follicles, in the paracortical cords. Naive T cells enter the T cell
zones through specialized cortical blood vessels called high
endothelial venules (HEVs), as described in detail in Chapter 3, and
T cells are densely packed around the HEVs. Most (∼70%) of the
cortical T cells are CD4+ helper T cells, intermingled with fewer
CD8+ cells. These proportions can change dramatically during the
course of an infection. For example, during a viral infection, there
may be a marked increase in CD8+ T cells. DCs are also
concentrated in the T cell zones of the lymph nodes, where they can
present antigens to the T cells.
The anatomic segregation of B and T lymphocytes in distinct areas
of the node is dependent on chemokines (chemoaĴractant cytokines),
that are secreted by specialized cells located in each area and that
direct the migration of the lymphocytes (see Fig. 2.17) . These
specialized cells are ﬁbroblastic reticular cells (FRCs) in the T cell
zones and follicular dendritic cells (FDCs) in the follicles. FRCs are
mesenchymally derived myoﬁbroblasts that drive formation of
secondary lymphoid organs during embryonic development and
contribute in multiple ways to the functions of these organs. There
are several subtypes of FRCs located in diﬀerent places within
secondary lymphoid organs. Most FRCs in lymph nodes can be
identiﬁed by expression of podoplanin, a glycoprotein that may
facilitate adhesion of the FRCs to the stromal reticular (connective
tissue) scaﬀold. Some types of FRC that play central roles in
maintaining the structure and functions of lymph nodes include
marginal reticular cells that form the subcapsular sinus ﬂoor,
perivascular reticular cells that form layers around HEVs, T cell
zone FRCs that direct movement of T cells and DCs within the
lymph node, and B cell zone FRCs that direct movement of B and T
cells in and out of B cell follicles. FDCs are derived from an FRC
precursor, and play essential roles in maintaining follicle structure
as well as in B cell activation (see Chapter 12).
FIGURE 2.17  Segregation of B cells and T cells in a
lymph node. A, The schematic diagram illustrates
the path by which naive T and B lymphocytes
migrate to different areas of a lymph node. The
naive lymphocytes enter the node through an
artery, leave the circulation by moving across the
wall of the high endothelial venule (HEV), and then
the B and T cells migrate to different zones of the
lymph node drawn by chemokines that are
produced in these areas and bind selectively to
chemokine receptors specific for each cell type.
Also shown is the migration of dendritic cells
(DCs), which pick up antigens from the sites of
antigen entry, enter through afferent lymphatic
vessels, and migrate to the T cell–rich areas of
the node. B, In this section of a lymph node, the B
lymphocytes, located in two follicles, are stained
red; the T cells, in the parafollicular cortex, are
blue. Dendritic cells, in the parafollicular cortex,
are also stained red. The method used to stain
these cells is called immunofluorescence (see
Appendix III for details). 
The anatomic segregation of T and B cells is also seen in the
spleen (see Fig. 2.19). (Courtesy of Andrea Radtke, PhD, laboratory
of Ronald N. Germain, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health.
Chemokines are a large family of 8- to 10-kD cytokines that are
involved in cell motility functions in development, maintenance of
tissue architecture, and immune and inﬂammatory responses.
Chemokines bind to receptors on lymphocytes and other cells and
stimulate the cells to move up concentration gradients of the
chemokine. We will discuss the properties of chemokines and their
receptors in Chapter 3. The production of particular chemokines in
diﬀerent areas of secondary lymphoid organs and the expression of
receptors for these chemokines determine where B and T cells
reside in these organs. Naive T cells express a receptor called CCR7
that binds the chemokines CCL19 and CCL21, which are produced
by T cell zone FRCs. These chemokines promote naive T cell
movement from the blood, through the wall of the HEVs, into the T
cell zone. DCs that are activated by microbes also express CCR7,
and lymphatic endothelial cells express CCL21; this is why DCs
enter the node through lymphatics, and why they migrate to the
same area of the node as do naive T cells (see Chapter 6). Naive B
cells express low levels of CCR7 and higher levels of another
chemokine receptor, CXCR5, which recognizes a chemokine,
CXCL13, produced by B cell zone FRCs and FDCs. Thus, circulating
naive B cells that enter lymph nodes, also through HEVs, are
aĴracted into the follicles. The functions of chemokines in
regulating where lymphocytes are located in lymphoid organs and
in the formation of these organs have been established by
numerous studies in mice. For example, CXCR5 knockout mice lack
B cell–containing follicles in lymph nodes and spleen, and CCR7
knockout mice lack T cell zones.
The anatomic segregation of B and T cells ensures that each
lymphocyte population is in close contact with the appropriate
APCs (i.e., B cells with FDCs and T cells with DCs) . Furthermore,
because of this precise segregation, B and T lymphocyte
populations are kept apart until it is time for them to interact in a
functional way. As we will see in Chapters 9 and 12, after
stimulation by protein antigens, B and T cells change their
expression of chemokine receptors and begin to migrate toward one
another in response to signals from chemokines and other
mediators. Activated T cells either migrate toward follicles to help B
cells or exit the node and enter the circulation. Activated B cells
migrate into germinal centers and, after diﬀerentiation into plasma
cells, may home to the bone marrow.
T cell zone FRCs maintain lymph node structure and function by
forming a network of specialized tube-like structures called FRC
conduits (Fig. 2.18). These conduits range in diameter from 0.2 to 3
µM and contain organized arrays of extracellular matrix molecules
secreted by the FRCs, including parallel bundles of collagen ﬁbers
embedded in a meshwork of ﬁbrillin microﬁbers, all tightly
surrounded by a basement membrane produced by a sleeve of
y
p
y
FRCs. The FRC conduits display chemokines on their surfaces and
act as tracks along which T cells and DCs migrate, responding to
the chemokines. The FRC conduits also carry some antigens that
enter the lymph nodes through aﬀerent lymphatics into the T cell
zone for access to antigen-presenting DCs. The conduits begin at
the subcapsular sinus and extend to both medullary sinus
lymphatic vessels and cortical HEVs.
Antigen Transport Through Lymph Nodes
Lymph-borne substances that enter the subcapsular sinus of the
lymph node are sorted by molecular size and delivered to DCs,
macrophages, and FDCs to initiate T and B cell responses. The ﬂoor
of the subcapsular sinus is constructed in a way that permits cells
in the sinus to contact or migrate into the underlying cortex but
does not allow soluble molecules in the lymph to freely pass into
the cortex. Microbes and high-molecular-weight antigens are taken
up by sinus macrophages and presented to cortical B lymphocytes
just beneath the sinus. This is the ﬁrst step in antibody responses
to these antigens. Low-molecular-weight soluble antigens are
transported out of the sinus through the FRC conduits and passed
to resident cortical DCs located adjacent to the conduits. The
resident DCs extend processes between the cells lining the conduits
and into the lumen and use these processes to capture and ingest
the soluble antigens that have entered the conduits. This pathway
of antigen delivery may play a role in initial T cell immune
responses to some microbial antigens, but larger and sustained
responses require delivery of antigens to the node by tissue DCs, as
discussed in Chapter 6.
Spleen
The spleen is a highly vascularized organ whose major functions are
to remove aging and damaged blood cells and particles (such as
immune complexes and opsonized microbes) from the circulation and
to initiate adaptive immune responses to blood-borne antigens. The
spleen weighs approximately 150 g in adults and is located in the
left upper quadrant of the abdomen. The splenic parenchyma is
divided into red pulp, which is composed mainly of blood-ﬁlled
vascular sinusoids, and lymphocyte-rich white pulp. Blood enters
the spleen through a single splenic artery that pierces the capsule
at the hilum and divides into progressively smaller branches that
remain surrounded by protective and supporting ﬁbrous trabeculae
(Fig. 2.19). Some of the arteriolar branches of the splenic artery end
in extensive vascular sinusoids that are ﬁlled with large numbers of
erythrocytes and are lined by macrophages and other cells. The
sinusoids end in venules that drain into the splenic vein, which
carries blood out of the spleen and into the portal circulation. The
red pulp macrophages serve as an important ﬁlter for the blood,
removing 
microbes, 
damaged 
cells, 
and 
antibody-coated
(opsonized) cells and microbes. Individuals lacking a spleen are
susceptible to disseminated infections with encapsulated bacteria,
such as pneumococci and meningococci. This is likely because such
organisms are normally cleared by opsonization and phagocytosis
and the spleen is an important site of antibody production, and
both functions are defective in the absence of the spleen.
The white pulp contains the cells that mediate adaptive immune
responses to blood-borne antigens. In the white pulp are many
collections of densely packed lymphocytes, which appear as white
nodules against the background of the vascular sinusoids. The
white pulp is organized around central arteries, which are branches
of the splenic artery distinct from the branches that form the
vascular sinusoids. Several smaller branches of each central artery
pass through the lymphocyte-rich area and drain into a marginal
sinus. A region of specialized cells surrounding the marginal sinus,
called the marginal zone, forms the boundary between the red pulp
and white pulp. The architecture of the white pulp is analogous to
the organization of lymph nodes, with segregated T cell and B cell
zones. The central arteries are surrounded by cuﬀs of lymphocytes,
most of which are T cells. Because of their anatomic location,
morphologists call these T cell zones periarteriolar lymphoid
sheaths. B cell–rich follicles occupy the space between the marginal
sinus and the periarteriolar sheath. As in lymph nodes, the T cell
p
y
p
areas in the spleen contain a network of conduits lined by FRCs.
The marginal zone just outside the marginal sinus is a distinct
region populated by B cells and specialized macrophages. The B
cells in the marginal zone, known as marginal zone B cells, are
functionally distinct from follicular B cells and have a limited
repertoire of antigen speciﬁcities. The architecture of the white
pulp is more complex in humans than in mice, with both inner and
outer marginal zones and a perifollicular zone. Antigens in the
blood are delivered into the marginal sinus by circulating DCs or
are sampled by the macrophages in the marginal zone.
FIGURE 2.18  Microanatomy of the lymph node
cortex. A, Schematic of the microanatomy of a
lymph node showing locations of fibroreticular
cells (FRCs) and depicting the route of lymph
drainage from the subcapsular sinus, through FRC
conduits, to the perivenular channel around the
HEV. B, Transmission electron micrograph of an
FRC conduit surrounded by fibroblast reticular
cells (arrowheads) and adjacent lymphocytes (L).
C, Immunofluorescent stain of an FRC conduit
formed of the basement membrane protein laminin
(red) and collagen fibrils (green). HEV, High
endothelial venule. 
From Gretz JE, Norbury CC, Anderson AO, Proudfoot AEI, Shaw S.
Lymph-borne chemokines and other low molecular weight
molecules reach high endothelial venules via specialized conduits
while a functional barrier limits access to the lymphocyte
microenvironments in lymph node cortex. J Exp Med.
2000;192:1425–1439; and Sixt M, Nobuo K, Selg M, Samson T,
Roos G, Reinhardt DP, et al. The conduit system transports soluble
antigens from the afferent lymph to resident dendritic cells in the T
cell area of the lymph node. Immunity. 2005;22:19–29. Copyright ©
2005 by Elsevier Inc.
The anatomic arrangements of the APCs, B cells, and T cells in
the splenic white pulp promote the interactions required for the
eﬃcient development of humoral immune responses, as we will
discuss in Chapter 12. The segregation of T lymphocytes in the
periarteriolar lymphoid sheaths and B cells in follicles and marginal
zones is dependent on the production of diﬀerent cytokines and
chemokines by the stromal cells in these diﬀerent areas, analogous
to the case for lymph nodes. As in lymph nodes, the chemokine
CXCL13 and its receptor CXCR5 are required for B cell migration
into the follicles, and CCL19 and CCL21 and their receptor CCR7
are required for naive T cell migration into the periarteriolar
sheath. The production of these chemokines by nonlymphoid
stromal cells, such as FRCs, is stimulated by the cytokine
lymphotoxin.
Cutaneous and Mucosal Immune Systems
All major epithelial barriers of the body, including the skin,
gastrointestinal mucosa, and bronchial mucosa, have their own
system of lymph nodes, nonencapsulated lymphoid structures, and
diﬀusely distributed immune cells, which work in coordinated ways
to provide specialized immune responses against the pathogens that
enter at those barriers. The skin-associated immune system has
evolved to respond to a wide variety of environmental microbes.
The components of the immune systems associated with the
gastrointestinal and bronchial mucosa are called the mucosa-
associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) and are involved in immune
responses to ingested and inhaled antigens and microbes. The skin
and MALT contain a large proportion of the cells of the innate and
adaptive immune systems. An important feature of these epithelial
tissues is that they are densely populated with commensal
microbes, some of which are essential for normal physiology. The
immune system in these tissues has evolved to not eliminate the
commensals. We will discuss the special features of these epithelial
barrier immune systems in Chapter 14.
FIGURE 2.19  Morphology of the spleen. A,
Schematic diagram of the spleen illustrating T cell
and B cell zones, which make up the white pulp.
B, Photomicrograph of a section of human spleen
showing a periarteriolar lymphoid sheath and a
lymphoid follicle with a germinal center.
Surrounding these areas is the red pulp, rich in
vascular sinusoids. C, Immunofluorescence stain
of white pulp in human spleen, demonstrating B
cells, light blue, in a follicle and T cells, stained
dark blue, in the periarteriolar lymphoid sheath. 
B, Courtesy of Kaushik Sridhar and Robert Ohgami, MD, PhD,
Department of Pathology, University of California San Francisco,
San Fracisco, California. C, Courtesy of Andrea Radtke, PhD,
laboratory of Ronald N. Germain, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health.
Summary
• The anatomic organization of the cells and tissues of the
immune system is of critical importance for the generation
of eﬀective innate and adaptive immune responses. This
organization permits the rapid delivery of innate immune
cells, including neutrophils and monocytes, to sites of
infection and permits a small number of lymphocytes
speciﬁc for any antigen to locate and respond eﬀectively to
that antigen regardless of where in the body the antigen is
introduced.
• The cells that perform the majority of eﬀector functions of
innate and adaptive immunity are phagocytes (including
neutrophils and macrophages), mast cells, basophils,
eosinophils, dendritic cells, innate lymphoid cells (ILCs),
and natural killer (NK) cells, and lymphocytes.
• Many surface molecules are diﬀerentially expressed on
distinct types and subsets of immune cells, and these are
named according to the CD nomenclature.
• Neutrophils, the most abundant blood leukocyte with a
distinctive multilobed segmented nucleus and abundant
cytoplasmic lysosomal granules, are rapidly recruited to
sites of infection and tissue injury, where they perform
phagocytic and microbial killing functions.
• Tissue resident–macrophages are sentinel cells that detect
microbes and alert the immune system and may perform
other specialized functions in diﬀerent tissues, such as
lung, spleen, and liver.
• Monocytes are circulating phagocytes that are recruited to
sites of tissue infection and injury, where they rapidly
diﬀerentiate into macrophages that ingest and kill microbes
and dead host cells and secrete cytokines and chemokines
that promote the recruitment of leukocytes from the blood
and initiate the repair of damaged tissues.
• Dendritic cells (DCs) are bone marrow–derived cells with
extended cytoplasmic processes that are present in most
tissues of the body and function as innate sentinel cells and
as antigen-presenting cells (APCs) uniquely capable of
activating naive T lymphocytes. There are diﬀerent subsets
of DCs with diﬀerent functions in innate and adaptive
immunity.
• Innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) are cytokine-producing cells of
the innate immune system with a lymphocyte-like
morphology. They perform functions similar to those of
CD4+ or CD8+ eﬀector T cells. ILCs, which include NK cells,
do not express highly diverse, clonally distributed antigen
receptors.
• B and T lymphocytes express highly diverse and speciﬁc
antigen receptors and are the cells responsible for the
speciﬁcity and memory of adaptive immune responses.
• Both B and T lymphocytes arise from a common precursor
in the bone marrow. B cell development proceeds in the
bone marrow, whereas T cell precursors migrate to and
mature in the thymus. After maturing, B and T cells leave
the bone marrow or thymus, enter the circulation, and
populate peripheral lymphoid organs.
• Naive B and T cells are mature lymphocytes that have not
been previously stimulated by antigen. When they
encounter antigen, they proliferate and diﬀerentiate into
eﬀector lymphocytes that have functions in protective
immune responses. Eﬀector B lymphocytes are antibody-
secreting plasma cells. Eﬀector T cells include cytokine-
secreting CD4+ helper T cells and CD8+ CTLs.
• Some of the progeny of antigen-activated B and T
lymphocytes diﬀerentiate into memory cells that survive for
long periods in a quiescent state. These memory cells are
responsible for the rapid and enhanced responses to
subsequent exposures to antigen.
• The organs of the immune system may be divided into the
primary, or generative, lymphoid organs (bone marrow and
thymus), where lymphocytes mature, and the secondary, or
peripheral, lymphoid organs (lymph nodes, spleen, and the
mucosal and cutaneous immune systems), where
lymphocytes are activated by antigens.
• Bone marrow contains the stem cells for all blood cells,
including lymphocytes, and is the site of maturation of all
of these cell types except T cells, which mature in the
thymus.
• Extracellular ﬂuid (lymph) is constantly drained from
tissues through lymphatics into lymph nodes and
eventually into the blood. Microbial antigens are carried in
soluble form and within DCs in the lymph to lymph nodes,
where they are recognized by lymphocytes.
• Lymph nodes are encapsulated secondary lymphoid organs
located throughout the body along lymphatics, where naive
B and T cells respond to antigens that are collected by the
lymph from peripheral tissues.
• The spleen is an encapsulated organ in the abdominal cavity
where senescent or opsonized blood cells are removed from
the circulation, and in which lymphocytes respond to blood
borne antigens.
• Lymph nodes and the white pulp of the spleen are
organized into B cell zones (the follicles) and T cell zones.
The T cell areas are also the sites of residence of mature
DCs, which are APCs specialized for the activation of naive
T cells.
• Fibroblastic reticular cells (FRCs) are specialized
myoﬁbroblasts found in secondary lymphoid organs, which
are essential for the structural organization and function of
these organs. FRCs produce chemokines and form FRC-
conduits, both of which are required for the directed
movement of lymphocytes and DCs within the organs, and
the separation of B and T cells. Follicular dendritic cells are
related to FRCs and are required for B cell follicle structure
and function.
• The development of secondary lymphoid tissues depends
on cytokines and lymphoid tissue inducer cells.
Selected Readings
∗Indicates publications of historical interest, generally reporting
the discovery of a phenomenon or process that was later shown to
be of fundamental importance in the immune system. Many (but
not all) of these discoveries led to Nobel Prizes for the
discoverer(s). The nature of the discovery is summarized brieﬂy in
each reference.
Cells of the Immune System
Amon L, Lehmann C.H.K, Heger L, et al. The ontogenetic path of human dendritic cells. 
Mol Immunol . 2020;120:122–129.
∗Cooper M.D, Raymond D.A, Peterson R.D, et al. The functions of the thymus system and
the bursa system in the chicken.  J Exp Med . 1966;123:75–106Miller,
1961 Miller J.F. Immunological function of the thymus.  Lancet . 1961;2:748–749 (The
discoveries that T and B cell lineages are respectively responsible for cell-mediated and
humoral immunity.).
Eisenbarth S.C. Dendritic cell subsets in T cell programming: location dictates function. 
Nat Rev Immunol . 2019;19:89–103.
Fan X, Rudensky A.Y. Hallmarks of tissue-resident lymphocytes.  Cell . 2016;164:1198–1211.
Ginhoux F, Guilliams M. Tissue-resident macrophage ontogeny and homeostasis.  Immunity
. 2016;44:439–449.
Guilliams M, Mildner A, Yona S. Developmental and functional heterogeneity of
monocytes.  Immunity . 2018;49:595–613.
Guilliams M, Ginhoux F, Jakubzick C, et al. Dendritic cells, monocytes and macrophages: a
uniﬁed nomenclature based on ontogeny.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2014;14:571–578.
Hume D.A, Irvine K.M, Pridans C. The mononuclear phagocyte system: the relationship
between monocytes and macrophages.  Trends Immunol . 2019;40:98–112.
Lavin Y, Mortha A, Rahman A, Merad M. Regulation of macrophage development and
function in peripheral tissues.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2015;15:731–744.
Lawrence S.M, Corriden R, Nizet V. The ontogeny of a neutrophil: mechanisms of
granulopoiesis and homeostasis.  Microbiol Mol Biol Rev . 2018;82 e00057-17.
Mildner A, Jung S. Development and function of dendritic cell subsets.  Immunity
. 2014;40:642–656.
Swiecki M, Colonna M. The multifaceted biology of plasmacytoid dendritic cells.  Nat Rev
Immunol . 2015;15:471–485.
Tissues of the Immune System
Bronte V, PiĴet M.J. The spleen in local and systemic regulation of immunity.  Immunity
. 2013;39:806–818.
Farley A.M, Morris L.X, Vroegindeweij E, et al. Dynamics of thymus organogenesis and
colonization in early human development.  Development . 2013;140:2015–2026.
Fletcher A.L, Acton S.E, Knoblich K. Lymph node ﬁbroblastic reticular cells in health and
disease.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2015;15:350–361.
Grant S.M, Lou M, Yao L, et al. The lymph node at a glance: how spatial organization
optimizes the immune response.  J Cell Sci . 2020;133:jcs241828.
Krishnamurty A.T, Turley S.J. Lymph node stromal cells: cartographers of the immune
system.  Nat Immunol . 2020;21:369–380.
Lewis S.M, Williams A, Eisenbarth S.C. Structure and function of the immune system in
the spleen.  Sci Immunol . 2019;4 eaau6085.
Petrova T.V, Koh G.Y. Organ-speciﬁc lymphatic vasculature: from development to
pathophysiology.  J Exp Med . 2018;215:35–49.
Chapter 3: Leukocyte Circulation
and Migration Into Tissues
Overview of Leukocyte Migration,
Adhesion Molecules on Leukocytes and Endothelial Cells
Involved in Leukocyte Recruitment,
Selectins and Selectin Ligands,
Integrins and Integrin Ligands,
Chemokines and Chemokine Receptors,
Chemokine Structure, Production, and
Receptors,
Functions of Chemokines,
Other Chemoattractants and Receptors,
Leukocyte-Endothelial Interactions and Leukocyte
Recruitment into Tissues,
Migration of Neutrophils and Monocytes to Sites of
Infection or Tissue Injury,
Migration and Recirculation of T Lymphocytes,
Recirculation of Naive T Lymphocytes Between
Blood and Secondary Lymphoid Organs,
Recirculation of T Cells Through Other
Lymphoid Tissues,
Migration of Effector T Lymphocytes to Sites
of Infection,
Memory T Cell Migration,
Migration of B Lymphocytes,
Recirculation of Naive Follicular B Cells,
Migration of Antibody Secreting Plasmablasts
and Memory B Cells,
Summary,
A unique property of the immune system that distinguishes it from
all other physiological systems in the body is the constant and
highly regulated movement of its major cellular components
through the blood, into tissues, and often back into the blood
again. This movement accomplishes three main functions (Fig. 3.1):
• Delivery of leukocytes of myeloid lineage (mainly
neutrophils and monocytes) from the circulation into tissue
sites of infection or injury, where the cells perform their
protective functions of eliminating infectious pathogens,
clearing dead tissues, and repairing the damage.
• Delivery of lymphocytes from their sites of maturation
(bone marrow or thymus) to secondary lymphoid organs,
where the cells recognize antigens, proliferate, and
diﬀerentiate into eﬀector and memory lymphocytes.
• Delivery of eﬀector lymphocytes from the secondary
lymphoid organs in which they were produced to sites of
infection in any tissue, where they perform their protective
functions.
Because of the ability of immune cells to disseminate throughout
the body, an immune response may be initiated at one site but may
be active at distant locations. In other words, immunity is both
local and systemic.
The migration of a leukocyte out of the blood and into a
particular tissue, or to a site of an infection or injury, is often called
leukocyte homing, and the general process of leukocyte movement
from blood into tissues is called migration or recruitment. The
ability of lymphocytes to repeatedly home to secondary lymphoid
organs, reside there transiently, and return to the blood is called
recirculation. The recruitment of leukocytes and plasma proteins
from the blood to sites of infection and tissue injury is a major part
of the process of inﬂammation. Inﬂammation is triggered by
recognition of microbes and injured or dead cells in innate immune
responses and is reﬁned and prolonged during adaptive immune
responses. The inﬂammatory response delivers the cells and
molecules of host defense to the sites where oﬀending agents need
to be combated. The same process is responsible for causing tissue
damage and underlies many important diseases. We will return to
inﬂammation in the context of innate immunity in Chapter 4 and in
the discussion of inﬂammatory diseases in Chapter 19.
Overview of Leukocyte Migration
Leukocyte homing and recruitment to diﬀerent tissues are
governed by some general principles.
• Naive lymphocytes continuously migrate mainly into
secondary lymphoid organs, whereas lymphocytes that have
been previously activated by antigen (e.g., eﬀector
lymphocytes), as well as myeloid leukocytes, preferentially
home into tissues where there is infection or tissue injury.
Memory lymphocytes migrate into lymphoid organs,
mucosal tissues, skin, and other tissues.
FIGURE 3.1  The main functions served by
leukocyte migration from blood into tissues.
A, Neutrophils and monocytes that arise in
the bone marrow, circulate in the blood, and
are recruited into tissue sites of infection or
injury, where they eliminate infectious
pathogens, clear dead tissues, and repair the
damage. B, Naive lymphocytes that arise in
bone marrow or thymus home to secondary
lymphoid organs, such as lymph nodes (or
spleen, not shown), where they become
activated by antigens and differentiate into
effector lymphocytes. C, Effector
lymphocytes that develop in secondary
lymphoid organs migrate into tissue sites of
infection, where they participate in microbial
defense. Memory lymphocytes (not shown)
migrate between among, secondary lymphoid
organs, and normal or infected tissues.
TABLE 3.1
CLA-1, Cutaneous lymphocyte antigen 1; GlyCAM-1, glycan-bearing cell adhesion
molecule 1; HEV, high endothelial venule; ICAM-1, intracellular adhesion molecule 1; IL-
1, interleukin-1; LFA-1, leukocyte function–associated antigen 1; MAdCAM-1, mucosal
addressin cell adhesion molecule 1; PNAd, peripheral node addressin; PSGL-1, P-
selectin glycoprotein ligand 1; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; VCAM-1, vascular cell
adhesion molecule 1; VLA-4, very late antigen 4.
• Leukocyte homing and recruitment require the adhesion of
leukocytes to the endothelial lining of postcapillary venules,
a process that involves molecules on the surfaces of both
the leukocytes (adhesion molecules and chemokine
receptors) and endothelial cells (adhesion molecules and
chemokines).
• Endothelial cells at sites of infection and tissue injury are
activated by cytokines secreted by sentinel cells in the
tissues (including dendritic cells [DCs], macrophages, and
mast cells), which induce increased expression of adhesion
molecules and chemokines. The consequence is increased
adhesiveness of the endothelial cells for circulating myeloid
leukocytes and previously activated lymphocytes.
• Because microbes and necrotic tissues stimulate the
expression of molecules that mediate leukocyte-endothelial
adhesion at the sites of infection or injury, eﬀector
leukocytes migrate through endothelium mainly when and
where they are needed.
The basic process of leukocyte migration into tissues is the same
for the homing of diﬀerent types of leukocytes (neutrophils,
monocytes, and naive and eﬀector lymphocytes) to diﬀerent types
of tissues (secondary lymphoid organs, infected tissues), although
the speciﬁc chemokines and adhesion molecules vary in ways that
result in distinct paĴerns of migration for diﬀerent cell types.
Before describing the process, we will discuss the properties and
functions of the adhesion molecules and chemokines that are
involved in leukocyte recruitment.
Adhesion Molecules on Leukocytes and
Endothelial Cells Involved in Leukocyte
Recruitment
Adhesion of circulating leukocytes to vascular endothelial cells is
mediated by two classes of molecules, called selectins and integrins,
and their ligands. The expression of these molecules varies among
diﬀerent types of leukocytes and in blood vessels at diﬀerent
locations.
Selectins and Selectin Ligands
Selectins are plasma membrane carbohydrate-binding adhesion
molecules that mediate an initial step of low-aﬃnity adhesion of
circulating leukocytes to endothelial cells lining postcapillary
venules (Table 3.1) . The extracellular domains of selectins are
similar to C-type lectins, so called because they bind carbohydrate
structures (lectins are carbohydrate-binding proteins) in a calcium-
dependent manner. Selectins and their ligands are expressed on
leukocytes and endothelial cells. Importantly, the expression of
selectins and their ligands is increased by exposure to cytokines
produced at sites of tissue injury and infection, and this is one
mechanism by which leukocytes are recruited to sites of
inﬂammation.
Endothelial cells express two types of selectins, called P-selectin
(CD62P) and E-selectin (CD62E). P-selectin, so named because it
was ﬁrst found in platelets, is stored in cytoplasmic granules of
endothelial cells and is rapidly redistributed to the luminal surface
in response to histamine from mast cells and thrombin generated
during blood coagulation. E-selectin is synthesized and expressed
on the endothelial cell surface within 1 to 2 hours in response to the
cytokines interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF),
which are produced by tissue sentinel cells (DCs and macrophages)
in 
response 
to 
infection. 
Microbial 
products 
such 
as
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) also stimulate E-selectin expression on
endothelial cells. We will describe IL-1, TNF, and LPS in our
discussion of inﬂammation in Chapter 4.
The ligands on leukocytes that bind to E-selectin and P-selectin
on endothelial cells are complex sialylated carbohydrates related to
the Lewis X or Lewis A family of blood group molecules. These
chemical structures are present on various surface glycoproteins of
granulocytes, monocytes, and some previously activated eﬀector
and memory T cells. The best deﬁned of these is the tetrasaccharide
sialyl Lewis X. (The structure was originally identiﬁed as an antigen
on red blood cells in studies of genetically related people with the
family name Lewis). A leukocyte membrane glycoprotein called P-
selectin glycoprotein ligand 1 (PSGL-1) is post-translationally
modiﬁed to display sialyl Lewis X, which serves as the major
carbohydrate ligand for P-selectin. Several diﬀerent molecules may
display the carbohydrate ligand for E-selectin, including the
glycoproteins PSGL-1 and E-selectin ligand-1 and some glycolipids.
A third selectin, called L-selectin (CD62L), is expressed on
leukocytes and not on endothelial cells. The ligands for L-selectin
are sialomucins on endothelial cells, whose expression may be
increased by cytokine activation of the cells. A major recognition
determinant that L-selectin binds to on these sialomucins is sialyl
6-sulfo Lewis X. The expression of the ligand on endothelial cells is
increased by IL-1, TNF, and other inﬂammatory cytokines, so L-
selectin on neutrophils promotes the adhesion of these cells to
endothelial cells at sites of inﬂammation. In adaptive immunity, L-
selectin is required for naive T and B lymphocyte homing into
lymph nodes through specialized blood vessels called high
endothelial venules (HEVs). The sialomucin ligands on HEVs that
bind to L-selectin on naive lymphocytes are collectively called
peripheral node addressin (PNAd). Leukocytes express L-selectin
and the carbohydrate ligands for P-selectin and E-selectin at the
tips of their microvilli, facilitating interactions with molecules on
the endothelial cell surface.
Integrins and Integrin Ligands
Integrins are cell surface proteins that mediate adhesion of cells to
other cells or to extracellular matrix, through speciﬁc binding
interactions with various ligands. There are more than 30 diﬀerent
integrins, all of which are heterodimers containing one of more
than 15 types of α chains and one of seven types of β chains. The
extracellular globular heads of both chains contribute to ligand
binding. The cytoplasmic domains of the integrins interact with
cytoskeletal components (including vinculin, talin, actin, α-actinin,
and tropomyosin). The name integrin for this family of proteins
derives from the idea that these proteins integrate signals triggered
by extracellular ligands with cytoskeleton-dependent motility,
shape change, and phagocytic responses. Although we will focus on
the leukocyte adhesive functions of integrins, these molecules have
many other biological functions, including adhesion, proliferation
and diﬀerentiation of epithelial cells, and platelet adhesion and
aggregation during blood coagulation. Inﬂammatory cytokines and
other signals increase endothelial expression of integrin ligands
and binding aﬃnity of leukocyte integrins, thus promoting
leukocyte adhesion to endothelium at sites of inﬂammation.
In the immune system, two important integrins that are
expressed on myeloid cells and lymphocytes are leukocyte
function–associated antigen 1 (LFA-1), more precisely named αLβ2
or CD11aCD18, and very late antigen 4 (VLA-4), also named α4β1 or
CD49dCD29 (see Table 3.1). One important ligand for LFA-1 is
intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1, CD54), a membrane
glycoprotein expressed on cytokine-activated endothelial cells and
on a variety of other cell types, including lymphocytes, DCs,
macrophages, 
ﬁbroblasts, 
and 
most 
epithelial 
cells. 
The
extracellular portion of ICAM-1 is composed of globular domains,
called immunoglobulin (Ig) domains, which share sequence
homology and structural features with domains found in Ig
molecules. Many proteins in the immune system contain Ig
domains and belong to the Ig superfamily (see Chapter 5). LFA-1
binding to ICAM-1 is important for leukocyte-endothelial
interactions (discussed later) and T cell interactions with antigen-
presenting cells (APCs) (see Chapter 9). Two other Ig superfamily
ligands for LFA-1 are ICAM-2, which is expressed on endothelial
cells, and ICAM-3, which is expressed on lymphocytes. VLA-4 binds
to vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1, CD106), an Ig
superfamily protein expressed on cytokine-activated endothelial
cells in some tissues. Other integrins also play roles in innate and
adaptive immune responses. For example, MAC-1 (αMβ2,
CD11bCD18, or complement receptor 3 [CR3]) on circulating
monocytes 
binds 
to 
ICAM-1 
and 
mediates 
adhesion 
to
endothelium. MAC-1 also functions as a complement receptor, as
does another integrin of the β2 family known as CD11cCD18 (αXβ2,
complement receptor 4 [CR4]); both bind particles opsonized with a
product of complement activation called the inactivated C3b (iC3b)
fragment (discussed in Chapters 4 and 13), and thereby enhance
phagocytosis of microbes. CD11cCD18 is expressed mainly on DCs
but also on other myeloid cells and activated B cells. It helps DCs
ingest apoptotic cells. The integrin α4β7 is expressed on
lymphocytes that home to intestinal mucosa and binds to an
endothelial protein called mucosal addressin cell adhesion
molecule 1 (MAdCAM-1). αEβ7 (CD103) is an integrin that binds to
an epithelial adhesion molecule called E-cadherin. αEβ7 is
expressed on subsets of T cells and DCs that are found within
epithelial layers of mucosa.
Integrins rapidly increase aﬃnity for their ligands in response to
intracellular signals, which are induced in all leukocytes by
chemokine binding to chemokine receptors and in T cells by antigen
binding to antigen receptors. Chemokine receptor and antigen
receptor engagement trigger signaling pathways (described in more
detail in Chapter 7) that lead to the association of RAP family small
GTPase proteins and cytoskeleton-interacting proteins with the
cytoplasmic tails of the integrin proteins. This results in
conformational changes in the extracellular domains of the
integrins that lead to increased aﬃnity (Fig. 3.2). In the low-aﬃnity
state, the stalks of the extracellular domains of each integrin
subunit are bent over, and the ligand-binding globular heads are
close to the plasma membrane. In response to alterations in the
cytoplasmic tail, the stalks extend, bringing the globular heads
away from the membrane to a position where they more eﬀectively
interact with their ligands. The process by which intracellular
signals, generated in response to chemokines or antigen, alter the
binding functions of the extracellular domain of integrins is called
inside-out signaling.
FIGURE 3.2  Integrin activation. A, The integrins on
blood leukocytes are normally in a low-affinity
state. If a leukocyte comes close to endothelial
cells, such as when selectin-dependent rolling of
leukocytes occurs, then chemokines displayed on
the endothelial surface can bind chemokine
receptors on the leukocyte. Chemokine receptor
signaling then occurs, which activates the
leukocyte integrins, increasing their affinity for
their ligands on the endothelial cells. B, Ribbon
diagrams are shown of bent and extended
conformations of a leukocyte integrin,
corresponding to low- and high-affinity states,
respectively. ICAM-1, Intercellular adhesion
molecule 1. 
B, From Takagi J, Springer TA. Integrin activation and structural
rearrangement.Immunol Rev. 2002;186:141–163.
Chemokines also induce clustering of integrins on leukocyte
surfaces. This results in higher local concentration of integrins at
the sites of interaction with endothelial cells, where the chemokines
are displayed, leading to increased overall strength (avidity) of
integrin-mediated leukocyte binding to the endothelium.
Chemokines and Chemokine Receptors
Chemokines are a large family of structurally homologous cytokines
that stimulate leukocyte movement and regulate the migration of
leukocytes from the blood to tissues. Chemokines stimulate
movement of leukocytes along the concentration gradient of the
secreted proteins toward their source, a process called chemotaxis
(or chemoaĴraction). The name chemokine is a contraction of
chemotactic cytokine. We referred to the role of chemokines in the
organization of lymphoid tissues in Chapter 2, and now we will
describe the general properties of this family of cytokines and their
multiple functions in innate and adaptive immunity. Table 3.2
summarizes the major features of selected chemokines and their
receptors.
Chemokine Structure, Production, and
Receptors
Most chemokines are 8- to 10-kD polypeptides that contain two
internal disulﬁde loops and four cysteine residues that are
responsible for the tertiary structure. There are 47 human
chemokines, which are classiﬁed into four families on the basis of
the number and location of two of the conserved cysteines. The two
major families are the CC (also called β) chemokines, in which the
two deﬁning cysteine residues are adjacent, and the CXC (or α)
chemokines, in which these residues are separated by one amino
acid. In both mice and humans, the genes encoding most of the CC
or CXC chemokines are found in distinct clusters on diﬀerent
chromosomes. A few additional chemokines have either a single
cysteine (C family) or two cysteines separated by three amino acids
(CX3C). There are two structural variants of CXC chemokines, some
that have the amino acid sequence glutamic acid–leucine-arginine
(called ELR motifs) just before the ﬁrst cysteine of the CXC motif
and others without the ELR motif. CXC chemokines with ELR
motifs support neutrophil migration. The other CXC chemokines
and the CC chemokines act on monocytes, lymphocytes, and other
leukocytes. Chemokines were originally named on the basis of how
they were identiﬁed and what responses they triggered, but a
standard nomenclature has been adopted and coordinated with
names for the receptors the chemokines bind to (see Table 3.2). The
CC chemokines are named CCL1 through CCL28, and the CXC
chemokines are named CXCL1 through CXCL17.
Chemokines bind tightly to glycosaminoglycans with sulfated N-
acetyllactosamine disaccharide repeat units, and there is speciﬁcity
for which chemokines bind depending on the length of the chain of
repeats and the paĴern of sulfation. These glycosaminoglycans on
the surface of endothelial cells or in extravascular matrices display
the bound chemokines to chemokine receptors expressed on
migrating cells.
The chemokines of the CC and CXC subfamilies are produced by
leukocytes and by several types of tissue cells, such as endothelial
cells, epithelial cells, resident macrophages, ﬁbroblasts, and other
stromal cells. In many of these cells, secretion of chemokines is
induced by recognition of microbes through various cellular
receptors of the innate immune system, discussed in Chapter 4. In
addition, inﬂammatory cytokines, including TNF, IL-1, and IL-17,
induce chemokine production. Several CC chemokines are also
produced by activated T cells, providing a link between adaptive
immunity and recruitment of inﬂammatory leukocytes.
TABLE 3.2
CTL, Cytotoxic T lymphocyte; IL, Interleukin; NK, natural killer cells.
The receptors for chemokines belong to the seven-transmembrane,
guanosine 
triphosphate–binding 
(G) 
protein–coupled 
receptor
(GPCR) 
superfamily. 
These 
receptors 
initiate 
intracellular
responses through associated trimeric G proteins. All chemokine
receptors mediating immune cell migration share an amino acid
sequence motif (DRYLAIV) at the end of the third transmembrane
domain that is required for interaction with G proteins. The G
proteins stimulate signaling events that result in cytoskeletal
changes and polymerization of actin and myosin ﬁlaments,
resulting in increased cell motility. As previously discussed, these
signals also increase the aﬃnity of the integrins for their ligands.
Diﬀerent combinations of chemokine receptors are expressed on
diﬀerent types of leukocytes, resulting in distinct paĴerns of
migration of these cells. There are 10 diﬀerent receptors for CC
chemokines (called CCR1 through CCR10), seven for CXC
chemokines (called CXCR1 through CXCR6 and CXCR8), one for
the C chemokine (called XCR1), and one for CX3CL1 (called
CX3CR1) (see Table 3.2). Chemokine receptors are expressed on all
leukocytes, with the greatest number and diversity seen on T cells.
The receptors exhibit overlapping speciﬁcity for chemokines within
each family, and the paĴern of cellular expression of the receptors
determines which cell types respond to which chemokines. Certain
chemokine receptors, notably CCR5 and CXCR4, act as coreceptors
for entry of human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) into cells (see
Chapter 21).
A distinct set of chemokine receptors, called atypical chemokine
receptors (ACKRs), does not engage heterodimeric G-protein
signaling pathways that activate leukocytes but rather is involved in
inhibiting or terminating chemokine responses in cells. There are
four human ACKRs, expressed on many diﬀerent cell types, that
together bind most of the inﬂammatory chemokines with high
aﬃnity. One particular ACKR, ACKR1 or DARC, is found on
erythrocytes and on the specialized endothelium of postcapillary
venules (the site of leukocyte migration from the blood into
tissues). ACKRs signal through a pathway dependent on G-protein
regulatory proteins called β-arrestins, which bind to chemokine
receptors 
with 
aĴached 
chemokines 
and 
simulate 
the
internalization and degradation of these receptors.
Functions of Chemokines
Some chemokines are produced by cells in response to external
stimuli and are involved in inﬂammatory reactions. Other
chemokines are produced constitutively in tissues and maintain the
distribution of cells in these tissues, such as localization of T and B
cells in lymphoid organs.
• In inﬂammatory reactions, chemokines serve to recruit
circulating leukocytes from blood vessels into extravascular
sites. Diﬀerent groups of chemokines bind to chemokine
receptors expressed on diﬀerent cells and, in coordination
with the types of adhesion molecules expressed, control the
nature of the inﬂammatory inﬁltrate. Chemokines play two
roles in inﬂammation.
○ Increased adhesion of leukocytes to endothelium.
Chemokines produced in the tissues bind to heparan
sulfate proteoglycans on endothelial cells that line
postcapillary venules. The bound chemokines are
displayed in this way to circulating leukocytes that are
aĴached to the endothelial surfaces through adhesion
molecule interactions. Endothelial display provides a
high local concentration of chemokines, enabling them
to bind to chemokine receptors on the leukocytes.
Signals from chemokine receptors lead to enhanced
integrin aﬃnity, which results in ﬁrm adhesion of the
leukocyte, a critical step for migration of leukocytes out
of blood vessels into extravascular tissue.
○ Migration of leukocytes through blood vessels and
toward the site of infection or tissue damage.
Chemokines produced in the extravascular tissues act
on leukocytes that have migrated through the
endothelium and exited the circulation. The leukocytes
migrate toward infected and damaged cells in tissues,
where chemokines are produced and are at the highest
concentration.
• Chemokines are involved in the development of lymphoid
organs, and they regulate the traﬃc of lymphocytes and
other leukocytes through diﬀerent regions of secondary
lymphoid organs. Because these chemokines are expressed
constitutively and maintain normal tissue architecture, they
are referred to as homeostatic. We discussed the function of
chemokines in the anatomic organization of lymphoid
organs in Chapter 2. Some homeostatic chemokines are also
induced under inﬂammatory conditions and contribute to
leukocyte migration out of blood vessels into tissues.
• Chemokines are required for the migration of DCs from sites
of infection into draining lymph nodes. DCs are activated by
microbes in peripheral tissues, and they then migrate to
lymph nodes to inform T lymphocytes of the presence of
infection (discussed in Chapter 6). This migration depends
on expression of a chemokine receptor, CCR7, which is
induced when the DCs encounter microbes, and
chemokines produced in lymphatics and lymphoid tissues
that bind to CCR7. Naive T cells also express CCR7, and this
explains how DCs and naive T cells localize to the same
place in lymph nodes, enabling the DCs to present antigen
to the T cells.
Other Chemoattractants and Receptors
Several other types of molecules serve similar functions as
chemokines in the immune system, promoting leukocyte migration
into inﬂammatory sites and their directed movement in tissues or
maintaining spatial separation of lymphocytes in secondary
lymphoid organs. The C3a and C5a complement fragments
generated by activation of complement (described in Chapters 4
and 13), and the arachidonic acid metabolite leukotriene B4 (LTB4)
are important chemoaĴractants that promote neutrophil and
monocyte migration during acute inﬂammatory responses. Other
lipid molecules play critical roles in movement of lymphocytes and
DCs in lymph nodes, spleen, and mucosal lymphoid tissues. These
include sphingosine 1-phosphate, a lipid required for egress of
lymphocytes out of lymphoid organs, which is discussed later in
this chapter, and oxysterols involved in organizing lymphoid
follicles and directing movement of B cells during germinal center
reactions, discussed in Chapter 12. All of these chemoaĴractant
molecules, like chemokines, bind to speciﬁc GPCRs expressed on
the leukocytes.
Leukocyte-Endothelial Interactions and
Leukocyte Recruitment into Tissues
Leukocyte recruitment from the blood into tissues requires adhesion
of the leukocytes to the endothelial lining of postcapillary venules
and then movement through the endothelium and vessel wall into the
extravascular tissue. Leutkocyte recruitment into tissues is a key
event in inﬂammatory reactions. It is a multistep process in which
each step is orchestrated by diﬀerent types of adhesion molecules
and chemokines. Studies of the interactions of leukocytes with
endothelium in vitro under conditions that mimic ﬂowing blood,
and in vivo using intravital microscopic techniques, have
established a sequence of events common to migration of most
leukocytes into most tissues (Fig. 3.3). The steps in this process are
the following:
FIGURE 3.3  Multistep leukocyte-endothelial
interactions mediating leukocyte recruitment into
tissues. 1. Production of cytokines at site of
infection and tissue injury. 2. Selectin-mediated
rolling of leukocytes. 3. Increase in integrin
affinity. 4. Integrin-mediated firm attachment of
leukocytes to endothelium. 5. Transmigration of
leukocytes through endothelium. 6. Migration of
leukocytes to site of infection and tissue injury.
• Selectin-mediated rolling of leukocytes on endothelium.
Macrophages, DCs, and other cells that encounter microbes
in extravascular tissues are activated to secrete cytokines,
including TNF and IL-1. These cytokines stimulate
endothelial cells lining postcapillary venules at the site of
an infection to express E-selectin. Endothelial cells also
express P-selectin in response to histamine released from
microbe-activated mast cells, and thrombin produced
during blood coagulation, which occurs commonly in
inﬂammatory reactions. At these sites, blood vessels dilate
and blood ﬂow slows. As a result, leukocytes, being larger
than red cells, tend to move away from the central axial ﬂow
and closer to the vessel lining, a process known as
margination. This allows the ligands for E- and P-selectins
expressed on the microvilli of the leukocytes to bind to the
selectins that have been induced on the endothelial cells.
Because the interactions of selectins with their ligands are
of low aﬃnity (K d ∼100 µm) with a fast oﬀ-rate, they are
easily disrupted by the shear force of the ﬂowing blood. As
a result, the selectin–selectin ligand bonds repeatedly form
and break, and the leukocytes are pushed along the
endothelial surface in a rolling motion. This slowing of
leukocytes on the endothelium allows the next set of stimuli
in the multistep process to act on the leukocytes.
• Chemokine-mediated increase in aﬃnity of integrins.
Chemokines displayed on endothelial cells of postcapillary
venules at the infection site bind to their receptors on the
rolling leukocytes. As discussed before, this results in
stronger binding of leukocyte integrins to their ligands on
the endothelial surface.
• Stable integrin-mediated arrest of leukocytes on endothelium.
In parallel with the activation of integrins, the expression of
their ligands on the endothelial cells is upregulated by
inﬂammatory cytokines and microbial products. These
ligands include VCAM-1, which binds the integrin VLA-4,
and ICAM-1, which binds LFA-1 and MAC-1 integrins.
Thus, the leukocytes aĴach ﬁrmly to the endothelium, their
cytoskeleton is reorganized, and they spread out on the
endothelial surface.
• Transmigration of leukocytes through the endothelium.
Leukocytes usually migrate out of blood vessels between
endothelial cells, a process called paracellular
transmigration or diapedesis, to reach extravascular tissues.
Paracellular transmigration depends on interactions of
integrins on the leukocytes and their ligands on the
endothelial cells, as well as the contribution of other
proteins, notably CD31, which is expressed on leukocytes
and endothelial cells. This process requires a transient and
reversible disruption of adherens junction proteins,
primarily the VE-cadherin complex, that hold endothelial
cells together. The mechanism responsible for disruption of
the VE-cadherin complex involves activation of kinases
when leukocyte integrins bind ICAM-1 or VCAM-1. The
kinases phosphorylate the cytoplasmic tail of VE-cadherin,
which leads to reversible disruption of the adherens
complex. Less often, leukocytes have been observed to
move through endothelial cells rather than between them,
by a poorly understood process called transcellular
migration.
These basic steps are seen in the migration of all leukocytes
through the endothelium. However, neutrophils, monocytes, and
diﬀerent subsets of lymphocytes diﬀer in which tissues they
migrate into and when they do so in inﬂammatory reactions and
the steady state. These paĴerns of leukocyte migration are
dependent on the expression of distinct combinations of adhesion
molecules and chemokine receptors, as we will discuss in more
detail later.
Evidence for the essential role of selectins, integrins, and
chemokines in leukocyte migration came ﬁrst from antibody-
blockade studies and gene knockout mice and then from the
discovery of rare inherited human diseases called leukocyte
adhesion deﬁciencies (see Chapter 21). An autosomal recessive
inherited deﬁciency in the CD18 gene, which encodes the β subunit
of LFA-1, MAC-1, and CD11cCD18, is the cause of an immune
deﬁciency disease called type 1 leukocyte adhesion deﬁciency
(LAD-1), in which there are marked defects in leukocyte migration
and immune responses. Patients who lack the Golgi GDP-fucose
transporter needed to express the carbohydrate ligands for E-
selectin and P-selectin on neutrophils have similar problems,
resulting in a syndrome called type 2 leukocyte adhesion deﬁciency
(LAD-2). These disorders are characterized by recurrent bacterial
and fungal infections, lack of neutrophil accumulation at sites of
infection, 
and 
defects 
in 
adherence-dependent 
lymphocyte
functions. Rare human mutations in the signaling pathways linking
chemokine receptors to integrin activation also result in impaired
leukocyte adhesion and recruitment into tissues and therefore
ineﬀective leukocyte defense against infections, a syndrome called
type 3 leukocyte adhesion deﬁciency (LAD-3).
Migration of Neutrophils and Monocytes to
Sites of Infection or Tissue Injury
After maturing in the bone marrow, neutrophils and monocytes
enter the blood and circulate throughout the body. Although these
cells can perform some phagocytic functions within the blood, their
main functions, including phagocytosis and destruction of
microbes and dead tissue cells, take place in extravascular sites of
infection virtually anywhere in the body.
Blood neutrophils and monocytes are recruited to tissue sites of
infection and injury by a selectin-, integrin-, and chemokine-
dependent multistep process, which follows the basic sequence
common to the migration of all leukocytes into tissues, discussed
earlier. As we will consider in detail in Chapter 4, neutrophils are
usually the most numerous type of leukocyte to accumulate in
tissues within 24 to 48 hours after the onset of an infection or
injury, and are then replaced by monocytes. This probably reﬂects
the fact that there are many more neutrophils in the blood, and
they respond more rapidly to chemokines compared to monocytes
or other leukocytes. After entering tissues, neutrophils have short
life spans before dying by apoptosis whereas monocytes survive
longer and may also proliferate in the tissues. However, in some
inﬂammatory sites, neutrophils are not recruited at all, but
monocytes are. These diﬀerent migratory behaviors likely reﬂect
variations in relative expression of adhesion molecules and
chemokine 
receptors 
on 
neutrophils 
versus 
monocytes.
Neutrophils express CXCR1 and CXCR2, which bind CXCL1 and
CXCL8 (IL-8), the major chemokines with ELR motifs that support
neutrophil migration into tissues (see Table 3.2). Early neutrophil
recruitment is a consequence of early and abundant CXCL8
production by tissue-resident macrophages and other cells in
response to infections. In contrast to neutrophils, classical
monocytes, which are the main type of monocyte recruited to
inﬂammatory sites, express CCR2. This receptor binds several
chemokines, the most important one for monocyte recruitment
being CCL2 (MCP-1). Thus, monocyte recruitment occurs when
resident tissue cells produce CCL2 in response to infection.
Migration and Recirculation of T
Lymphocytes
Lymphocytes are continuously moving through the blood, lymphatic
vessels, secondary lymphoid organs, and nonlymphoid tissues, and
distinct populations of lymphocytes show diﬀerent traﬃcking
paĴerns through these sites (Fig. 3.4) . When a mature naive T cell
emerges from the thymus and enters the blood, it homes to lymph
nodes, spleen, or mucosal lymphoid tissues and migrates into the T
cell zones of these secondary lymphoid tissues. If the T cell does
not recognize antigen in these sites, it remains naive and leaves the
nodes or mucosal tissue through lymphatics and eventually drains
back into the blood stream. Once back in the blood, a naive T cell
repeats its cycle of homing to secondary lymphoid organs. This
traﬃcking paĴern of naive lymphocytes, called lymphocyte
recirculation, maximizes the chances that the small number of
naive lymphocytes that are speciﬁc for a particular foreign antigen
will encounter that antigen if it shows up anywhere in the body.
Lymphocytes that have recognized and become activated by
antigen within secondary lymphoid organs proliferate and
diﬀerentiate to produce thousands of eﬀector and memory cells.
The eﬀector and memory lymphocytes may move back into the
blood stream and then migrate into sites of infection or
inﬂammation in nonlymphoid tissues.
Some eﬀector and memory lymphocyte subsets preferentially
home to a particular tissue, such as skin or gut (see Chapter 14).
The existence of diﬀerent homing paĴerns ensures that diﬀerent
subsets of lymphocytes that are specialized to defend against
diﬀerent types of microbes, such as parasites, extracellular fungi
and bacteria, or intracellular bacteria, are delivered to the tissues
where those microbes are and not, wastefully, to places where they
would serve no purpose.
In the following section, we describe the mechanisms and
pathways of lymphocyte recirculation and homing. Our discussion
emphasizes T cells because more is known about their movement
through tissues than is known about B cell recirculation, but many
of the same mechanisms appear to mediate the recirculation of
both cell types.
FIGURE 3.4  Pathways of T lymphocyte
recirculation.Naive T cells preferentially leave the
blood and enter lymph nodes across the high
endothelial venules. Dendritic cells bearing antigen
enter the lymph nodes through lymphatic vessels.
Naive T cells that do not recognize antigen after
several hours return to the circulation. If the T
cells recognize antigen, they are activated and
generate effector and memory T cells, which also
leave the lymph node and return to the circulation.
Effector and memory T cells preferentially leave
the blood and enter peripheral tissues through
venules at sites of inflammation. Recirculation
through secondary lymphoid organs other than
lymph nodes is not shown.
Recirculation of Naive T Lymphocytes
Between Blood and Secondary Lymphoid
Organs
T lymphocyte recirculation depends on mechanisms that control
entry of naive T cells from the blood into lymph nodes, as well as
molecular signals that control the exit of naive T cells from the
nodes. We will discuss these two mechanisms separately.
Migration of Naive T Cells Into Lymph Nodes
The homing mechanisms that bring naive T cells into lymph nodes
are very eﬃcient, resulting in a net ﬂux of lymphocytes through
lymph nodes that is estimated to be up to 25 × 109 cells each day.
On average, every naive T lymphocyte in the body goes through at
least one node once a day. Peripheral tissue inﬂammation, which
usually accompanies infections, causes a signiﬁcant increase of
blood ﬂow into lymph nodes draining the aﬀected tissue and
consequently an increase in T cell inﬂux into those lymph nodes. At
the same time, egress of the T cells into eﬀerent lymphatics is
transiently reduced by mechanisms we will discuss later, so that T
cells stay in lymph nodes that drain sites of inﬂammation longer
than in other lymph nodes. Protein antigens are concentrated in the
lymph nodes and other secondary lymphoid organs, where they are
presented to T cells by DCs, the type of APCs best able to initiate
responses of naive T cells (see Chapter 6). Thus, movement and
transient retention of naive T cells in the secondary lymphoid
organs, together with capture and concentration of antigen,
maximize the chances of T cell activation and initiation of an
adaptive immune response.
FIGURE 3.5  High endothelial venules. A, Light
micrograph of ahigh endothelial venules (HEVs) in
a lymph node, illustrating the tall endothelial cells.
B, Expression of L-selectin ligand on HEVs,
stained with a specific antibody by the
immunoperoxidase technique. (The location of the
antibody is revealed by a brown reaction product
of peroxidase, which is coupled to the antibody;
see Appendix III for details.) The HEVs are
abundant in the T cell zone of the lymph node. C,
A binding assay in which lymphocytes are
incubated with frozen sections of a lymph node.
The lymphocytes (stained dark blue) bind
selectively to HEVs. D, Scanning electron
micrograph of an HEV with lymphocytes attached
to the luminal surface of the endothelial cells. 
A, Courtesy of Dr. Steve Rosen, Department of Anatomy, University
of California, San Francisco. B, Courtesy of Drs. Steve Rosen and
Akio Kikuta, Department of Anatomy, University of California, San
Francisco. C, Courtesy of Dr. Steve Rosen, Department of
Anatomy, University of California, San Francisco. D, Courtesy of J.
Emerson and T. Yednock, University of California, San Francisco,
School of Medicine. From Rosen SD, Stoolman LM. Potential role of
cell surface lectin in lymphocyte recirculation. In: Olden K, Parent J,
eds. Vertebrate Lectins. New York, NY: Van Nostrand Reinhold;
1987.
Homing of naive T cells into lymph nodes and mucosa-associated
lymphoid tissues (MALTs) occurs through specialized postcapillary
HEVs located in the T cell zones. Naive T lymphocytes are delivered
to secondary lymphoid tissues through arterial blood ﬂow, and they
leave the circulation and migrate into the stroma of lymph nodes
through these HEVs. These vessels are lined with plump
endothelial cells and not the ﬂat endothelial cells that are typical of
other venules (Fig. 3.5). HEVs are also present in mucosal lymphoid
tissues, such as Peyer’s patches in the gut, but not in the spleen.
The endothelial cells of HEVs are specialized to display certain
adhesion molecules and chemokines on their surfaces, discussed
later, which support the selective homing of only certain
populations 
of 
lymphocytes. 
Certain 
cytokines, 
such 
as
lymphotoxin, are required for HEV development. In fact, HEVs may
develop in extralymphoid sites of chronic inﬂammation, where such
cytokines are produced for prolonged periods.
Naive T cell migration out of the blood through the HEVs into the
lymph node parenchyma involves the adhesion molecules L-selectin
and LFA-1 and the chemokine receptor CCR7. This process includes
the sequential events described earlier for migration of all
leukocytes (see Fig. 3.3), but migration across HEVs into lymphoid
tissues involves particular adhesion molecules and chemokines
(Fig. 3.6).
• The rolling of naive T cells on HEVs in secondary lymphoid
organs is mediated by L-selectin on the lymphocytes
binding to PNAd on the HEV. PNAd is a sulfated 6 sialyl
Lewis X carbohydrate aĴached to a glycoprotein backbone.
The PNAd carbohydrate group that binds L-selectin may be
aĴached to diﬀerent sialomucins on the HEVs in diﬀerent
tissues. For example, on lymph node HEVs, the L-selectin
ligand is displayed by two sialomucins, called glycan-
bearing cell adhesion molecule 1 (GlyCAM-1) and CD34. In
Peyer’s patches in the intestinal wall, the L-selectin ligand is
exhibited on a glycoprotein called MAdCAM-1, which is
also the ligand for the α4β7 integrin.
• As with leukocyte migration in other sites, the subsequent
ﬁrm adhesion of the naive T cells to the HEVs is mediated
by integrins, mainly LFA-1.
• The principal chemokines that activate the naive T cell
integrins to a high-aﬃnity state are CCL19 and CCL21,
which are uniquely involved in leukocyte homing to T cell
zones of lymphoid tissues (see Chapter 2). The main source
of CCL19 and CCL21 is ﬁbroblast reticular cells (FRCs)
within the T cell zone, and CCL21 is also constitutively
produced by HEVs. These chemokines are displayed on the
surface of the HEV and recognized by rolling lymphocytes.
Both these chemokines bind to the chemokine receptor
CCR7, which is expressed at high levels on naive T cells.
This interaction of the chemokines with CCR7 ensures that
naive T cells increase integrin avidity and are able to adhere
ﬁrmly to HEVs. Recall that CCR7 also governs DC migration
via lymphatics into lymph nodes. The important role of L-
selectin and chemokines in naive T cell homing to
secondary lymphoid organs is supported by many diﬀerent
experimental observations. Lymphocytes from L-selectin
knockout mice do not bind to peripheral lymph node HEVs,
and the mice have a marked reduction in the number of
lymphocytes in lymph nodes. There are very few naive T
cells in the lymph nodes of mice with genetic deﬁciencies in
CCL19 and CCL21 or CCR7.
FIGURE 3.6  Molecules involved in migration of
naive and effector T lymphocytes. A, Naive T
lymphocytes home to lymph nodes as a result
of L-selectin binding to peripheral node
addressin (PNAd) on HEVs, which are
present only in secondary lymphoid organs,
and as a result of binding chemokines
(CCL19 and CCL21) displayed on the surface
of the HEV. Activated T lymphocytes,
including effector cells, home to sites of
infection in peripheral tissues, and this
migration is mediated by E-selectin and P-
selectin, integrins, and chemokines that are
produced at sites of infection. Additional
chemokines and chemokine receptors,
besides the ones shown, are involved in
effector/memory T cell migration. B, The
adhesion molecules, chemokines, and
chemokine receptors involved in naive and
effector/memory T cell migration are
described. ICAM-1, Intercellular adhesion
molecule 1; LFA-1, leukocyte function–
associated antigen 1; VCAM-1, vascular cell
adhesion molecule 1; VLA-4, very late
antigen 4.
Movement of T Cells Within Secondary Lymphoid Organs
After entering lymph nodes or mucosal lymphoid tissues, T
lymphocytes and DCs actively move in ways that maximize the
chances of the two cell types interacting with one another. Initiation
of T cell–mediated immune responses requires that rare antigen-
speciﬁc naive T cells recognize speciﬁc antigens displayed on the
surface of DCs, which are also numerically rare. Although their
shared expression of CCR7 promotes the localization of both these
cell types to the same area of the lymph node or mucosal lymphoid
tissue, there are thousands of DCs and naive T cells in these
locations. However, naive T cells are remarkably motile within the
lymph node, moving like amoebas up to 12 µm/minute. T cell
movement is stimulated by CCL21 binding to CCR7 on the T cells.
The FRCs that secrete CCL19 and CCL21 form three-dimensional
networks that traverse the T cell zones of the lymph node, and the T
cells move along these FRC tracks. DCs are also distributed along
the FRC network, covering most of the surface, and, although they
are not highly motile, they constantly extend their dendrites in
diﬀerent directions. As a result, each DC can contact many T cells
over time, as many as ∼85/minute. A single naive T cell may move
along the FRC network in one lymph node for up to 24 hours, and,
therefore, if there are some DCs displaying a particular antigen in a
lymph node, a naive T cell speciﬁc for that antigen that enters the
node will likely ﬁnd one of the those DCs. Immediately after
recognizing antigen on a DC, the T cell stops moving and the
interaction with the DC is stabilized, which allows for full activation
of the T cell (see Chapter 9).
Exit of Naive and Effector T Cells From Lymph Nodes
Naive T cells that have homed into lymph nodes but fail to recognize
antigen and are not activated will eventually return to the blood
stream. This return to the blood completes one recirculation loop
and provides the naive T cells another chance to enter secondary
lymphoid organs and search for the antigens they can recognize.
The major route of reentry into the blood is through the eﬀerent
lymphatics, perhaps via other lymph nodes in the same chain, then
through the lymphatic vasculature to the thoracic duct, which
drains into the superior vena cava, or to the right lymphatic duct,
which drains into the right subclavian vein.
The egress of naive T cells from lymph nodes is dependent on a
lipid chemoaĴractant called sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P), which
binds to a GPCR family receptor on T cells called sphingosine 1-
phosphate receptor 1 (S1PR1) (Fig. 3.7) . S1P is present at higher
concentrations in the blood and lymph than in tissues. This
concentration gradient is maintained because an S1P-degrading
enzyme, S1P lyase, is present in most tissues, so the lipid is
catabolized in tissues more than in the lymph and blood. S1PR1
stimulates migration of cells toward a gradient of S1P. Circulating
naive T cells have very liĴle surface S1PR1 because the high blood
concentration of S1P causes internalization of the receptor. After a
naive T cell enters a lymph node, where S1P concentrations are low,
S1PR1 reappears on the cell surface over a period of several hours.
This time lag allows a naive T cell to interact with APCs. If the naive
T cell does not recognize any antigens before the S1PR1 receptor is
re-expressed, the T cell leaves the lymph node and is directed down
the S1P concentration gradient into the eﬀerent lymphatic, and
eventually returns to the blood.
The egress from lymph nodes of eﬀector T cells, generated from
antigen-activated naive T cells, is also dependent on S1P. When a
naive T cell is activated by antigen in the lymph node, the surface
expression of S1PR1 is suppressed for several days, and, therefore,
the ability of the cells to leave the lymphoid organ in response to an
S1P gradient is delayed. This suppression of S1PR1 is controlled in
part by cytokines called type I interferons that are produced during
innate immune responses to infections, as we will discuss in
Chapter 4. Antigenic stimulation and interferons together increase
the expression of a protein called CD69, which binds to intracellular
S1PR1 and reduces its cell surface expression. Thus, the activated T
cell becomes transiently insensitive to the S1P gradient. This allows
the antigen-activated T cells to remain in the lymphoid organ and
undergo clonal expansion and diﬀerentiation into eﬀector T cells, a
process that may take several days. When diﬀerentiation into
eﬀector cells is complete, the cells stop expressing CD69, and,
therefore, S1PR1 is again expressed on the cell surface. At the same
time, the newly generated eﬀector cells reduce expression of L-
selectin and CCR7, which previously aĴracted the naive T cells to
the lymph nodes. Therefore, the eﬀector T cells become responsive
to the concentration gradient of S1P and exit the lymph node via
the medullary sinus draining into the eﬀerent lymphatic, and
eventually re-enter the blood. S1P and the S1PR1 are also required
for mature T cell egress from the thymus and migration of B cell–
derived plasmablasts from secondary lymphoid organs.
Our understanding of the role of S1P and S1PR1 in T cell
traﬃcking is based in part on studies of a drug called ﬁngolimod
(FTY720), which binds to S1PR1 and causes its down-modulation
from the cell surface. Fingolimod blocks T cell egress from
lymphoid organs and thereby acts as an immunosuppressive drug.
It is approved for the treatment of multiple sclerosis, an
autoimmune disease of the central nervous system, and the use of
y
ﬁngolimod and other drugs with a similar mechanism of action to
treat other autoimmune diseases and graft rejection is under
investigation. Additional experimental evidence for the central role
of S1P in naive T cell traﬃcking comes from studies of mice with
genetic ablation of S1PR1. In these mice, there is failure of T cells to
leave the thymus and populate secondary lymphoid organs. If naive
T cells from S1PR1 knockout mice are injected into the circulation
of other mice, the cells enter the lymph nodes but are unable to
exit.
FIGURE 3.7  Mechanism of egress of lymphocytes
from lymphoid organs.S1P is present at relatively
high concentration in the blood and lymph and at
lower concretions within lymphoid tissues.
Circulating naive T cells have low levels of S1PR1
because the receptor is internalized after binding
S1P in the blood. Therefore, naive T cells that
have recently entered a lymph node initially cannot
sense the S1P concentration gradient between
the T cell zone of the node and the lymph in the
medullary sinus and efferent lymphatics, and
these T cells cannot exit the node. After activation
of a naive T cell by antigen, surface expression of
S1PR1 is blocked for several days, and the
activated cells also will not leave the node. S1PR1
is re-expressed after several minutes to hours for
naive T cells, or days for activated and
differentiated effector T cells, and these cells can
then sense the S1P gradient and exit the node.
The average dwell time is about 12 hours for
naive T cells in lymph nodes and about 3 days for
antigen-stimulated T cells, but this varies greatly
in different conditions.
Recirculation of T Cells Through Other
Lymphoid Tissues
Naive T cell homing into gut-associated lymphoid tissues,
including Peyer’s patches and mesenteric lymph nodes, is
fundamentally similar to homing to other lymph nodes and relies
on interactions of the T cells with HEVs. As in other tissues, these
interactions are mediated by selectins, integrins, and chemokines.
One particular feature of naive T cell homing to mesenteric lymph
nodes and Peyer’s patches is the contribution of the Ig superfamily
molecule MAdCAM-1, which is expressed on HEVs in these sites
but not typically elsewhere in the body. The two ligands on naive T
cells that bind to MAdCAM-1, L-selectin and the integrin α4β7,
both contribute to the homing of naive T cells into gut-associated
lymphoid tissues.
Naive T cell migration into the spleen through the splenic white
pulp diﬀers from migration into lymph nodes. There are no HEVs
in the spleen, and there appears to be unregulated T cell entry
through the open circulation. T cells are then directed into a T cell
zone of the white pulp by CCR7-binding chemokines. The rate of
lymphocyte passage through the spleen is very high, approximately
half the total circulating lymphocyte population every 24 hours. T
cell egress from white pulp to red pulp and the circulation is
dependent on S1P and S1PR1.
Migration of Effector T Lymphocytes to Sites
of Infection
Circulating eﬀector T cells preferentially home to peripheral tissue
sites of infection rather than lymphoid organs, because of changes in
adhesion molecule and chemokine receptor expression. Many of the
protective antimicrobial functions of eﬀector T cells must be
performed locally at sites of infections (see Chapters 10 and 11),
and, therefore, these cells must be able to leave lymphoid organs
and migrate into infected tissues. After diﬀerentiation of naive T
lymphocytes into eﬀector cells, when S1PR1 expression is restored
and expression of CCR7 and L-selectin is lost, the eﬀector T cells
also start expressing receptors for inﬂammatory chemokines
produced at infection sites and the ligands for E- and P-selectins.
These changes impair homing of the eﬀector T cells into other
secondary lymphoid organs and promote their migration into sites
of infection.
The process of eﬀector lymphocyte homing into infected tissues
occurs in postcapillary venules and is mediated by the same
multistep selectin-, integrin-, and chemokine-dependent process
described for other leukocytes. As with neutrophils and monocytes,
eﬀector T cells in the circulation, but not naive T cells, express
selectin ligands, integrins, and chemokine receptors that bind to
the types of selectins, integrin ligands, and chemokines,
respectively, that are expressed in activated endothelium (see Fig.
3.6).
The migration of eﬀector T cells into infected tissues is antigen-
independent, but the eﬀector cells that encounter antigen in the
tissue are preferentially retained there. Thus, eﬀector cells of diverse
speciﬁcities can enter tissue sites of infection, which maximizes the
chance of cells ﬁnding the antigen for which they are speciﬁc. On
eﬀector T cells that recognize antigen in infected tissues, the
integrins are kept in their high-aﬃnity state because of antigen-
induced activation and the continued presence of chemokines.
These integrins bind tightly to extracellular matrix proteins, and
this favors retention of the eﬀector T cells that encounter antigens
at these sites. Retention allows eﬀector T cells that recognize
antigens to perform the functions that eliminate microbes and
other sources of the antigens. Most eﬀector cells that enter a site of
infection eventually die there after performing their functions.
Some eﬀector cells have a propensity to migrate to particular
types of tissues. This selective migration capacity is acquired during
the diﬀerentiation of the eﬀector T cells from naive precursors in
secondary lymphoid organs. By enabling distinct groups of eﬀector
T cells to migrate to diﬀerent sites, the adaptive immune system
directs cells with specialized eﬀector functions to the locations
where they are best suited to deal with particular types of
infections. The clearest examples of populations of eﬀector T cells
that speciﬁcally home to diﬀerent tissues are skin-homing and gut-
homing T cells, whose migration paĴerns reﬂect the expression of
diﬀerent adhesion molecules and chemokine receptors on each
subset, discussed in detail in Chapter 14.
Diﬀerent subsets of eﬀector T cells exist, each with distinct
functions, and these subsets have diﬀerent although often
overlapping paĴerns of migration. Eﬀector T cells include CD8+
cytotoxic T lymphocytes and CD4+ helper T cells. Helper T cells
include Th1, Th2, and Th17 subsets, each of which expresses
diﬀerent types of cytokines and protects against diﬀerent types of
microbes. The characteristics and functions of these subsets will be
discussed in detail in Chapter 10. For now, it is suﬃcient to know
that the migration of these subsets shows some diﬀerences. This is
because the array of chemokine receptors and adhesion molecules
expressed by each subset diﬀers in ways that result in preferential
recruitment of each subset into sites of inﬂammation elicited by
diﬀerent types of infections.
Memory T Cell Migration
Memory T cells are heterogeneous in their paĴerns of expression of
adhesion molecules and chemokine receptors and in their propensity
to migrate to diﬀerent tissues. Because the ways of identifying
memory T cells are still imperfect (see Chapters 2 and 9), the
distinction between eﬀector and memory T cells in experimental
studies and in humans is often not precise. Two subsets of memory
T cells, called central memory and eﬀector memory T cells, were
initially identiﬁed on the basis of diﬀerences in CCR7 and L-
selectin expression. Central memory T cells (TCM) were deﬁned as
human CD45RO+ blood T cells that express high levels of CCR7 and
L-selectin; eﬀector memory T cells (TEM) were deﬁned as CD45RO+
blood T cells that express low levels of CCR7 and L-selectin but
express other chemokine receptors that bind inﬂammatory
chemokines. These phenotypes suggest that central memory T cells
home to secondary lymphoid organs, whereas eﬀector memory T
cells home to peripheral tissues. Although central and eﬀector
memory T cell populations also can be detected in mice,
experimental studies have indicated that CCR7 expression is not a
deﬁnitive 
marker 
to 
distinguish 
these 
memory 
T 
cell
subpopulations. Nonetheless, it is clear that some memory T cells
tend to home to secondary lymphoid organs, whereas others
migrate into peripheral tissues, especially skin and mucosal tissues.
Many of these cells recirculate between blood and secondary
lymphoid organs, like naive T cells, or between blood and skin or
mucosal tissues.
Some memory T cells migrate into tissues after an infection and
remain there indeﬁnitely. These non-recirculating T cells, called
tissue-resident memory T cells (or TRM), stay in peripheral tissues
and secondary lymphoid organs for months to years after infections
without recirculation into blood. Both CD4+ and CD8+ tissue-
resident memory T cells have been found in many types of normal
and disease tissues in mice and humans, including skin, lung, liver,
intestines, brain, lymph nodes, and spleen. A common feature of
these cells is the expression of molecules that promote retention in
tissues. Most tissue-resident memory T cells express CD69, which
as discussed earlier blocks surface expression of S1PR1, thereby
conferring resistance of these cells to S1P-mediated egress from
tissues. Many tissue-resident memory T cells also express the
integrin CD103, which binds to E-cadherin, a molecule expressed by
epithelial cells. Based on experimental models in mice and data
from human tissue analyses, the presence of tissue-resident
memory T cells is associated with resistance to reinfection by
microbes.
Migration of B Lymphocytes
B lymphocyte migration is critical for eﬀective adaptive immunity,
although the paĴerns of migration diﬀer from those of T cells. The
initiation of B cell responses to infection begins in secondary
lymphoid organs, and often depends on help from T cells.
Therefore, this ﬁrst stage of a B cell response requires similar
migratory activities of naive B cells as we described for naive T cells.
However, secreted antibodies perform the eﬀector functions of B
cells at sites distant from the B cells, and these antibodies, but not
the B cells themselves, need to be delivered by the blood to infected
tissues. Some of the antibody-secreting B cells generated from
naive B cells in lymph nodes or spleen do migrate to bone marrow
or mucosal sites, where they remain and secrete antibodies for long
periods.
FIGURE 3.8  Migration of B cells.Naive B cells enter
lymph nodes and mucosal-associated lymphoid
tissues through high endothelial venules (HEVs),
migrate into follicles, become activated, and
differentiate into antibody-producing cells, some
of which are plasmablasts that enter the
circulation and migrate into bone marrow or
mucosal tissues, where they fully differentiate into
plasma cells. Immunoglobulin G (IgG)-secreting
plasma cells may be generated in any lymphoid
tissues. IgA-secreting plasma cells are produced
mainly in mesenteric lymph nodes or mucosa-
associated lymphoid tissues and home back to
mucosal tissues. Other B cells that enter follicles
differentiate into memory B cells, some of which
enter the circulation. The chemokine receptors
and chemokines involved in these steps are
shown. Adhesion molecules are also involved in
migration out of the HEV and blood vessels in
tissues, as described in the text.
Recirculation of Naive Follicular B Cells
Naive follicular B cells use the same basic mechanisms as do naive T
cells to home to and exit out of secondary lymphoid organs. There
are diﬀerent subsets of B cells, but the major subset responsible for
most antibody production are called follicular B cells, and we will
describe their migratory activities. Immature follicular B cells leave
the bone marrow through the blood, enter the spleen through the
marginal zone, and migrate to the periphery of the white pulp. As
they mature further, the B cells express the chemokine receptor
CXCR5, which promotes their movement into the white pulp in
response to a chemokine called CXCL13 that is produced by
follicular dendritic cells (FDCs) in lymphoid follicles. After the
maturation is completed within the white pulp, naive follicular B
cells reenter the circulation by an S1P-driven process and then
recirculate to lymph nodes, mucosal lymphoid tissues, or back to
the spleen. Homing of naive B cells from the blood into lymph
nodes and Peyer’s patches in the small bowel involves rolling
interactions on HEVs, chemokine activation of integrins, and stable
arrest, as described earlier for naive T cells (Fig. 3.8). This process
depends on the chemokine receptors CCR7, CXCR4, and CXCR5 on
naive B cells and their respective ligands CCL19/CCL21, CXCL12,
and CXCL13. CCL19/CCL21 and CXCL12 are displayed by HEVs in
lymph nodes and mediate the entry of naive and memory B cells
into lymph nodes. CXCL13 then draws B cells into the B cell zone,
the follicles. There are no HEVs in the white pulp of the spleen, and
the mechanisms of homing of naive B cells into splenic white pulp
are not well understood. Homing of naive B cells into Peyer’s
patches in the small bowel wall involves CXCR5 and the integrin
α4β7, which binds to MAdCAM-1. During the course of B cell
responses to protein antigens, B cells and helper T cells must
directly interact, and this is made possible by highly regulated
movements of both cell types within the secondary lymphoid
organs. These local migratory events, and the chemokines that
orchestrate them, will be discussed in detail in Chapter 12. If a
naive B cell is not activated by antigen in a lymph node or the
spleen after several hours, it will respond to the S1P gradient, exit
into the circulation, and recirculate back into other secondary
lymphoid organs. B cells in the lymph node will exit through
eﬀerent lymphatics and by the thoracic duct into the blood, and B
cells in the spleen migrate to the marginal zone and then are
carried by ﬂuid through the red pulp into the circulation.
Migration of Antibody Secreting
Plasmablasts and Memory B Cells
Plasmablasts derived from follicular B cells exit out of secondary
lymphoid organs and home to bone marrow or mucosal tissues,
where they diﬀerentiate into long-lived plasma cells and secrete
antibodies (see Fig. 3.8). If a naive B cell is activated by antigen in a
secondary lymph node, it will diﬀerentiate into antibody-secreting
cells called plasmablasts. Some of these plasmablasts will mature
in the secondary lymphoid organ itself into plasma cells with short
life spans that will secrete antibodies locally. However, as a
response to a protein antigen progresses, and T cells help B cells
(described in Chapter 12), plasmablasts are generated in the
germinal centers of follicles. These plasmablasts exit the secondary
lymphoid tissues by an S1P-dependent mechanism and enter the
blood. Many of these cells home to the bone marrow, and some to
mucosal tissues, where they mature into long-lived plasma cells
that stay in these tissues and secrete antibodies for long periods.
Most memory B cells are generated in germinal centers of
secondary lymphoid organs along with plasmablasts. Some
memory B cells migrate to bone marrow and mucosal sites with the
plasmablasts, whereas other memory B cells appear to recirculate
through secondary lymphoid organs. Reactivation of memory B
cells upon re-exposure to microbial protein antigens induces new
germinal center reactions in the lymphoid organs. Overall, the
mechanisms that govern memory B cell migration and recirculation
are not well understood.
Subsets of activated B cells commiĴed to producing particular
types of antibodies migrate from secondary lymphoid organs into
speciﬁc tissues, where they diﬀerentiate into long-lived plasma cells
(see Fig. 3.8) . As we will describe in later chapters, during their
responses to antigen, B cells may diﬀerentiate into cells that
produce diﬀerent types of antibodies, called isotypes (or classes),
each of which performs a distinct set of eﬀector functions. The
genetic changes that determine which isotype will be expressed by
B cells occur before diﬀerentiation into plasmablasts and ﬁnally
into plasma cells. B cells that are commiĴed to secreting antibodies
of the IgG isotype will diﬀerentiate into plasmablasts that mostly
migrate to the bone marrow, and accordingly, most plasma cells
residing in the bone marrow produce IgG antibodies, which are
then distributed throughout the body via the blood stream. B cells
that are activated within MALTs usually become commiĴed to
expression of the IgA isotype of antibody, and IgA-producing
plasmablasts home speciﬁcally to mucosal tissues. The local
diﬀerentiation within the mucosal lymphoid tissues of B cells into
IgA-secreting cells, combined with the homing of these cells into
the mucosa, optimizes IgA defense against microbial invasion
through the mucosal barriers. As we will discuss in more detail in
Chapter 14, IgA is eﬃciently secreted into the lumen of tissues
lined by mucosal epithelia, such as the gut and respiratory tract.
The mechanisms by which diﬀerent B cell populations migrate to
diﬀerent tissues are similar to the mechanisms we described for
tissue-speciﬁc migration of eﬀector T cells and depend on
expression of distinct combinations of adhesion molecules and
chemokine receptors on each B cell subset. For example, bone
marrow–homing IgG-secreting plasma cells express VLA-4 and
CXCR4, which bind respectively to VCAM-1 and CXCL12 expressed
on bone marrow sinusoidal endothelial cells. In contrast, mucosa-
homing IgA-secreting plasma cells express α4β7 and CCR9, which
bind respectively to MAdCAM-1 and CCL25 on mucosal
endothelial cells. IgG-secreting B cells are also recruited to chronic
inﬂammatory sites in various tissues, and this homing paĴern can
be aĴributed to VLA-4 and CXCR3 on these B cells binding to
VCAM-1, CXCL9, and CXCL10, which are often found on the
endothelial surface at sites of chronic inﬂammation.
Summary
• Leukocyte migration from blood into tissues occurs through
postcapillary venules and depends on chemokines and
adhesion molecules expressed on the leukocytes and
vascular endothelial cells.
• Selectins are carbohydrate-binding adhesion molecules that
mediate low-aﬃnity interaction of leukocytes with
endothelial cells, the ﬁrst step in leukocyte migration from
blood into tissues. E-selectin and P-selectin are expressed
on activated endothelial cells and bind to selectin ligands
on leukocytes, and L-selectin is expressed on leukocytes and
binds ligands on endothelial cells.
• Integrins are a large family of adhesion molecules, some of
which mediate tight adhesion of leukocytes with activated
endothelium, a critical step in leukocyte migration from
blood into tissues. The important leukocyte integrins
include LFA-1 and VLA-4, which bind to ICAM-1 and
VCAM-1, respectively, on endothelial cells. Chemokines
and other signals at sites of infection increase the aﬃnity of
integrins on leukocytes, and various cytokines (tumor
necrosis factor, interleukin-1) increase the expression of
integrin ligands on endothelium.
• Chemokines are a family of proteins that regulate when and
how leukocytes migrate into and within tissues, and they
organize the functional locations of lymphocytes and
dendritic cells (DCs) in lymphoid organs. Chemokines bind
to chemokine receptors on leukocytes, which signal to
increase leukocyte integrin aﬃnity and stimulate leukocyte
chemokinesis along a concentration gradient of
chemokines. Diﬀerent types of leukocytes and leukocytes at
diﬀerent stages of diﬀerentiation express distinct sets of
chemokine receptors, and the types of chemokines present
in tissues or on endothelial cells varies with diﬀerent
inﬂammatory states and tissue types.
• Migration of leukocytes from blood into tissues involves a
series of sequential interactions with endothelial cells,
starting with low-aﬃnity leukocyte binding to and rolling
along the endothelial surface (mediated by selectins and
selectin ligands). Next, chemokines displayed on
endothelial cells bind to chemokine receptors on the rolling
leukocytes, which generates signals that increase the
aﬃnity of leukocyte integrins. Then the leukocytes become
ﬁrmly bound to the endothelium through interactions of
the integrins binding to Ig superfamily ligands on the
endothelium. Finally, the leukocytes move through cell
junctions between endothelial cells into the tissues.
• Lymphocyte recirculation is the process by which naive
lymphocytes continuously migrate from the blood into the
secondary lymphoid organs, back into the blood through
lymphatics, and into other secondary lymphoid organs. This
process maximizes the chance of naive T or B cell encounter
with the antigen it recognizes and is critical for the
initiation of immune responses.
• Naive B and T cells migrate preferentially to secondary
lymphoid organs. In lymph nodes and Peyer’s patches, this
process is mediated by binding of L-selectin on
lymphocytes to peripheral lymph node addressin on high
endothelial venules in lymph nodes and by binding of the
CCR7 receptor on lymphocytes to the chemokines CCL19
and CCL21, which are produced in lymph nodes. There are
no HEVs in splenic white pulp, and naive T and B cell
migration into the spleen is not well understood.
g
p
• Within the T cell zones of the lymph nodes and spleen,
naive T cells constantly move along an FRC network,
interacting with DCs bound to the FRCs. If a naive T cell
interacts with a DC displaying the antigen it can recognize,
the T cell becomes activated to generate eﬀector and
memory T cells. If a naive T cell does not ﬁnd its antigen
within several hours, it will leave the lymph node via
eﬀerent lymphatics by a process dependent on the S1PR on
the lymphocytes and a gradient of S1P.
• Naive B cells that enter secondary lymphoid tissues migrate
into follicles in response to a gradient of the chemokine
CXCL13 chemokine binding to the CXCR5 receptors on the
B cell. Within the follicle, B cells move on a reticular
network made of follicular dendritic cells and may bind
antigens displayed by other cell types in the follicle.
• The eﬀector and memory lymphocytes that are generated by
antigen stimulation of naive cells exit the lymph node by
the S1P pathway. Eﬀector T cells have decreased expression
of L-selectin and CCR7 but increased expression of
integrins and E-selectin and P-selectin ligands, and these
molecules mediate binding to endothelium at peripheral
inﬂammatory sites. Eﬀector and memory lymphocytes also
express receptors for chemokines that are produced in
infected peripheral tissues
• Naive follicular B cells that are activated by antigen in
lymph node, spleen, or mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue
may diﬀerentiate into short-lived antibody-secreting plasma
cells that may stay in the secondary lymphoid organs. With
help from T cells, some B cells may diﬀerentiate into
plasmablasts that migrate through the blood to bone
marrow or mucosal sites, where they diﬀerentiate into long-
lived plasma cells that secrete antibodies for long periods.
Selected Readings
∗Indicates publications of historical interest, generally reporting
the discovery of a phenomenon or process that was later shown to
be of fundamental importance in the immune system. Many (but
not all) of these discoveries led to Nobel Prizes for the
discoverer(s). The nature of the discovery is summarized brieﬂy in
each reference.
Adhesion Molecules
Ley K, Laudanna C, Cybulsky M.I, Nourshargh S. GeĴing to the site of inﬂammation: the
leukocyte adhesion cascade updated.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2007;7:678–689.
McEver R.P. Selectins: initiators of leucocyte adhesion and signalling at the vascular wall. 
Cardiovasc Res . 2015;107:331–339.
Muller W.A. Localized signals that regulate transendothelial migration.  Curr Opin Immunol
. 2016;38:24–29.
Vestweber D. How leukocytes cross the vascular endothelium.  Nat Rev Immunol
. 2015;15:692–704.
Chemokines and Other Regulators of Migration
Bromley S.K, Mempel T.R, Luster A.D. Orchestrating the orchestrators: chemokines in
control of T cell traﬃc.  Nat Immunol . 2008;9:970–980.
Cyster J.G, Schwab S.R. Sphingosine-1-phosphate and lymphocyte egress from lymphoid
organs.  Annu Rev Immunol . 2012;30:69–94.
Lian J, Luster A.D. Chemokine-guided cell positioning in the lymph node orchestrates the
generation of adaptive immune responses.  Curr Opin Cell Biol . 2015;36:1–6.
Lu E, Cyster J.G. G-protein coupled receptors and ligands that organize humoral immune
responses.  Immunol Revs . 2019;289:158–172.
Schulz O, Hammerschmidt S.I, Moschovakis G.L, Forster R. Chemokines and chemokine
receptors in lymphoid tissue dynamics.  Annu Rev Immunol . 2016;34:203–242.
Sokol C.L, Luster A.D. The chemokine system in innate immunity.  Cold Spring Harb
Perspect Biol . 2015;7:a016303.
Zlotnik A, Yoshie O. The chemokine superfamily revisited.  Immunity . 2012;36:705–716.
Lymphocyte Migration Through Lymphoid Tissues and Into
Inflammatory Sites
Girard J.P, Moussion C, Forster R. HEVs, lymphatics and homeostatic immune cell
traﬃcking in lymph nodes.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2012;12:762–773.
∗Gowans J.L, Knight E.J. The route of re-circulation of lymphocytes in the rat.  P Roy Soc B-
Biol Sci.  1964;159:257–282 (This and other papers from the Gowans laboratory describe rat
thoracic duct cannulation studies that ﬁrst demonstrated lymphocyte recirculation.).
Hunter M.C, Teijeira A, Halin C. T cell traﬃcking through lymphatic vessels.  Front Immunol
. 2016;7:613.
∗Mackay C.R, Marston W.L, Dudler L. Naive and memory T cells show distinct pathways of
lymphocyte recirculation.  J Exp Med . 1990;171:801–817 (This study, involving phenotypic
analysis of T cells in aﬀerent and eﬀerent lymphatics of sheep, showed for the ﬁrst time that
naive and previoulsy activated/memory T cells follow diﬀerent recirculation routes .).
Masopust D, Schenkel J.M. The integration of T cell migration, diﬀerentiation and
function.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2013;13:309–320.
Permanyer M, Bosnjak B, Forster R. Dendritic cells, T cells and lymphatics: dialogues in
migration and beyond.  Curr Opin Immunol . 2018;53:173–179.
Qi H, Kastenmuller W, Germain R.N. Spatiotemporal basis of innate and adaptive
immunity in secondary lymphoid tissue.  Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . 2014;30:141–167.
Chapter 4: Innate Immunity
Overview of Innate Immunity,
Functions of Innate Immune Responses,
Comparative Features of Innate and Adaptive
Immunity,
Evolution of Innate Immunity,
Recognition of Microbes and Damaged Tissue by the
Innate Immune System,
Cellular Pattern Recognition Receptors,
Toll-Like Receptors,
Cytosolic Receptors for Pathogen-Associated
Molecular Patterns and Damage-Associated
Molecular Patterns,
Other Cell-Associated Pattern Recognition
Receptors,
Cellular Components of the Innate Immune System,
Epithelial Barriers,
Phagocytes,
Dendritic Cells,
Cytokine-Producing Innate Lymphoid Cells,
Natural Killer Cells,
T and B Lymphocytes With Limited Antigen
Receptor Diversity,
Mast Cells,
Soluble Effector Molecules of Innate Immunity,
The Complement System,
Pentraxins,
Collectins and Ficolins,
The Inflammatory Response,
The Major Proinflammatory Cytokines of Innate
Immunity,
Sequence of Events in Inflammation: Vascular
Changes and Leukocyte Migration Into
Tissues,
Ingestion and Killing of Microbes by Activated
Phagocytes,
Role of Macrophages in Tissue Repair,
Systemic and Pathologic Consequences of
Inflammation,
The Antiviral Response,
Stimulation of Adaptive Immunity,
Mechanisms that Limit Innate Immune Responses,
Summary,
Overview of Innate Immunity
The term innate immunity refers to defense mechanisms that are
always present, ready to combat microbes and other oﬀending
agents. The innate immune system, which was introduced in
Chapter 1, consists of many types of cells and soluble molecules in
tissues and blood that prevent microbes from invading and
establishing infections. If microbes do establish a foothold, innate
immune responses provide early defense, before adaptive immune
responses can develop (see Fig. 1.1). In this chapter, we will
describe in more detail the components, speciﬁcity, and
antimicrobial mechanisms of innate immunity. The focus of much
of the subsequent chapters is on the role of the adaptive immune
response in host defense and disease.
Functions of Innate Immune Responses
Innate immunity is the ﬁrst line of defense against infections and
serves several essential functions that protect us against microbes
and tissue injury. The major components of the innate immune
system are barrier epithelia, which block the entry of microbes;
tissue-resident sentinel cells, including macrophages, mast cells,
and dendritic cells (DCs), which detect microbes that have
breached epithelia and initiate host responses; white blood cells
(leukocytes), including neutrophils, monocytes that become
macrophages in tissues, natural killer (NK) cells, and other cells,
which enter the tissues from the blood and eliminate microbes that
have invaded through epithelia and also remove damaged host
cells; and several types of plasma proteins that combat microbes
within and outside the circulation. We discuss the functions of each
of these later in the chapter. Many other cell types, including
epithelial cells and other tissue cells, also possess intrinsic
mechanisms for defending themselves against microbes.
The two major types of protective reactions of the innate immune
system are inﬂammation and antiviral defense. Inﬂammation is the
process by which circulating leukocytes and plasma proteins are
brought into sites of infection in tissues and are activated to destroy
and eliminate the oﬀending agents. Inﬂammation is also the major
reaction to damaged or dead cells unrelated to infection and to
accumulations of abnormal substances in cells and tissues.
Antiviral defense mechanisms prevent virus replication and
promote killing of infected cells, thus eliminating reservoirs of viral
infection without an inﬂammatory reaction (although inﬂammation
also may contribute to defense against viruses).
FIGURE 4.1  Cellular locations of pattern recognition
receptors of the innate immune system.Some
pattern recognition molecules, including members
of the TLR family (see Fig. 4.2) and lectin-like
receptors, are expressed on the cell surface,
where they may bind extracellular pathogen-
associated molecular patterns. Other TLRs are
expressed on endosomal membranes and
recognize nucleic acids of microbes that have
been phagocytosed by cells. Cells also contain
cytosolic sensors of microbial infection, including
the NLRs, RLRs, and CDSs. Only selected
examples of microbial PAMPs recognized by
these receptors are shown. Cytosolic receptors
that recognize products of damaged cells
(DAMPs) as well as some microbes are shown in
Fig. 4.4. CDS, Cytosolic DNA sensor; NLR, NOD-
like receptor; RLR, RIG-like receptor; TLR, Toll-
like receptor.
The functions of innate immune responses have some important
general features.
• Physical and chemical defenses at epithelial barriers, such as
the skin and lining of the gastrointestinal and respiratory
tracts, block microbial entry. Microbes are able to colonize
tissues only if they are capable of crossing epithelia. If these
barriers are damaged or microbes are able to penetrate
them, innate and adaptive immune responses are activated
to provide the next lines of defense.
• Innate immune responses are the initial reactions to microbes
that serve to control or eliminate infection of the host by
many pathogens. These responses are activated by microbes
that traverse epithelial barriers. The responses are
mediated by tissue-resident cells and other cells and
plasma proteins recruited from the blood in the process of
inﬂammation. The importance of innate immunity in host
defense is illustrated by clinical observations and
experimental studies showing that deﬁciencies, inhibition,
or elimination of any of several mechanisms of innate
immunity increase susceptibility to infections, even when
the adaptive immune system is intact and functional. Many
pathogenic microbes have evolved strategies to resist innate
immunity, and these strategies are crucial for the virulence
of the microbes. Innate immune responses to such
microbes may keep the infection in check until adaptive
immune responses are activated. Adaptive immune
responses typically are more potent and specialized and
therefore able to eliminate microbes that resist the defense
mechanisms of innate immunity.
• Innate immunity eliminates damaged cells and initiates the
process of tissue repair. These functions involve recognition
and response to host molecules that are produced by,
released from, or accumulate in stressed, damaged, and
dead host cells. The injury that elicits these innate
responses may occur as a result of infection, or it may be
sterile cell and tissue damage in the absence of infection.
• Innate immune responses stimulate adaptive immune
responses and can inﬂuence the nature of the adaptive
responses to make them optimally eﬀective against diﬀerent
types of microbes. Thus, innate immunity not only serves as
the initial line of defense early after infection but also
provides the danger signals that alert the adaptive immune
system to respond. Moreover, diﬀerent components of the
innate immune system often react in distinct ways to
diﬀerent microbes (e.g., extracellular bacteria versus
intracellular viruses) and thereby inﬂuence the type of
adaptive immune response that develops. We will return to
this concept at the end of the chapter.
Comparative Features of Innate and Adaptive
Immunity
In order to understand how innate and adaptive immunity
complement each other to protect against pathogens, it is
instructive to highlight their important diﬀerences.
• Innate immune responses to a microbe develop rapidly and
do not require prior exposure to the microbe. In other
words, innate immune eﬀector cells and molecules are
present in suﬃcient quantities even before infection and
are fully functional or quickly become activated by microbes
to prevent, control, or eliminate infections. In contrast,
eﬀective adaptive immune responses to a newly introduced
microbe develop over several days as clones of naive
antigen-speciﬁc lymphocytes expand and diﬀerentiate into
functional eﬀector cells.
• For most innate responses to microbes, there is no
appreciable change in the quality or magnitude of the
response upon repeated exposure—that is, there is liĴle or
no memory. In contrast, repeated exposure to a microbe
enhances the rapidity, magnitude, and eﬀectiveness of
adaptive immune responses. There is emerging evidence
for some memory in innate immunity, in that macrophage
and NK cell responses to certain infections are increased in
magnitude upon subsequent infections. It is not clear how
speciﬁc these memory-like innate responses are, which and
how many microbes are capable of eliciting them, or if such
responses contribute to increased protection against repeat
infections.
• The innate and adaptive immune systems diﬀer greatly in
speciﬁcity for microbial structures and in the diversity of
their receptors, as discussed later.
Evolution of Innate Immunity
Innate immunity is phylogenetically the oldest part of the immune
system. It co-evolved with microbes to protect all organisms from
infections. Some components of the mammalian innate immune
system are remarkably similar to components in plants and insects,
suggesting that these appeared in common ancestors long ago in
evolution. For example, peptides that are toxic to bacteria and
fungi, called defensins, are found in plants and mammals and have
essentially the same tertiary structure in both life forms. A family
of receptors that we will discuss in detail later in this chapter, called
Toll-like receptors, recognize pathogenic microbes and activate
antimicrobial defense mechanisms. Toll-like receptors are found in
every life form in the evolutionary tree from insects up to
mammals. The major signal transduction pathway that Toll-like
receptors engage to activate cells, called the NF-κB (nuclear factor
kappa B) pathway in mammals, also shows remarkable evolutionary
conservation. In fact, most of the mechanisms of innate immune
defense that we will discuss in this chapter appeared very early in
evolution, when the ﬁrst multicellular organisms evolved, about 750
million years ago. An adaptive immune system, in contrast, is
clearly recognizable only in vertebrates that developed about 350 to
500 million years ago. A testament to the importance of innate
immunity is that the human genome contains approximately 850
genes that are directly related to innate immune responses,
compared to about 575 for adaptive immunity.
We begin our discussion of the innate immune system by
describing how it recognizes microbes and damaged host cells. We
will then proceed to the individual components of innate immunity
and their functions in host defense.
Recognition of Microbes and Damaged
Tissue by the Innate Immune System
The speciﬁcities of innate immune recognition have evolved to
combat microbes and are diﬀerent from the speciﬁcities of the
adaptive immune system in several respects (Table 4.1).
• The innate immune response is activated by recognition of a
relatively limited set of molecular structures that either are
products of microbes or are expressed by injured or dead
host cells. It is estimated that the innate immune system
recognizes only about 1000 products of microbes and
damaged cells. By contrast, the adaptive immune system
potentially can recognize millions of diﬀerent microbial
antigens and can also recognize nonmicrobial
environmental antigens and the self antigens that are
normally present in healthy tissues.
• The innate immune system uses germline-encoded invariant
receptors to recognize microbial and other products. By
contrast, the adaptive immune system uses highly variable
and diverse receptors to recognize foreign antigens. The
speciﬁcity and receptors of innate immunity are described
later.
The innate immune system recognizes molecular structures that
are produced by microbial pathogens. The microbial substances that
stimulate innate immunity are often shared by classes of microbes
and are called pathogen-associated molecular paĴerns (PAMPs).
Diﬀerent types of microbes (e.g., viruses, gram-negative bacteria,
gram-positive bacteria, fungi) express diﬀerent PAMPs (Table 4.2).
These structures include nucleic acids that are unique to or more
abundant in microbes than in host cells, such as double-stranded
RNA found in replicating viruses and unmethylated CpG DNA
sequences found in bacteria; features of proteins that are found in
microbes, such as initiation by N-formylmethionine, which is
typical of bacterial proteins; and complex lipids and carbohydrates
that are synthesized by microbes but not by mammalian cells, such
as lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in gram-negative bacteria, lipoteichoic
acid in gram-positive bacteria, and oligosaccharides with terminal
mannose residues found in microbial but not in mammalian
glycoproteins.
The innate immune system detects the presence of infection but not
the speciﬁc pathogens. By recognizing PAMPs, which are produced
by broad classes of microbes, and products of cell damage that is
often induced by pathogens, the innate immune system triggers
host defense regardless of the particular species of microbe. In
contrast, the adaptive immune system is capable of recognizing
many more and diverse foreign substances (antigens), which may
be unique to diﬀerent individual microbial species or may be
unrelated to microbial infection or tissue injury.
The innate immune system recognizes microbial products that are
often essential for survival of the microbes. This evolutionary
adaptation of innate immune recognition is important because it
ensures that microbes cannot evade innate immunity by mutating
the molecules recognized by the host. An example of a target of
innate immunity that is indispensable for microbes is double-
stranded viral RNA, which is an essential intermediate in the life
cycle of many viruses. Similarly, LPS and lipoteichoic acid are
structural components of bacterial cell walls that are recognized by
innate immune receptors; both are required for bacterial survival.
p
q
In contrast, as we will see in Chapter 16, microbes may mutate or
lose many of the antigens that are recognized by the adaptive
immune 
system, 
thereby 
evading 
host 
defense 
without
compromising their own survival.
TABLE 4.1
Specificity of Innate and Adaptive Immunity
Innate Immunity
Adaptive Immunity
Speciﬁcity
For structures
shared by
classes of
microbes
(pathogen-
associated
molecular
paĴerns)
For structural
detail of
microbial
molecules
(antigens);
may recognize
nonmicrobial
antigens
Number of
microbial
molecules
recognized
About 1000
molecular
paĴerns
(estimated)
>107 antigens
Receptors
Encoded in
germline;
limited
diversity
(paĴern
recognition
receptors)
Encoded by genes
produced by
somatic
recombination
of gene
segments;
greater
diversity
Innate Immunity
Adaptive Immunity
Number and
types of
receptors
<100 diﬀerent types
of invariant
receptors
Only two types of
receptors (Ig and
TCR), with
millions of
variations of each
Distribution of
receptors
Nonclonal: identical
receptors on all
cells of the same
lineage
Clonal: clones of
lymphocytes with
distinct
speciﬁcities
express diﬀerent
receptors
Genes encoding
receptors
Germline encoded,
in all cells
Formed by somatic
recombination of
gene segments
only in B and T
cells
Discrimination of
self and
nonself
Yes; healthy host
cells are not
recognized or
they may express
molecules that
prevent innate
immune reactions
Yes; based on
elimination or
inactivation of self
reactive
lymphocytes; may
be imperfect
(giving rise to
autoimmunity)
Ig, Immunoglobulin; TCR, T cell antigen receptor.
The innate immune system also recognizes endogenous molecules
that are produced by or released from damaged and dying cells.
These substances are called damage-associated molecular paĴerns
(DAMPs) (see Table 4.2). DAMPs may be produced as a result of
cell damage caused by infections, but they may also indicate sterile
injury to cells caused by any of many insults, such as chemical
toxins, burns, trauma, or loss of blood supply. DAMPs are generally
not released from cells dying by apoptosis. In some cases,
endogenous molecules, including some cytokines, that are
produced by healthy cells are released when the cells are damaged
or die, and they then stimulate innate responses. These molecules
are a subset of DAMPs and are sometimes called alarmins because
their presence outside cells alarms the immune system that
something is causing cell damage or death.
The innate immune system uses several types of cellular receptors,
present in diﬀerent locations in cells, and soluble molecules in the
blood and mucosal secretions to recognize PAMPs and DAMPs
(Table 4.3) . Cell-associated recognition molecules of the innate
immune 
system 
are 
expressed 
by 
phagocytes 
(primarily
macrophages and neutrophils), DCs, epithelial cells that form the
barrier interface between the body and the external environment,
mast cells, and many other types of cells that reside in tissues. The
cellular receptors for pathogen- and damage-associated molecular
paĴerns are called paĴern recognition receptors. They are
expressed on the surface, in phagocytic vesicles, and in the cytosol
of various cell types, all of which are locations where microbes or
their products may be present (see Fig. 4.1). When these cell-
associated paĴern recognition receptors bind to PAMPs and
DAMPs, they activate signal transduction pathways that promote
the antimicrobial and proinﬂammatory functions of the cells in
which they are expressed. In addition, many proteins present in the
blood and extracellular ﬂuids recognize PAMPs (see Table 4.3).
These soluble molecules are responsible for facilitating the
clearance of microbes from the blood and extracellular ﬂuids by
enhancing uptake into phagocytes or by activating extracellular
killing mechanisms.
TABLE 4.2
ATP, Adenosine triphosphate; CpG, cytosine-guanine–rich oligonucleotide; dsRNA, double-
stranded RNA; HMGB1, high-mobility group box 1; HSP, heat shock protein; LPS,
lipopolysaccharide; ssRNA, single-stranded RNA.
The receptors of the innate immune system are encoded by
inherited (germline) genes, whereas the genes encoding receptors of
adaptive immunity are generated by somatic recombination of gene
segments in the precursors of mature lymphocytes. As a result, the
diversity of innate immune system receptors and the range of their
speciﬁcities are small compared with those of B and T cells of the
adaptive immune system. It is estimated that innate immune
recognition is mediated by about 100 diﬀerent receptors belonging
to several protein families, whereas in the adaptive immune system
there are only two families of receptors (immunoglobulins [Igs]
and T cell receptors) each with millions of variations that recognize
a vast number of antigens. Furthermore, whereas the adaptive
immune system can distinguish between antigens of diﬀerent
microbes of the same class and even diﬀerent antigens of one
microbe, innate immunity can distinguish only classes of microbes,
or only damaged cells from healthy cells, but not particular species
of microbes or cell types.
The innate immune system does not react against normal, healthy
cells and tissues. This characteristic is, of course, essential for the
health of the organism. The failure to recognize healthy self is due
to three main mechanisms: normal cells do not produce ligands for
innate immune receptors, these receptors are located in cellular
compartments where they do not encounter host molecules they
could recognize, and regulatory proteins expressed by normal cells
prevent activation of various components of innate immunity. We
will discuss examples of such regulation later in this chapter.
With this introduction, we can proceed to a discussion of the
large variety of molecules in the body that are capable of
recognizing PAMPs and DAMPs, focusing on their speciﬁcity,
location, and functions. We will begin with cell-associated receptors
expressed on membranes or in the cytosol of cells. The soluble
recognition and eﬀector molecules of innate immunity, found in
the blood and extracellular ﬂuids, are described later.
Cellular Pattern Recognition Receptors
Most cell types express paĴern recognition receptors and therefore
are capable of participating in innate immune responses.
Phagocytes, especially macrophages, and DCs express the widest
variety and greatest number of these receptors. This is in keeping
with the fundamental role of phagocytes in detecting microbes and
damaged cells and ingesting them for destruction and the role of
DCs in reacting to microbes in ways that elicit inﬂammation and
subsequent adaptive immunity. PaĴern recognition receptors are
linked to intracellular signal transduction pathways that activate
various cellular responses, including the production of molecules
that promote inﬂammation and molecules that destroy microbes.
We will organize our discussion around several distinct classes of
cellular paĴern recognition receptors that diﬀer in their structure
and speciﬁcity for various types of microbes.
Toll-Like Receptors
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are an evolutionarily conserved family of
paĴern recognition receptors expressed by many cell types that
recognize products of a wide variety of microbes, as well as
molecules expressed or released by stressed and dying cells.  Toll was
discovered as a Drosophila gene involved in establishing the
dorsal-ventral axis during development of the fruit ﬂy, but
subsequently it was discovered that the Toll protein also mediated
antimicrobial responses in these organisms. Furthermore, the
cytoplasmic domain of Toll was found to be similar to the
cytoplasmic region of the receptor for the innate immune cytokine
interleukin-1 (IL-1). These discoveries led to the identiﬁcation of
mammalian homologs of Toll, which were named Toll-like
receptors. There are 10 diﬀerent functional TLRs in humans, named
TLR1 through TLR10 (Fig. 4.2). Mice express TLRs homologous to
human TLRs 1 through 9, plus three more (TLRs 11 through 13), but
they do not express TLR10. The function of TLR10 remains poorly
understood compared to those of other TLRs.
TABLE 4.3
 
AIM2, Absent in melanoma-2; CDSs, cytosolic DNA sensors; CLRs, C-type lectin–like
receptors; DAMP, damage-associated molecular pattern; DC, dendritic cells; MDA,
melanoma differentiation-associated gene; NLRs, NOD-like receptors; NOD, nucleotide
oligomerization domain; PAMP, pathogen-associated molecular pattern; RLRs, RIG-like
receptors; SP-D, surfactant protein D; STING, stimulator of IFN (interferon) genes; TLRs, Toll-
like receptors.
The TLRs are integral membrane glycoproteins that contain
leucine-rich repeats ﬂanked by characteristic cysteine-rich motifs in
their extracellular regions, which are involved in ligand binding,
and a Toll/IL-1 receptor (TIR) domain in their cytoplasmic tails,
which is essential for signaling. TIR domains are also found in the
cytoplasmic tails of the receptors for the cytokines IL-1, IL-18, and
IL-33, and similar signaling pathways are engaged by TLRs and
these cytokines.
TLRs are involved in responses to a wide variety of molecules that
are expressed by microbes but not by healthy mammalian cells. The
ligands that the diﬀerent TLRs recognize are structurally diverse
and include products of all classes of microorganisms (see Fig. 4.2),
as in the following examples:
FIGURE 4.2  Structure, location, and specificities of
mammalian Toll-like receptors.Note that some
TLRs are expressed on the cell surface and
others in endosomes. TLRs may form
homodimers or heterodimers. dsRNA, Double-
stranded RNA; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; ssRNA,
single-stranded RNA; TIR, Toll IL-1 receptor; TLR,
Toll-like receptor.
• Bacterial cell wall constituents: LPS of gram-negative bacteria,
which binds TLR4; and peptidoglycan and lipoteichoic acid
of gram-positive bacteria, which bind TLR2.
• Bacterial surface proteins: ﬂagellin, a protein subunit
component of the ﬂagella of motile bacteria, which binds to
TLR5
• Viral nucleic acids: double-stranded RNAs that make up the
genomes of some viruses, are generated during the life
cycle of most viruses, and bind TLR3; single-stranded
RNAs, which are distinguished from cellular cytoplasmic
single-stranded RNA transcripts by their location within
endosomes and by their high guanosine and uridine
content, bind TLR7 and TLR8; and unmethylated CpG
nucleotides, which are common in prokaryotic DNA but
rare in vertebrate genomes, bind TLR9.
TLRs are also involved in responses to endogenous molecules
whose expression or location indicates cell damage. Examples of
host molecules that engage TLRs include heat shock proteins
(HSPs), which are chaperones induced in response to various cell
stresses and bind to TLR4, and high-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1),
an abundant DNA-binding protein involved in transcription and
DNA repair, which binds to TLR2. Both HSPs and HMGB1 are
normally intracellular proteins but may become extracellular when
released from injured or dying cells. From their extracellular
location, they activate TLR2 and TLR4 signaling in DCs,
macrophages, and other cell types.
The structural basis of TLR speciﬁcities resides in the multiple
extracellular or endosomal lumenal leucine-rich modules of these
receptors, which bind directly to PAMPs or to adaptor molecules
that bind the PAMPs. There are between 16 and 28 leucine-rich
repeats in TLRs. Each of these modules is composed of 20 to 30
amino acids that include conserved LxxLxLxxN motifs (where L is
leucine, x is any amino acid, and N is asparagine) and amino acid
residues that vary among TLRs. The ligand-binding variable
residues of the modules are on the convex surface formed by α
helices and β turns or loops. These repeats contribute to the ability
of some TLRs to bind hydrophobic molecules such as bacterial LPS.
Ligand binding to the leucine-rich domains induces physical
interactions between TLR molecules and the formation of TLR
dimers. The ability of TLRs to form homodimers or heterodimers
with diﬀerent speciﬁcities increases the number of PAMPs that can
be recognized by the small number of TLRs expressed. For
example, TLR1/TLR2 dimers recognize diﬀerent lipopeptides than
TLR2/TLR6 
dimers, 
and 
TLR2/TLR2 
homodimers 
recognize
peptidoglycan.
The binding of TLRs to their ligands is also inﬂuenced by various
non-TLR accessory molecules. This is best deﬁned for the TLR4
response to LPS. LPS ﬁrst binds to soluble LPS-binding protein in
the blood or extracellular ﬂuid, and this complex facilitates delivery
of the LPS to the surface of the responding cell. An extracellular
protein called MD2 (myeloid diﬀerentiation protein 2) binds to the
lipid A component of LPS, forming a complex that then interacts
with TLR4 and initiates signaling. Another protein, called CD14, is
also required for eﬃcient LPS-induced signaling. CD14 is expressed
by most cells (except endothelial cells) as a soluble protein or as a
glycophosphatidylinositol-linked membrane protein.
TLRs are found on the cell surface and on intracellular membranes
and are thus able to recognize microbes in diﬀerent cellular locations
(see Fig. 4.2) . TLRs 1, 2, 4, 5, and 6 are expressed on the plasma
membrane, where they recognize various bacterial and fungal
PAMPs in the extracellular environment. Some of the most potent
microbial stimuli for innate immune responses bind to these
plasma membrane TLRs, such as bacterial LPS and lipoteichoic
acid, which are recognized by TLR4 and TLR2, respectively. In
contrast, TLRs 3, 7, 8, and 9 are mainly expressed inside cells on
endosomal membranes, where TLR3 detects double-stranded RNA,
TLR7 and TLR8 detect single-stranded RNA produced by viruses,
and TLR9 detects unmethylated CpG motifs in bacterial or viral
DNA. Single- and double-stranded RNA are not unique to
microbes, but their location in endosomes likely reﬂects origin
from microbes. This is because host cell RNA is not normally
present in endosomes, but microbial RNA may end up in
endosomes of neutrophils, macrophages, or DCs when the
microbes are phagocytosed by these cells. Enzymatic digestion of
the microbes within endosomes will release their nucleic acids so
these are able to bind TLRs in the endosomal membrane. Thus, the
endosomal TLRs may distinguish nucleic acids of normal cells from
microbial nucleic acids on the basis of the cellular location of these
molecules. A protein called UNC93B is required for the transfer of
TLRs synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum to their endosomal
localization. Genetic deﬁciency in UNC93B or TLR3 leads to
susceptibility to certain viral infections, especially herpes simplex
virus encephalitis, demonstrating the importance of the endosomal
location of TLRs for innate defense against viruses.
TLR recognition of microbial ligands results in the activation of
several signaling pathways and ultimately transcription factors,
which induce the expression of genes whose products are important
for inﬂammatory and antiviral responses (Fig. 4.3) . The signaling
pathways are initiated by ligand binding to the TLR at the cell
surface or in endosomes, leading to dimerization of the TLR
proteins. Ligand-induced TLR dimerization is predicted to bring
the TIR domains of the cytoplasmic tails of each protein close to
one another. This is followed by recruitment of TIR domain–
containing adaptor proteins, which facilitate the recruitment and
activation of various protein kinases, leading to the activation of
diﬀerent transcription factors. The major transcription factors that
are activated by TLR signaling pathways are NF-κB, interferon
response factor 3 (IRF3), and IRF7. NF-κB stimulates the expression
of genes encoding many of the molecules required for
inﬂammatory responses, including inﬂammatory cytokines (e.g.,
tumor necrosis factor [TNF] and IL-1), chemokines (e.g., CCL2 and
CXCL8), and endothelial adhesion molecules (e.g., E-selectin). IRF3
g
and IRF7 promote expression of the genes encoding interferon
(IFN)-α and IFN-β, respectively, which are both type I IFNs that are
important for antiviral innate immune responses.
FIGURE 4.3  Signaling pathways and functions of
Toll-like receptors.TLRs 1, 2, 5, and 6 use the
adaptor protein MyD88 and activate the
transcription factor NF-κB, which induces
inflammatory gene expression. TLR3 uses the
adaptor protein TRIF, which activates the IRF3
transcription factor and promotes IFN-β
expression and NF-κB. TLR4 uses both MyD88
and TRIF, leading to activation of NF-κB and IRF3
pathways, respectively. TLRs 7, 8, and 9 in the
endosome use MyD88, leading to activation of
both NF-κB and IRF7, promoting expression of
genes whose products mediate inflammation and
antiviral defense. dsRNA, Double-stranded RNA;
IFN, interferon; IRFs, interferon regulatory
factors; NF-κB, nuclear factor kappa B; ssRNA,
single-stranded DNA; TIR, Toll IL-1 receptor; TLR,
Toll-like receptors; TRIF, TIR-domain-containing
adapter-inducing interferon-β.
Diﬀerent combinations of adaptors and signaling intermediates
are used by diﬀerent TLRs, accounting for the common and unique
downstream eﬀects of the TLRs. The cell surface TLRs 1, 5, and 6
engage the adaptor MyD88, leading mainly to NF-κB activation and
inﬂammatory responses but not robust IRF activation or type I IFN
responses. The endosomal TLRs 7, 8, and 9 also engage MyD88, but
in these cases, downstream signaling leads to both NF-κB and IRF7
activation. NF-κB promotes inﬂammatory responses, and IRF7
promotes IFN-α expression that mediates antiviral responses. Cell
surface TLR4 engages both MyD88 and the adaptor called TRIF
(TIR domain–containing adaptor inducing IFN-β), both of which
induce NF-κB activation, whereas TRIF alone induces IRF3
activation that promotes IFN-β expression. Endosomal TLR3 signals
only through TRIF, which mediates both NF-κB and IRF3 activation.
Thus, TLR4 and TLR3 signaling induce both inﬂammatory and IFN-
β–mediated responses.
Cytosolic Receptors for Pathogen-Associated
Molecular Patterns and Damage-Associated
Molecular Patterns
In addition to the membrane-bound TLRs, which sense pathogens
outside cells or in endosomes, the innate immune system has
evolved to equip cells with paĴern recognition receptors that detect
infection or cell damage in the cytosol (see Fig. 4.1 and Table 4.3).
Three major classes of these cytosolic receptors are NOD-like
receptors, retinoic acid–inducible gene (RIG)-like receptors, and
cytosolic DNA sensors. These cytosolic receptors, similar to the
TLRs, are linked to signal transduction pathways that promote
inﬂammation or type I IFN production. Some of the cytosolic
sensors induce the formation of enzyme complexes called
inﬂammasomes, which proteolytically generate a biologically active
inﬂammatory cytokine IL-1β from an inactive precursor and also
may induce cell death. The ability of the innate immune system to
detect infection in the cytosol is important because parts of the
normal life cycles of some microbes, such as viral gene translation
and viral particle assembly, take place in the cytosol. Some bacteria
and parasites have mechanisms that enable them to escape from
phagocytic vesicles into the cytosol. Microbes can produce toxins
that create pores in host cell plasma membranes, including
endosomal membranes, through which microbial molecules can
enter the cytosol. These pores also can result in changes in the
concentration of endogenous molecules, such as ions, in the
cytoplasm, which are reliable signs of infection and damage and are
detected by the cytosolic receptors.
NOD-Like Receptors: NOD1 and NOD2
NOD-like receptors (NLRs) are a family of more than 20 diﬀerent
cytosolic proteins, some of which recognize PAMPs and DAMPs and
recruit other proteins to form signaling complexes that promote
inﬂammation. Typical NLRs include a C-terminal leucine-rich
repeat domain that senses the presence of ligand; a central NOD
(nucleotide oligomerization domain, also called NACHT) domain
required for NLR proteins to bind to one another and form
oligomers; and an N-terminal eﬀector domain, which recruits other
proteins to form signaling complexes (Fig. 4.4). There are three NLR
subfamilies that serve as innate immune receptors, each using a
diﬀerent eﬀector domain to initiate signaling. These include NLRB,
which uses the BIR (baculovirus inhibition of apoptosis protein
repeat) eﬀector domain; NLRC, which uses CARDs (caspase
recruitment and activation domains); and NLRP, which uses pyrin
domains (so called because they are found in proteins involved in
causing fever) (see Fig. 4.4). NLRs are found in a wide variety of cell
types, although some have restricted cellular expression. Some of
the best studied NLRs are found in immune and inﬂammatory cells
and in barrier epithelial cells. We will discuss two NLR sensors of
bacterial PAMPs here, named NOD1 and NOD2, and other NLRs
later, when we discuss inﬂammasomes.
NOD1 and NOD2, members of the NLRC subfamily, are
expressed in the cytosol of several cell types, including mucosal
epithelial cells and phagocytes, and they respond to bacterial cell
wall peptidoglycans. NOD2 is highly expressed in intestinal Paneth
cells in the small bowel, where it stimulates expression of
antimicrobial 
substances 
called 
defensins 
in 
response 
to
pathogens. NOD1 recognizes a glycosylated tripeptide called
diaminopimelic acid (DAP), derived mainly from gram-negative
bacterial peptidoglycan, whereas NOD2 recognizes a distinct
molecule called muramyl dipeptide (MDP), derived from both
gram-negative and gram-positive peptidoglycans. These peptides
are released from intracellular or extracellular bacteria; in the laĴer
case, their presence in the cytosol requires specialized bacterial
mechanisms of delivery of the peptides into host cells. These
mechanisms include type III and type IV secretion systems, which
have evolved in pathogenic bacteria as a means of delivering toxins
into host cells. NOD1 and NOD2 also can be activated by other
y
microbial PAMPs, including bacterial proteins and viral RNAs.
When oligomers of NODs recognize their ligands, a conformational
change occurs that allows the CARD eﬀector domains of the NOD
proteins to recruit multiple copies of the kinase RIP2, forming a
signaling complex that has been called the NOD signalosome. The
RIP2 kinases in these complexes activate NF-κB, which stimulates
production of cytokines and other molecules involved in
inﬂammation, similar to TLRs that signal through MyD88,
discussed earlier. Both NOD1 and NOD2 appear to be important in
innate 
immune 
responses 
to 
bacterial 
pathogens 
in 
the
gastrointestinal tract, such as Helicobacter pylori and Listeria
monocytogenes.
Certain NOD2 gene polymorphisms increase the risk for an
inﬂammatory disease of the bowel called Crohn’s disease. A
possible explanation for this association is that the disease-
associated NOD2 variants are defective in their ability to sense
microbial products, resulting in defective innate responses against
commensal and pathogenic organisms in the intestine. If these
organisms gain access to the intestinal wall, they may trigger
chronic inﬂammation. Also, gain-of-function mutations of NOD2
that cause increased NOD signaling and NF-κB activation lead to a
systemic inﬂammatory disease called Blau syndrome.
Cytosolic DNA Sensors and the STING Pathway
Cytosolic DNA sensors (CDSs) are molecules that detect double-
stranded (ds) DNA in the cytosol and activate signaling pathways
that initiate antimicrobial responses, including type  I  IFN
production and autophagy. DNA may be released into the cytosol
from intracellular microbes. Furthermore, host DNA damage due
to various factors, such as radiation, toxins, or mutations, will lead
to the delivery of that DNA into the cytoplasm in micronuclei
whose nuclear envelopes degrade, exposing the DNA to cytosolic
CDSs. Cytosolic DNA may also be produced during normal
turnover but is usually rapidly degraded by endonucleases. The
ability of the innate immune system to distinguish and react to
microbial or damaged self DNA and not normal self DNA is partly
related to the location of most of the DNA sensors in the cytosol,
where DNA should not be in normal uninfected cells.
FIGURE 4.4  NOD-like receptors.Members of the
NOD-like receptor (NLR) family that perform
immune functions can be assigned to one of four
subfamilies: NLRA, NLRB, NLRC, and NLRP, each
with a different N-terminal effector domain. NLRA,
better known as CIITA, is a transcription factor
that has an N-terminal transactivating (TA) domain
required for class II major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) gene expression. NLRB has a
baculovirus inhibition of apoptosis protein repeat
(BIR) domain, of unknown function. NLRC
members have an N-terminal caspase recruitment
and activation domain (CARD), which is involved in
caspase-1 activation. NLRP members have a
pyrin (PYD) domain, which also activates
caspase-1. All NLRs contain a central NOD or
NACHT (NAIP, CIITA, HET-E, and TP1) domain
involved in nucleotide binding, and C-terminal
leucine-rich repeat domains involved in ligand
recognition. Some of the principal functions and
activating ligands of NLRs are shown. ATP,
Adenosine triphosphate; DAP, diaminopimelic
acid; IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; LRR, leucine-
rich repeat; MDP, muramyl dipeptide; NF-κB,
nuclear factor kappa B; NOD, nucleotide
oligomerization domain; ROS, reactive oxygen
species.
The STING (stimulator of IFN genes) pathway is an important
mechanism of DNA-induced activation of type I IFN responses (Fig.
4.5) . In this pathway, cytosolic dsDNA activates the enzyme cGAS
(cyclic 
guanosine 
monophosphate–adenosine 
monophosphate
[GMP-AMP] synthase), which generates a signaling molecule called
cGAMP (cyclic GMP-AMP). STING is an endoplasmic reticulum–
localized transmembrane adaptor protein whose cytosolic tail binds
to cGAMP with high aﬃnity, inducing a conformational change that
leads to its translocation from the endoplasmic reticulum to the
Golgi apparatus. After localization to the Golgi, STING activates
the TBK1 kinase, which phosphorylates and activates the IRF3
transcription factor, leading to type I IFN gene expression. STING
also responds to other cytosolic DNA sensors besides cGAS,
including DAI (DNA-dependent activator of IFN-regulatory
factors) and IFI16 (interferon inducible protein 16). In addition to
inducing IFN production, STING stimulates autophagy, a
mechanism by which cells degrade their own organelles, such as
mitochondria, by sequestering them within membrane-bound
vesicles and fusing the vesicles with lysosomes. In innate
immunity, autophagy is a mechanism to deliver cytosolic microbes
to the lysosome, where they are killed by proteolytic enzymes. In
adaptive immunity, autophagy is one of several mechanisms for
generating microbial peptides in lysosomes for presentation to T
cells.
Gain-of-function mutations in the gene that encodes STING
result in systemic inﬂammatory disease with manifestations in skin
and lung, driven by excess type I IFN production. This disorder is
one example of a group of diseases characterized by excess type I
IFN production, called interferonopathies, others of which are
caused by genetic defects that result in increased amounts of
nucleic acids in cells (e.g., mutations aﬀecting endonucleases).
Interferonopathies are part of a broader group of disorders called
autoinﬂammatory 
syndromes 
that 
are 
characterized 
by
spontaneous cytokine-driven inﬂammation without an overt
inciting trigger. Autoinﬂammatory diseases are distinct from
autoimmune diseases, which are disorders of adaptive immunity
caused by antibodies and/or T cells reactive with self antigens.
However, some autoinﬂammatory diseases, including some
interferonopathies, are associated with autoimmune diseases, such
as systemic lupus erythematous. This probably reﬂects the fact that
innate immune responses are needed in addition to antigen to
initiate T and B cell responses, and thus dysregulated production of
innate cytokines that occurs in autoinﬂammatory syndromes may
contribute to inappropriate activation of self-reactive lymphocytes
and subsequent autoimmune disease.
FIGURE 4.5  The STING cytosolic DNA sensing
pathway.Cytoplasmic microbial DNA and self DNA
that accumulates in the cytosol activate the
enzyme cGAS, which catalyzes the synthesis of
cyclic GMP-AMP (cGAMP) from ATP and GTP.
cGAMP binds to STING in the endoplasmic
reticulum membrane, causing STING to
translocate to the Golgi (not shown), and then
STING recruits and activates the kinase TBK1,
which phosphorylates IRF3. Phospo-IRF3 moves
to the nucleus, where it induces type I IFN gene
expression. Self DNA may be produced as a
result of genomic or mitochondrial damage or
from turnover of DNA. The bacterial second
messenger molecules cyclic di-GMP (c-di-GMP)
and cyclic di-AMP (c-di-AMP) are directly sensed
by STING. ATP, Adenosine triphosphate; cGAS,
cyclic GMP-AMP synthase; ER, endoplasmic
reticulum; GTP, guanosine triphosphate; IFN,
interferon; IRF3, interferon response factor 3.
Some cytosolic DNA sensors may work through STING
independent pathways.
• RNA polymerase 3 binds and transcribes AT-rich microbial
dsDNA into an RNA-containing-triphosphate moiety,
which then activates the RIG-I pathway leading to type I
IFN expression, as described later.
• AIM2 (absent in melanoma-2) is another cytosolic sensor
that binds cytosolic dsDNA and forms an inﬂammasome,
which proteolytically generates the biologically active
inﬂammatory cytokine IL-1β. Inﬂammasomes are also
formed with other innate immune sensors and are
described later.
RIG-Like Receptors
RIG-like receptors (RLRs) are cytosolic sensors of viral RNA that
respond by inducing the production of the antiviral type I IFNs. This
family of receptors is named after RIG. RLRs can recognize double-
stranded RNA and RNA-DNA heteroduplexes, which are present
in the genomes of RNA viruses and RNA transcripts of RNA and
DNA viruses. The two best characterized RLRs are RIG-I and
MDA5 (melanoma diﬀerentiation-associated gene 5). Both of these
proteins contain two N-terminal caspase recruitment domains that
interact with other signaling proteins, an RNA-helicase domain,
and a C-terminal domain, the laĴer two being involved in RNA
recognition. RIG-I and MDA5 recognize diﬀerent sets of viral RNAs
that are characteristic of distinct viruses and not typical of
mammalian RNA. For example, MDA5 recognizes long dsRNA (1
to 6 kb), which is longer than dsRNA that may be formed
transiently in normal cells, and RIG-I will only recognize RNA with
a 5′ triphosphate moiety, which is not present in mammalian host
cell cytosolic mRNA because of addition of a 7-methylguanosine
cap. RIG-I can recognize uncapped short single-stranded RNA or
dsRNA. MDA-5 can recognize dsRNAs with or without a 5′ cap but
only if they are unmethylated at the 2′-O position on the ribose in
the ﬁrst nucleotide adjacent to the cap. Coronaviruses can evade
RIG-I by utilizing enzymes that generate a 5′ cap on viral RNAs,
and they evade MDA-5 mediated antiviral responses by expressing
an enzyme that methylates the ribose in the ﬁrst nucleotide of each
viral RNA. RLRs are expressed in a wide variety of cell types,
including bone marrow–derived leukocytes and various tissue cells.
Therefore, these receptors enable the many cell types that are
susceptible to infection by RNA viruses to mount innate immune
responses to these viruses.
On binding viral dsRNA, the RLRs are recruited to the outer
mitochondrial membrane by the MAVS (mitochondrial antiviral-
signaling) protein. This leads to a self-perpetuating mechanism
whereby MAVS polymerizes to form high-molecular-weight
ﬁlamentous aggregates that induce other MAVS molecules to
polymerize. The MAVS aggregates initiate signaling events that
lead to phosphorylation and activation of IRF3 and IRF7, as well as
NF-κB, and these transcription factors induce production of type I
IFNs. MDA5 and RIG-I not only induce type I IFN production but
also directly inhibit viral replication by inhibiting viral RNA-
protein interactions.
Inflammasomes
Inﬂammasomes are multiprotein enzymatic complexes that form in
the cytosol in response to infections or cell injury, which produce
proteolytically active caspase-1 and thereby generate biologically
active forms of the inﬂammatory cytokines IL-1β and IL-18 (Fig. 4.6)
. IL-1β and IL-18 are two homologous cytokines that are produced
as inactive precursors and must be proteolytically cleaved by the
enzyme caspase-1 to become active cytokines that are released from
the 
cell 
and 
promote 
inﬂammatory 
responses. 
Most
inﬂammasomes (so-called canonical inﬂammasomes) are composed
of oligomers of a sensor, caspase-1, and an adaptor that links the
two, and these oligomeric complexes form only when the sensors
detect changes in the cell indicating the presence of infection or
damage. Thus, inﬂammation mediated by IL-1β and IL-18 occurs
when there are PAMPs or DAMPs in the cytosol, indicating
infection or cell injury.
Inﬂammasomes can form with several diﬀerent sensor proteins.
NLR family sensors found in diﬀerent inﬂammasomes include
NLRB, NLRC4, and at least six NLRP proteins (see Fig. 4.4). Sensors
that are not in the NLR family but are used by other
inﬂammasomes include members of the AIM2 family, including
AIM2 and IFI16, which we discussed earlier as DNA sensors. These
proteins contain a DNA sensing domain and a pyrin domain. Pyrin
is another non-NLR sensor protein that contains an N-terminal
pyrin 
domain 
and 
participates 
in 
the 
formation 
of 
an
inﬂammasome. The gene encoding pyrin is mutated in familial
Mediterranean fever, as discussed later.
The formation of the inﬂammasome is induced either when
sensor proteins in the cytosol directly recognize microbial products
or when sensors detect changes in the amount of endogenous
molecules or ions in the cytosol that indirectly indicate the
presence of infection or cell damage. In response to the PAMPs or
indirect signals, the sensors become able to bind other proteins
through 
homotypic 
interactions 
between 
shared 
structural
domains, thereby forming the inﬂammasome complex. For
example, after binding of a ligand, multiple identical NLRP3
proteins interact to form an oligomer, and each NLRP3 protein in
the oligomer binds an adaptor protein called ASC (apoptosis-
associated speck-like protein containing a CARD). The binding of
p
p
g
g
ASC to sensors such as NLRP proteins causes ASC to undergo a
conformational alteration that triggers similar conformational
changes of other ASC molecules in the cytosol by a self-
propagating mechanism. This results in the formation of ﬁlaments
of ASC that can cluster and recruit an inactive precursor of caspase-
1 called pro–caspase-1. The recruitment and consequent clustering
of pro–caspase-1 result in the proteolytic generation of active
caspase-1. Caspases are proteases with cysteine residues in their
active site that cleave substrate proteins at aspartate residues.
Although several other caspases participate in a form of cell death
called apoptosis (see Chapter 15), the main function of caspase-1 is
to cleave the inactive cytoplasmic precursor forms of IL-1β and IL-
18. Caspase-1 cleavage generates active forms of these cytokines,
which then leave the cell and perform various proinﬂammatory
functions. IL-1β lacks a signal peptide required for the secretion of
most proteins from cells; thus, another mechanism is required for
its release from the cytosol. Caspase-1 also cleaves a cytosolic
protein called gasdermin D, generating an N-terminal fragment
that polymerizes to form pores in the plasma membrane through
which processed IL-1β may leave the cell. In some cell types, the
gasdermin pores also contribute to a form of cell death called
pyroptosis, described later. We will describe the action of IL-1β and
IL-18 and the inﬂammatory response in detail later in this chapter.
Suﬃce it to say here that the inﬂammation induced by IL-1 serves a
protective function by recruiting phagocytes that eliminate the
microbes and damaged cells that incited the formation of the
inﬂammasome.
Inﬂammasome activation is induced by a wide variety of
cytoplasmic stimuli that are often associated with infections and cell
stress, 
including 
microbial 
products, 
environmentally 
or
endogenously derived crystals, and reduction in cytosolic potassium
ion (K + ) concentrations (see Fig. 4.6) . NLRC4 recognizes cytosolic
ﬂagellin and components of the type III secretion system of
bacteria. NLRP1 recognizes the anthrax lethal toxin. NLRP3 senses
many DAMPS and PAMPS, including uric acid crystals, aluminum
hydroxide 
crystals 
used 
in 
vaccine 
adjuvants, 
adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) released from mitochondria, silica, bacterial
products, 
bacterial 
toxins 
produced 
by 
streptococci 
and
staphylococci, bacterial DNA-RNA hybrids, and the inﬂuenza
virus. Pyrin responds to numerous bacterial toxins that all mediate
post-translational modiﬁcation of endogenous Rho family GTPases.
FIGURE 4.6  Inflammasomes.Activation of three
different canonical inflammasomes using NLRP3,
NLRC4, or AIM2 as sensors, and the
noncanonical inflammasomes composed of
caspases 4, 5, or 11 are shown. Some of the
ligands or cellular conditions that induce the
assembly each of these inflammasomes are
indicated. The canonical inflammasomes
assemble as multimeric complexes including the
NLR sensors, adaptor proteins such as ASC or
NIAP5, and procaspase 1, leading to proteolytic
generation of active caspase 1, which processes
pro–IL-1β and pro–IL-18 to active IL-1β and IL-
18. Inflammasome-activated caspase-1 can also
proteolytically cleave the cytosolic protein
gasdermin D, generating an N-terminal fragment
that polymerizes in the plasma membrane,
forming a pore that lets IL-1β out of and water
and ions into the cell, leading to cell death by
osmotic lysis. This pathway of cell death is called
pyroptosis, because it is accompanied by
inflammation due to IL-1 released from the dying
cells. Cytoplasmic LPS induces the assembly of
procaspase-4, -5, or -11 molecules to form
nonconical inflammasomes that are multimers of
active caspase 4, 5, or 11, which can also cleave
gasdermin D, leading to gasdermin-N pore
formation and pyrotosis. AIM2, Absent in
melanoma-2; ASC, apoptosis-associated speck-
like protein containing a CARD; ATP, adenosine
triphosphate; DAMPs, damage-associated
molecular patterns; IL-1, interleukin-1; LPS,
lipopolysaccharide; NLR, NOD-like receptor;
PAMPs, pathogen-associated molecular patterns;
ROS, reactive oxygen species; TLR, Toll-like
receptor.
The mechanism by which such varied molecules activate the
same NLR sensors is unclear. The structural diversity of the agents
that activate these sensors suggests that they do not all directly
bind to NLR proteins but may act by inducing a shared set of
changes in endogenous cytoplasmic conditions that activate the
NLRs. Reduced cytoplasmic potassium ion concentration may be
one such common mechanism, because reductions in cellular K+
induced by some bacterial pore-forming toxins can activate
inﬂammasomes, and many of the other known inﬂammasome
activators, such as extracellular ATP, cause increased K+ eﬄux from
cells. Another common mechanism implicated in inﬂammasome
activation is the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which
are toxic free radicals of oxygen that are often produced during cell
injury. Inﬂammasome-activating crystals may work by damaging
lysosomal membranes, thereby releasing ROS into the cytosol,
where 
they 
are 
detected 
by 
the 
sensors 
that 
stimulate
inﬂammasome formation.
Inﬂammasome activation of caspases also causes an inﬂammatory
form of programmed cell death of macrophages and DCs (but not of
neutrophils and most other cell types) called pyroptosis (see Fig. 4.6)
. This form of cell death is the result of plasma membrane pores
formed 
by 
caspase-generated 
fragments 
of 
gasdermin 
D,
mentioned earlier as a pathways for IL-1β release from cells. These
pores contribute to osmotic death of macrophages and DCs,
characterized by inﬂux of ﬂuid, swelling of cells, loss of plasma
membrane integrity, and release of inﬂammatory mediators,
including IL-1β, IL-18, TNF, IL-6, and IL-8. Pyroptosis also results
in the death of certain microbes that gain access to the cytosol.
Pyroptosis is induced by canonical inﬂammasomes using the
sensors NLRC4, NLRP1, AIM2, pyrin, and NLRP3, all leading to
activation of caspase-1, which cleaves gasdermin D, removing the
inhibitory C-terminal domain and generating the pore-forming N-
terminal domain. Pyroptosis also may be induced by activation of a
noncanonical inﬂammasome pathway that uses a diﬀerent caspase
(caspase-11 in rodents, caspase-4 or caspase-5 in humans). Bacterial
LPS in the cytosol can directly bind to caspase-11, which leads to
proteolytic activation of gasdermin D and pore formation causing
pyroptosis and also indirectly leads to NLRP3 inﬂammasome
activation and generation of active IL-1β. The ampliﬁcation of
inﬂammation provided by pyroptosis enhances bacterial clearance
but may also contribute to septic shock, a severe systemic reaction
to inﬂammatory cytokines. The absence of caspase-11 in genetically
engineered mice protects them from LPS-induced septic shock.
The discovery that some crystalline substances are potent
inﬂammasome activators has changed our understanding of certain
inﬂammatory diseases. Gout is a painful inﬂammatory condition of
the joints that has long been known to be associated with
deposition of monosodium urate crystals in joints. Experimental
p
y
j
p
evidence suggests that when these crystals are phagocytosed, they
damage the lysosomal membranes of the cells, and this leads to
activation of inﬂammasomes and subsequent inﬂammation. Based
on these ﬁndings, IL-1 antagonists have been used to eﬀectively
treat cases of severe gout that are resistant to conventional
antiinﬂammatory drugs. Similarly, pseudogout is caused by
deposition of calcium pyrophosphate crystals and inﬂammasome
activation. Occupational inhalation of silica and asbestos can cause
chronic inﬂammatory and ﬁbrotic disease of the lung, and there is
also interest in the potential of blocking the inﬂammasome or IL-1
to treat these diseases.
Dysregulated activation of inﬂammasomes, most often due to
autosomal gain-of-function mutations in one or another of their
component proteins, leads to inappropriately triggered and excess
IL-1 production. The result is recurrent aĴacks of fever and
localized inﬂammation, most commonly in the skin, joints, and
abdominal cavity. These disorders are called inﬂammasomopathies
or 
IL-1β–activation 
syndromes, 
and 
are, 
like 
type 
1
interferonopathies discussed earlier, autoinﬂammatory syndromes.
The longest studied of the inﬂammasome-related autoinﬂammatory
syndromes is familial Mediterranean fever, caused by mutation of
the MEFV gene, which encodes pyrin. Autoinﬂammatory diseases
caused by mutations in NLRP3 (also known as cryopyrin) are called
cryopyrin-associated periodic syndromes (CAPS). Patients with
CAPS can be successfully treated with IL-1 antagonists, as
predicted from the pathogenesis of the syndromes.
A great deal of interest in inﬂammasomes has recently been
generated by ﬁndings that they may be activated by excessive
amounts of endogenous substances deposited in tissues in the
seĴing of various diseases. These substances include cholesterol
crystals within macrophages in atherosclerosis, free faĴy acids and
lipids in adipose tissue in obesity-associated metabolic syndrome
and type 2 diabetes, and β-amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease. In all of
these situations, activation of inﬂammasomes leads to production
of IL-1 and inﬂammation, which may contribute to the
pathogenesis of the diseases. Such ﬁndings have spurred clinical
trials to alleviate some of these diseases using IL-1 antagonists.
Other Cell-Associated Pattern Recognition
Receptors
Several other types of plasma membrane and cytoplasmic receptors
transmit activating signals similar to TLRs that promote
inﬂammatory responses and enhance killing of microbes or mainly
participate in the uptake of microbes into phagocytes (see Table
4.3).
C-Type Lectins: Receptors for Microbial Carbohydrates
Cellular receptors that recognize carbohydrates on the surface of
microbes facilitate the phagocytosis of the microbes and the
secretion of cytokines that promote inﬂammation and subsequent
adaptive immune responses (Table 4.4) . These receptors belong to
the C-type lectin family, so called because they bind carbohydrates
(hence lectins) in a Ca++-dependent manner (hence C-type). The C-
type lectins are also called C-type lectin-like receptors or CLRs to
parallel the nomenclature of TLRs and other paĴern recognition
receptors. These receptors are integral membrane proteins found
on the surfaces of macrophages, DCs, and some tissue cells. Other
lectins are soluble proteins in the blood and extracellular ﬂuids
(discussed later). All of these molecules contain a conserved
carbohydrate recognition domain. There are several types of plasma
membrane 
C-type 
lectins 
with 
speciﬁcities 
for 
diﬀerent
carbohydrates, including mannose, glucose, N-acetylglucosamine,
and β-glucans. In general, these cell surface lectins recognize
carbohydrate structures found on the cell walls of microorganisms
but not mammalian cells. Some of these C-type lectin receptors
function in the phagocytosis of microbes, and others have signaling
functions that induce protective responses of host cells to microbes.
TABLE 4.4
DC-SIGN, Dendritic cell-specific intercellular adhesion molecule 3 (ICAM-3)-grabbing
nonintegrin; ITAM, immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif; mincle, macrophage-
inducible Ca++-dependent lectin.
• The mannose receptor (CD206) is expressed on
macrophages, DCs, and lymphatic endothelial cells and is
involved in phagocytosis of various types of microbes. This
receptor recognizes certain terminal sugars on microbial
surface carbohydrates, including D-mannose, L-fucose, and
N-acetyl-D-glucosamine. These terminal sugars are often
present on the surface of microorganisms, whereas
eukaryotic cell surface carbohydrates are most often
terminated by galactose and sialic acid. Thus, the terminal
sugars on microbes can be considered PAMPs. Signaling
functions of the mannose receptor are not well described,
and the short cytoplasmic tail of the receptor contains no
known signaling motifs.
• Dectins (DC-associated C-type lectins) include several
diﬀerent lectins encoded within a gene cluster on human
chromosome 12, which also includes genes encoding NK
cell receptors (discussed later). Dectins are expressed on
DCs and macrophages, and play important roles in
antifungal immunity, as well as in responses to certain
bacteria. Dectin-1 (CD369) binds β-glucan, which is a major
cell wall component of many fungal species and is required
for immunity to various pathogenic fungi, including
Candida, Aspergillus, and Pneumocystis. Dectin-2 and Mincle
are two dectins that recognize high-mannose
oligosaccharides on the hyphal form of some fungi and on
bacteria. In response to binding of their ligands, these
dectins induce signaling events in DCs and macrophages
that activate a variety of immune functions. The cytoplasmic
tail of Dectin-1 has an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based
activation motif (ITAM), which engages tyrosine kinases,
which transduce signals leading to gene transcription.
Dectin-2 and Mincle rely on an associated ITAM-bearing
signaling partner protein called FcRγ. ITAMs are used by
many diﬀerent cell-activating receptors in the immune
system, and their mechanism of signaling will be discussed
in Chapter 7. In response to ligand binding to Dectin-1,
Dectin-2, or Mincle, DCs produce cytokines and other
proteins that promote inﬂammation and enhance adaptive
immune responses. Some of the induced cytokines promote
the development of a type of eﬀector T cell called Th17,
which is particularly eﬀective in defense against fungal and
some bacterial infections (see Chapter 10).
• Langerin (CD207) and DC-SIGN (CD209) are two other
lectins expressed on DCs, both of which bind mannose and
have roles in immune responses to various microbes.
Langerin is expressed by epidermal Langerhans cells and
other subsets of DCs in skin and other epithelial barriers.
DC-SIGN is expressed on the majority of DCs as well as on
macrophages and sinusoidal endothelial cells. DC-SIGN
binds to envelope glycoproteins of the hepatitis C virus and
HIV-1 and may play a pathogenic role in disseminating
infection by these viruses.
Scavenger Receptors
Scavenger receptors comprise a structurally and functionally
diverse collection of cell surface proteins that were originally
grouped on the basis of the common characteristic of mediating the
uptake of oxidized lipoproteins into cells. Some of these scavenger
receptors, including scavenger receptor A (SR-A) and CD36, are
expressed on macrophages and mediate the phagocytosis of
microorganisms. In addition, CD36 functions as a coreceptor in
TLR2/6 recognition and response to bacterially derived lipoteichoic
acid and diacylated lipopeptides. A wide range of molecular
structures bind to each scavenger receptor, including LPS,
lipoteichoic acid, nucleic acids, β-glucan, and proteins. The
signiﬁcance of scavenger receptors in innate immunity is
highlighted by increased susceptibility to infection in gene
knockout mice lacking these receptors and by the observation that
several microbial pathogens express virulence factors that block
scavenger receptor–mediated recognition and phagocytosis.
Formyl-Peptide Receptors
The formyl peptide receptor-1 (FPR1), expressed on leukocytes,
recognizes 
bacterial 
peptides 
containing 
N-formylmethionyl
residues and stimulates directed movement of the cells. Because all
bacterial proteins and few mammalian proteins (only those
synthesized 
within 
mitochondria) 
are 
initiated 
by 
N-
formylmethionine, FPR1 enables phagocytes to detect and respond
preferentially to bacterial proteins. The bacterial peptide ligands
that bind this receptor are some of the most potent known
chemoaĴractants for leukocytes. ChemoaĴractants include several
types of diﬀusible molecules, often produced at sites of infection,
that bind to speciﬁc receptors on cells and direct their movement
toward the source of the chemoaĴractant. Other chemoaĴractants,
such as the chemokines discussed in Chapter 3, are made by host
cells. FPR1 and all other chemoaĴractant receptors belong to the
seven-transmembrane, guanosine triphosphate (GTP)–binding (G)
protein–coupled receptor (GPCR) superfamily. These receptors
initiate intracellular responses through associated trimeric G
proteins (see Chapter 7). The G proteins stimulate many types of
cellular responses, including cytoskeletal changes that are
responsible for the increased cell motility.
Cellular Components of the Innate Immune
System
The three main functions of the cells of the innate immune system
are to serve as barriers against infections, act as sentinels to detect
microbes and damaged cells in tissues, and perform eﬀector
functions that eliminate microorganisms. Innate immune cells
express the various paĴern recognition receptors we have just
discussed, and, after recognizing PAMPs and DAMPs, they respond
by producing inﬂammatory cytokines and antiviral proteins and kill
microbes or infected host cells. In addition, some of the cells of
innate immunity are critical for stimulating subsequent adaptive
immune responses.
Epithelial Barriers
Intact epithelial surfaces form physical barriers between microbes in
the external environment and host tissue (Fig. 4.7) . The main
interfaces between the environment and the mammalian host are
the skin and the mucosal surfaces of the gastrointestinal,
respiratory, and genitourinary tracts. These interfaces are lined by
continuous layers of specialized epithelial cells that serve many
physiologic functions, including preventing the entry of microbes.
Loss of the integrity of these epithelial layers by trauma or other
reasons predisposes an individual to infections. We will summarize
the main features of innate defense by epithelial barriers here and
discuss epithelial barrier immunity in greater detail in Chapter 14.
FIGURE 4.7  Epithelial barriers.Epithelia at the
portals of entry of microbes provide physical
barriers, produce antimicrobial substances, and
harbor intraepithelial lymphocytes that are
believed to kill microbes and infected cells.
The protective function of barrier epithelia is in large part
physical. The epithelial cells form tight junctions with one another,
blocking passage of microbes between the cells. In the skin, the
outer layer of keratin, which accumulates as keratinocytes on the
surface die, serves to block microbial penetration into deeper layers
of the epidermis, and cutaneous infections generally occur when
there is a barrier breach. Mucus, a viscous secretion containing
glycoproteins 
called 
mucins, 
is 
produced 
by 
respiratory,
gastrointestinal, and urogenital epithelial cells and physically
impairs microbial invasion. The function of these barriers is
enhanced by ciliary action in the bronchial tree and peristalsis in
the gut, which facilitate elimination of microbes. Although these
physical properties alone are very important in host defense, other
epithelial defense mechanisms have evolved to complement the
mechanical barrier.
Epithelial cells, as well as some leukocytes, produce peptides that
have antimicrobial properties. Two structurally distinct families of
antimicrobial peptides are the defensins and the cathelicidins.
• Defensins are small peptides, 29 to 34 amino acids long,
that contain both cationic and hydrophobic regions and
three intrachain disulﬁde bonds. Two families of human
defensins, named α and β, are distinguished by the location
of these bonds. Defensins are produced by epithelial cells
of mucosal surfaces and by granule-containing leukocytes,
including neutrophils, NK cells, and cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTLs). The set of defensin molecules
produced diﬀers among diﬀerent cell types. Paneth cells
within the crypts of the small bowel are a major producer of
α-defensins. Paneth cell defensins are sometimes called
crypticidins; their function is to limit the amount of luminal
microbes near the epithelial barrier. Defensins are also
produced in the colon, in respiratory mucosal cells, and in
the skin. Some defensins are constitutively produced by
some cell types, but their secretion may be enhanced by
cytokines and microbial products. In other cells, defensins
are produced only in response to cytokines and microbial
products. The protective actions of the defensins include
both direct toxicity to microbes, including bacteria, fungi,
and enveloped viruses, and the activation of cells involved
in the inﬂammatory response to microbes. Defensins kill
microbes by a variety of mechanisms, many of which
depend on their ability to insert into and disrupt functions
of microbial membranes.
• Cathelicidin, produced by neutrophils and barrier epithelial
cells in the skin, gastrointestinal tract, and respiratory tract,
is synthesized as an 18-kD precursor protein that is secreted
and then proteolytically cleaved into two peptides, each
with protective functions. Both precursor synthesis and
proteolytic cleavage may be stimulated by inﬂammatory
cytokines and microbial products. The active cathelicidins
protect against infections by multiple mechanisms,
including direct toxicity to a broad range of microorganisms
and the activation of various responses in leukocytes and
other cell types that promote eradication of microbes. The
C-terminal fragment, called LL-37, can bind and neutralize
LPS, the toxic component of the outer wall of gram-negative
bacteria that is recognized by TLR4.
Barrier epithelia contain certain types of lymphocytes, including
intraepithelial T lymphocytes, which recognize and respond to
commonly encountered microbes. Intraepithelial T lymphocytes are
present in the epidermis of the skin and in mucosal epithelia.
Various subsets of intraepithelial lymphocytes are present in
diﬀerent proportions, depending on species and tissue location.
These subsets are distinguished mainly by the type of antigen
receptors they express. Some intraepithelial T lymphocytes express
the conventional αβ form of the T cell receptor (TCR), which is
present on most T cells in lymphoid tissues and in the circulation.
Other T cells in epithelia express a form of antigen receptor called
the γδ TCR that may recognize peptide and nonpeptide antigens. A
characteristic of intraepithelial T cells is the limited diversity of
their antigen receptors, compared with most T cells in the adaptive
immune system. These intraepithelial T lymphocytes are thought to
recognize a small number of commonly encountered microbial
structures, a typical feature of innate paĴern recognition receptors
we have described. It is also possible that these lymphocytes are
activated not by antigen recognition but by cytokines and other
molecules produced by epithelial cells in response to stress.
Intraepithelial lymphocytes may function in host defense by
secreting cytokines, activating phagocytes, and killing infected cells.
Phagocytes
Cells that have specialized phagocytic functions, primarily
macrophages and neutrophils, eliminate microbes that breach
epithelial barriers. We introduced these cell types in Chapter 2, and
we will discuss many other details of their functions in the context
of the inﬂammatory response later in this chapter. The essential
role that phagocytes play in innate immune defense against
microbes is demonstrated by the high rate of bacterial and fungal
infections in patients with low blood neutrophil counts caused by
bone marrow cancers or chemotherapy and irradiation for cancer
(which destroys immature cells in the bone marrow) and in patients
with inherited deﬁciencies in the functions of neutrophils and
macrophages. 
Neutrophils 
and 
monocytes 
are 
circulating
phagocytes that are recruited into tissues in response to signals
generated by innate sentinel cells. The monocytes rapidly
diﬀerentiate into macrophages after leaving the blood. Tissue-
resident macrophages are always present in most tissues under
normal conditions and also serve as sentinel cells.
Dendritic Cells
Dendritic cells rapidly and eﬃciently detect invading microbes
because of their location in tissues and their expression of numerous
paĴern recognition receptors for PAMPs and DAMPs. DCs express
many diﬀerent types of TLRs and cytoplasmic paĴern recognition
receptors, making them versatile sensors of PAMPs and DAMPs. In
response to invading microbes, they secrete inﬂammatory cytokines
that promote recruitment of additional leukocytes from the blood.
The plasmacytoid subset of DCs is a major source of the antiviral
cytokines type I IFNs, produced in response to viral infections. We
will discuss the antiviral actions of type I IFNs in more detail later
in the chapter.
The ability of DCs to promote T lymphocyte responses after innate
immune activation also makes them an important bridge between
innate and adaptive immunity. The reactions of DCs to microbes in
the early innate response enhance the ability of the DCs to activate
T cells in the subsequent adaptive immune response. DCs capture
antigens and display them to T cells (see Chapter 6). DCs activated
by microbial PAMPs also express membrane molecules called
costimulators that promote T cell responses. In addition,
depending on the nature of the microbe that induces the innate
response, a DC will direct naive T cell diﬀerentiation into distinct
types of eﬀector cells, such as IFN-γ–producing Th1 cells or IL-17–
producing Th17 cells. These features of DCs will be discussed in
Chapters 9 and 10. Because of their tissue residence and ability to
rapidly detect infections in the tissues, DCs are the prototypic
sentinels of the immune system.
Cytokine-Producing Innate Lymphoid Cells
Innate lymphoid cells (ILCs), which were introduced in Chapter 2,
are bone marrow–derived cells with lymphocyte morphology that
were discovered as cells that produced cytokines similar to those
made by helper T cells but lacked TCRs. There are diﬀerent subsets
of ILCs that arise from the same common lymphoid precursor that
gives rise to B and T cells, but the precise steps in ILC development
are not fully understood, especially in humans. It is clear that
during their development, there are branch points giving rise to
three diﬀerent “helper” subsets of ILCs, which function mainly by
secreting diﬀerent types of cytokines, similar to CD4+ helper T cell
subsets, and a separate branch giving rise to NK cells, which
function as cytotoxic eﬀectors in addition to secreting the cytokine
IFN-γ, similar to CD8+ CTLs. We will describe cytokine-producing
ILC subsets in this section and NK cells in the following section.
Three subsets of ILCs, called ILC1, ILC2, and ILC3, produce
diﬀerent cytokines and express diﬀerent transcription factors,
analogous to the Th1, Th2, and Th17 subsets of CD4 +   T
lymphocytes (Fig. 4.8) . ILC1s produce IFN-γ and express the
transcription factor T-BET, like Th1 cells. ILC2s produce mainly IL-5
and IL-13. and express the transcription factor GATA3, like Th2
cells. ILC3s produce IL-22 and/or IL-17 and express the
transcription factor RORγt, like Th17 cells. Because ILCs do not
express T cell receptors, they must be activated by diﬀerent
mechanisms than helper T cells to produce these cytokines. The
best-deﬁned stimuli for ILC cytokine production are other
cytokines, sometimes called alarmins, which are released in the
context of innate responses to infections and tissue damage; each
ILC subset is activated by diﬀerent cytokines (see Fig. 4.8).
FIGURE 4.8  Cytokine producing innate lymphoid cell
subsets.The three major subsets of cytokine
producing innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) develop
from the common lymphoid progenitor that also
gives rise to B and T lymphocytes and natural
killer (NK) cells (not shown). A common ILC
precursor identified by the Id2 transcription factor
differentiates into three major subsets of cytokine-
producing ILCs. Each differentiated subset is
distinguished by expression of distinct
transcription factors and by cytokines produced
when activated, as indicated. The cytokines that
drive differentiation into ILC1, 2, or 3 subsets, as
well as the cytokines that activate ILCs to
produce their own subset-specific cytokines, are
shown. The major known functions of the ILCs are
also indicated. The cytokines indicated in bold are
discussed in Chapter 10, in the context of T cell
responses. The functions of the other cytokines
mentioned in the figure are summarized later in
this chapter (see Table 4.5), and all these
cytokines are listed in Appendix I. IFN, Interferon;
IL, interleukin; TSLP, thymic stromal
lymphopoietin.
ILC subsets may participate in host defense against distinct
pathogens and also may be involved in inﬂammatory disorders.
ILC1s are likely important for defense against intracellular
microbes. ILC2s are important for defense against helminthic
parasites, and they also may contribute to allergic diseases. ILC3s
are found at mucosal sites and participate in defense against
extracellular fungi and bacteria, as well as in maintaining the
integrity of epithelial barriers. Lymphoid tissue–inducer (LTi) cells
are a subtype of ILC3s, which, in addition to secreting IL-17 and IL-
22, also express the membrane molecule lymphotoxin and secrete
TNF, both of which are required for the normal development of
lymphoid organs (see Chapter 2).
The feature of ILCs that makes them potentially important for
early host defense is that they are always resident in epithelial
barrier tissues, poised to react against microbes that breach those
barriers. In contrast, T cells circulate through secondary lymphoid
organs and migrate into tissues only after they are activated and
diﬀerentiate into eﬀector cells, a process that may take several days
after encounter with a microbe. Because corresponding subsets of
ILCs and helper T cells produce similar cytokines, they may work in
a temporally coordinated way, with ILCs being the early innate
participants, activated by alarmins in infected tissues, and the
helper T cells appearing later as part of adaptive immunity. The
actions of ILC1s, NK cells, and Th1 cells are sometimes grouped
under type I immunity (along with activated CD8+ T cells, discussed
in later chapters), ILC2s and Th2 cells are type II immunity, and
ILC3s and Th17 cells comprise type III immunity. In general,
although ILCs may be active early, eﬀector T cells rapidly become
the dominant participants because they are more numerous and
make much larger amounts of cytokines. The contribution of ILCs
to host defense has been diﬃcult to establish because it has not
been possible to selectively eliminate these cells or their cytokines
in experimental animals without having an impact on the
analogous T lymphocytes as well. The role of ILCs in host defense
and inﬂammatory diseases in humans is also uncertain because
these cells are numerically rare in blood and therefore diﬃcult to
study.
Natural Killer Cells
NK cells are cytotoxic cells that play important roles in innate
immune responses, mainly against viruses and intracellular bacteria.
The natural killer designation derives from the fact that their major
function is killing infected cells, similar to the adaptive immune
system’s killer cells, the CTLs, but unlike naive CD8+ T cells, NK
cells are functionally competent to kill other cells when they are
present in the blood or tissues without further diﬀerentiation
(hence natural). NK cells also secrete IFN-γ and thus resemble
ILC1s. They are also developmentally related to ILC1s but are not
considered identical because they are deﬁned based on cytotoxic
activity, not cytokine production. Unlike ILCs, which are found in
peripheral tissues but are rare in the blood and lymphoid organs,
NK cells constitute 5% to 20% of lymphocytes in the blood and
spleen. They are rare in other lymphoid organs and in most
nonlymphoid tissues but are numerous in the liver and placenta.
NK cells in the blood appear as large lymphocytes with numerous
cytoplasmic granules. NK cells do not express diverse, clonally
distributed antigen receptors typical of B and T cells. Rather, they
use germline DNA–encoded receptors (discussed later) to
distinguish pathogen-infected cells from healthy cells. They can be
identiﬁed in the blood by expression of CD56 and the absence of
the T cell marker CD3. Most human blood NK cells also express
CD16, an IgG Fc receptor that is involved in recognition of
antibody-coated cells.
Functions of Natural Killer Cells
The eﬀector functions of NK cells are to kill infected cells and to
produce 
IFN-γ, 
which 
activates 
macrophages 
to 
destroy
phagocytosed microbes (Fig. 4.9) . The mechanism of NK cell–
mediated cytotoxicity is essentially the same as that of CD8+ CTLs,
which we will describe in detail in Chapter 11. NK cells, like CTLs,
have granules that contain proteins that mediate killing of target
cells. When NK cells are activated, granule exocytosis releases these
proteins adjacent to the target cells. One NK cell granule protein,
called perforin, facilitates the entry of other granule proteins, called
granzymes, into the cytosol of target cells. The granzymes are
proteolytic enzymes that initiate a sequence of signaling events that
cause death of the target cells by apoptosis. By killing cells infected
by viruses and intracellular bacteria, NK cells eliminate reservoirs
of infection. Early in the course of a viral infection, NK cells are
expanded and activated by recognition of activating ligands on the
infected cells and by the cytokines IL-12 and IL-15, and they kill
infected cells before antigen-speciﬁc CTLs can become fully active,
which usually takes 5 to 7 days. NK cells also may be important
later in the course of viral infection by killing infected cells that
have escaped CTL-mediated immune aĴack by reducing expression
of class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules. Some
tumors, especially those of hematopoietic origin, are targets of NK
cells because the tumor cells upregulate ligands for activating NK
receptors and do not express normal levels or types of class I MHC
molecules, which inhibit NK cell activation, discussed later.
FIGURE 4.9  Functions of natural killer cells. A,
Natural killer (NK) cells recognize ligands on
infected cells or cells undergoing other types of
stress and kill the host cells. In this way, NK cells
eliminate reservoirs of infection as well as
dysfunctional cells. B, NK cells respond to
interleukin-12 (IL-12) produced by macrophages
and secrete interferon- γ (IFN-γ), which activates
the macrophages to kill phagocytosed microbes.
NK cell–derived IFN-γ increases the capacity of macrophages to
kill phagocytosed bacteria, similar to IFN-γ produced by T cells
(see Chapter 10). This IFN-γ–dependent NK cell–macrophage
interaction can control an infection with intracellular bacteria for
several days or weeks and thus allow time for T cell–mediated
immunity to develop and eradicate the infection. IFN-γ produced
by NK cells in lymph nodes can also direct the diﬀerentiation of
naive T cells into Th1 cells (see Chapter 10). Some human NK cells
do not express CD16, nor are they cytotoxic, but they do produce
abundant IFN-γ. Predictably, deﬁciency of NK cells, seen in rare
individuals, leads to increased susceptibility to infection by some
viruses and intracellular bacteria.
Activating and Inhibitory Receptors of Natural Killer Cells
NK cells distinguish infected and stressed cells from healthy cells,
and NK cell function is regulated by a balance between signals that
are generated by activating and inhibitory receptors. In general, the
activating receptors recognize ligands on infected and injured cells,
and the inhibitory receptors recognize ligands on healthy normal
cells (Fig. 4.10). When an NK cell interacts with another cell, the
outcome is determined by the integration of signals generated from
the array of inhibitory and activating receptors that are expressed
by the NK cell and that interact with ligands on the other cell.
Engagement of activating receptors stimulates the killing activity of
the NK cells, resulting in destruction of stressed or infected cells.
In contrast, engagement of inhibitory receptors shuts oﬀ NK cell
activity and prevents destruction of healthy cells. Because of the
stochastic nature of their expression, there is signiﬁcant diversity in
the array of activating and inhibitory receptors that diﬀerent NK
cells express in any one individual. The result of this is that
individual NK cells, even in the same person, may respond to cells
infected with diﬀerent types of microbes.
FIGURE 4.10  Functions of activating and inhibitory
receptors of natural killer cells. A, Activating
receptors of natural killer (NK) cells recognize
ligands on target cells and activate protein
tyrosine kinases (PTKs), whose activities are
inhibited by inhibitory receptors that recognize
class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
molecules and activate protein tyrosine
phosphatases (PTP). NK cells do not efficiently kill
class I MHC–expressing healthy cells. B, If a viral
infection or other stress inhibits class I MHC
expression on infected cells and induces
expression of additional activating ligands, the NK
cell inhibitory receptor is not engaged and the
activating receptor is unopposed to trigger
responses of NK cells, including killing of target
cells and cytokine secretion. In addition, infected
cells or cancer cells may express increased
amounts of activating ligands, inducing more
tyrosine phosphorylation than can be removed by
inhibitory receptor–associated phosphatases,
resulting in killing of the stressed cells (not
shown). Structural details and ligands of inhibitory
and activating NK cell receptors are shown in Fig.
4.11.
Activating receptors on NK cells recognize a heterogeneous group
of ligands, some of which may be expressed on normal cells and
others mainly on cells that have undergone stress, are infected with
microbes, or are neoplastic (Fig. 4.11) . Many of the NK cell–
activating receptors are called killer cell Ig-like receptors (KIRs)
because they contain a structural domain named the Ig fold, ﬁrst
identiﬁed in antibody (also known as Ig) molecules, discussed in
Chapter 5. All proteins with Ig folds are members of the Ig
superfamily. A second important group of activating NK receptors
are similar to the family of C-type lectins, which are proteins with
carbohydrate-binding properties similar to the CLRs discussed
earlier in the chapter, although these NK receptors do not bind
carbohydrates. One well-studied lectin-like NK cell–activating
receptor is NKG2D, which binds class I MHC–like proteins,
including MHC class I–related gene A (MIC-A) and MIC-B, and
proteins of the ULBP family. The expression of all of these NKG2D
ligands is increased by cellular stress, so they are found on virally
infected cells and tumor cells but not normal cells. The NKG2D
receptor associates with a signaling subunit named DAP10, which
has signaling functions that stimulate NK cell cytotoxicity against
target cells.
Another important activating receptor on NK cells is CD16
(FcγRIIIA), which is a low-aﬃnity receptor for IgG antibodies.
Antibody molecules have highly variable antigen-binding ends, and
on the opposite end, they have an invariant portion, called the Fc
region, that interacts with various other molecules in the immune
system. We will describe the structure of antibodies in detail in
Chapter 5, but for now, it is suﬃcient to know that CD16 binds to
the Fc regions of certain types of antibodies called IgG1 and IgG3.
CD16 associates with one of two diﬀerent signaling proteins
(FcεRIγ or ζ). During an infection, the adaptive immune system
produces IgG1 and IgG3 antibodies that bind to microbial antigens
expressed on the surface of infected cells, and CD16 on NK cells
can bind to the Fc regions of these antibodies. As a result, CD16
generates activating signals, through its associated signaling
partners, and the NK cells kill the infected cells that have been
p
coated with antibody molecules. This process is called antibody-
dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity; it is an eﬀector mechanism of
adaptive immunity, which we will discuss in Chapter 13 when we
consider humoral immunity.
Inhibitory receptors of NK cells recognize class I MHC molecules,
which are cell surface proteins normally expressed on all healthy
nucleated cells in the body (see Fig. 4.11) . A major function of class
I MHC molecules, distinct from their role in regulating NK cell
activation, is to display peptides derived from cytosolic proteins,
including microbial proteins, on the cell surface for recognition by
CD8+ T lymphocytes. We will describe the structure and function of
MHC molecules in relation to T cell antigen recognition in Chapter
6. For now, it is important to understand that NK cells use
fundamentally diﬀerent types of receptors than do T cells to
recognize class I MHC molecules. These NK receptors for class I
MHC molecules inhibit NK cell activation. This is useful because
normal cells express class I MHC molecules, and many viruses and
other causes of cell stress lead to a loss of cell surface expression of
class I MHC. Thus, NK cells interpret the presence of class I MHC
molecules as a marker of normal, healthy self, and their absence is
an indication of infection or damage. As a result, NK cells will be
inhibited by healthy cells but will not receive inhibitory signals
from infected or stressed cells. At the same time, the NK cells are
likely to receive activating signals from infected or damaged cells
through activating receptors. The net result will be activation of the
NK cells to secrete cytokines and to kill the infected or stressed cell.
This ability of NK cells to become activated by host cells that lack
class I MHC has been called recognition of missing self.
FIGURE 4.11  Structure and ligands of activating and
inhibitory receptors of natural killer cells.Different
activating and inhibitory receptors of NK cells use
different associated signaling components and
recognize different ligands. B7-H6 is a member of
the B7 family that is expressed mainly on tumor
cells. BAT3, HLA-B-associated transcript 3; HLA,
human leukocyte antigen; ITAM, immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based activation motif; HSPG, heparan
sulfate proteoglycan; ITIM, immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based inhibition motif KIR, killer cell
immunoglobulin (Ig)-like receptors; MHC, major
histocompatibility complex; MIC, MHC class I
polypeptide-related sequence; NCR, natural
cytotoxicity receptor. ULBP, UL-16 binding protein.
The largest group of NK inhibitory receptors belong to the same
KIR family that includes activating receptors, discussed earlier.
These inhibitory KIRs bind a variety of diﬀerent class I MHC
molecules. Other inhibitory receptors are lectin-like, such as the
CD94/NKG2A heterodimer, which recognizes a class I MHC
molecule called HLA-E. Interestingly, HLA-E displays peptides
derived from other class I MHC molecules, so CD94/NKG2A is a
surveillance receptor for several diﬀerent class I MHC molecules.
Activating and inhibitory NK receptors contain structural motifs
in their cytoplasmic tails that engage the signaling pathways that
respectively promote or inhibit target cell killing and cytokine
secretion (see Figs. 4.10 and 4.11) . Activating receptors have
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs), which
contain tyrosine residues that become phosphorylated by
cytoplasmic kinases after binding of ligands to the receptors. Other
protein kinases are recruited to the modiﬁed ITAMs and become
activated, and these kinases contribute to further signaling by
phosphorylating additional proteins, eventually leading to cytotoxic
activity and cytokine secretion. ITAMs also are found in the
cytoplasmic tails of other signaling receptors in the immune
system, including the antigen receptor complexes of T and B cells,
and we will discuss their structure and signaling functions in more
detail in Chapter 7. In some activating receptors, a single
polypeptide chain contains the cytoplasmic ITAM and the
extracellular ligand-binding portion. In other receptors, the ITAMs
are in separate polypeptide chains, such as FcεRIγ (so named
because it was ﬁrst identiﬁed as a signaling chain of the Fcε
receptor, see Chapter 20), ζ (a component of the TCR complex), and
DAP12. These signaling proteins do not bind ligands but are
noncovalently associated with the ligand-binding chains (see Fig.
4.11).
Inhibitory receptors of NK cells have immunoreceptor tyrosine-
based inhibition motifs (ITIMs), which engage molecules that block
the signaling pathways of activating receptors (see Figs. 4.10 and
4.11). ITIMs contain tyrosine residues that are phosphorylated
when ligands bind to the inhibitory receptor, and then serve as
docking sites for the recruitment and activation of tyrosine
phosphatases, which remove phosphates from several signaling
proteins generated by the signaling downstream of NK activating
receptors. The end result is blocking of the signaling functions of
activating receptors. ITIMs also are found in cytoplasmic tails of
other receptors besides NK inhibitory receptors, and we will
discuss their structure and signaling functions in more detail in
Chapter 7.
KIR genes are polymorphic, meaning that there are several allelic
variants in the human population. As a result, one person may
express diﬀerent receptors than another person. Groups of KIR
alleles are often inherited together from a single parent. These
groups of linked genes are called KIR haplotypes. There are two
major KIR haplotypes and some rarer ones. Haplotypes diﬀer in the
number of receptors encoded, and some have more or fewer
activating receptors than others. Some haplotypes are associated
with increased susceptibility to some disorders, including
spontaneous abortion and a type of eye inﬂammation called uveitis.
Cytokines can enhance the functional responses of NK cells. The
major cytokines of the innate immune system that stimulate NK
cell function are IL-12, IL-15, IL-18, and type I IFNs interferons
(discussed later). Each of these cytokines enhances the cytotoxic
activity of NK cells, and they can stimulate IFN-γ secretion by the
NK cells independent of activating receptors. In addition, IL-15 is
an important growth factor for NK cells.
T and B Lymphocytes With Limited Antigen
Receptor Diversity
In contrast to the cells of the innate immune system that we have
discussed so far, most T and B lymphocytes of the adaptive immune
system use highly diverse receptors to recognize an enormous
variety of diﬀerent antigens. Certain small populations of
lymphocytes express antigen receptors that are structurally the
same as those of T and B cells, but these receptors have very liĴle
diversity. These T and B cell subsets may recognize structures
expressed by many diﬀerent or commonly encountered microbial
species. T cells with limited antigen receptor diversity include
invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells, γδ T cells, mucosa-associated
invariant T (MAIT) cells, and intraepithelial T cells with αβ TCRs
(mentioned earlier). B cell subsets that produce antibodies with a
limited set of speciﬁcities include B-1 cells and marginal-zone B
cells. Although these T and B cells perform functions similar to
those of their more clonally diverse counterparts, the nature of
their speciﬁcities places them in a special category of lymphocytes
that is more akin to cells of innate immunity than to cells of
adaptive immunity. These special T and B cell subsets are described
in Chapters 10 and 12, respectively.
Mast Cells
Mast cells are sentinel cells present in the skin, mucosal epithelium,
and connective tissues that rapidly secrete proinﬂammatory
cytokines and lipid mediators in response to infections and other
stimuli. We introduced mast cells in Chapter 2. Recall that these
cells contain abundant cytoplasmic granules ﬁlled with various
inﬂammatory mediators that are released when the cells are
activated, either by microbial products or by a special antibody-
dependent mechanism. The granule contents include vasoactive
amines (such as histamine) that cause vasodilation and increased
capillary permeability, and proteolytic enzymes that can kill
bacteria or inactivate microbial toxins. Mast cells also synthesize
and 
secrete 
lipid 
mediators 
(such 
as 
leukotrienes 
and
prostaglandins) and cytokines (such as TNF). Because mast cells are
usually located adjacent to blood vessels (see Fig. 2.1B), their
released granule contents rapidly induce changes in the blood
vessels that promote acute inﬂammation. Mast cells express TLRs,
and TLR ligands can induce mast cell degranulation. Mast cell–
deﬁcient mice are impaired in controlling bacterial infections,
probably because of defective innate immune responses. Mast cell
products also provide defense against helminths and are
responsible for symptoms of allergic diseases. We will return to a
detailed discussion of mast cells in the context of allergic diseases
in Chapter 20.
Soluble Effector Molecules of Innate
Immunity
Several diﬀerent kinds of molecules that recognize microbes and
promote innate responses exist in soluble form in the blood and
extracellular ﬂuids. These molecules provide early defense against
pathogens that enter the circulation or are present outside host
cells at some stage of their life cycle. The soluble eﬀector molecules
function in two major ways:
• By binding to microbes, they act as opsonins and enhance
the ability of macrophages and neutrophils to phagocytose
the microbes. This is because the phagocytic cells express
membrane receptors speciﬁc for the opsonins, and these
receptors can eﬃciently mediate the internalization of the
complex of opsonin and bound microbes and subsequent
destruction of the ingested microbes.
• After binding to microbes, soluble mediators of innate
immunity promote inﬂammatory responses that bring more
phagocytes to sites of infections and they may also directly
kill microbes.
The soluble eﬀector molecules are sometimes called the humoral
branch of innate immunity, analogous to the humoral branch of
adaptive immunity mediated by antibodies. The major components
of the humoral innate immune system are the complement system,
collectins, pentraxins, and ﬁcolins, which are described next.
FIGURE 4.12  Pathways of complement
activation.The activation of the complement
system may be initiated by three distinct
pathways, all of which lead to the production of
C3a, which stimulates inflammation, and C3b
(early steps). C3b initiates the late steps of
complement activation, culminating in the
production of peptides that also stimulate
inflammation (C5a) and polymerized C9, which
forms the membrane attack complex (late steps).
The activation, functions, and regulation of the
complement system are discussed in much more
detail in Chapter 13.
The Complement System
The complement system consists of several plasma proteins that
work together to opsonize microbes, to promote the recruitment of
phagocytes to the site of infection, and in some cases to directly kill
the microbes (Fig. 4.12) . Complement activation involves proteolytic
cascades in which an inactive protein, called a zymogen, is altered
to become an active protease that cleaves and thereby induces the
proteolytic activity of the next complement protein in the cascade.
Enzymatic cascades result in tremendous ampliﬁcation of the
amount of proteolytic products that are generated at each step.
These products perform the eﬀector functions of the complement
system.
The ﬁrst step in activation of the complement system is
recognition of molecules on microbial surfaces, and this occurs in
three ways, each referred to as a distinct pathway of complement
activation.
• The classical pathway, so called because it was discovered
ﬁrst, uses a plasma protein called C1q to detect antibodies
bound to the surface of microbes or other structures. Once
C1q binds to the Fc portion of the antibodies, two
associated serine proteases, called C1r and C1s, become
active and initiate a proteolytic cascade involving other
complement proteins. The classical pathway is one of the
major eﬀector mechanisms of the humoral arm of adaptive
immune responses (see Chapter 13). Innate immune system
soluble proteins called pentraxins, which are discussed
later, can also bind C1q and initiate the classical pathway.
• The alternative pathway, which was discovered later but is
phylogenetically older than the classical pathway, is
triggered when a complement protein called C3 directly
recognizes certain microbial surface structures, such as
bacterial LPS. C3 is also constitutively activated at a low
level in blood and extravascular ﬂuid and binds to cell
surfaces, but it is then inhibited by regulatory molecules
present on mammalian cells. Because microbes lack these
regulatory proteins, the spontaneous activation can be
ampliﬁed on microbial surfaces. Thus, this pathway can
distinguish normal self from foreign microbes on the basis
of the presence or absence of the regulatory proteins.
• The lectin pathway is triggered by a plasma protein called
mannose-binding lectin (MBL), which recognizes terminal
mannose residues on microbial glycoproteins and
glycolipids, similar to the mannose receptor on phagocytes
described earlier. MBL is a member of the collectin family
(discussed later) with a hexameric structure similar to that
of the C1q component of the complement system. After
MBL binds to microbes, two zymogens called MASP1
(mannose-associated serine protease 1 or mannan-binding
lectin-associated serine protease) and MASP2, with
functions similar to those of C1r and C1s, associate with
MBL and initiate downstream proteolytic steps identical to
the classical pathway.
Recognition of microbes by any of the three complement pathways
results in sequential recruitment and assembly of additional
complement proteins into protease complexes (see Fig. 4.12) . One of
these complexes, called C3 convertase, cleaves the central protein of
the complement system, C3, producing C3a and C3b. The larger
C3b fragment becomes covalently aĴached to the microbial surface
where the complement pathway was activated. The sequential
enzymatic 
activity 
of 
complement 
proteins 
provides 
such
tremendous ampliﬁcation that millions of C3b molecules can
deposit on the surface of a microbe within 2 or 3 minutes. C3b
serves as an opsonin to promote phagocytosis of the microbes. The
smaller fragment, C3a, is released and stimulates inﬂammation by
acting as a chemoaĴractant for neutrophils, by inducing mast cell
degranulation, and by directly increasing vascular permeability so
that plasma proteins and ﬂuid leak into sites of infections. C3b
binds other complement proteins to form a protease called C5
convertase that cleaves C5, generating a released peptide (C5a) and
a larger fragment (C5b) that remains aĴached to the microbial cell
membranes. C5a exerts the same proinﬂammatory eﬀects as C3a
and is more potent. C5b initiates the formation of a complex of the
complement proteins C6, C7, C8, and C9, which are assembled into
a membrane pore called the membrane aĴack complex (MAC) that
causes lysis of the cells where complement is activated.
The complement system, activated by the alternative and lectin
pathways, is an essential component of innate immunity, and
patients with deﬁciencies in C3 are highly susceptible to recurrent,
often lethal, bacterial infections. Genetic deﬁciencies in MAC
formation (the terminal product of the classical pathway) cause
increased susceptibility to only a limited number of microbes,
notably Neisseria bacteria, which have thin cell walls that make
them especially susceptible to the lytic action of the MAC. The
complement system also contributes to cell and tissue injury in
many inﬂammatory and autoimmune diseases. We will discuss the
complement system in more detail in Chapter 13.
Pentraxins
Several plasma proteins that recognize microbial structures and
participate in innate immunity belong to the pentraxin family,
which is a phylogenetically old group of structurally homologous
pentameric proteins. Prominent members of this family include the
short pentraxins, C-reactive protein (CRP) and serum amyloid P
(SAP), and the long pentraxin PTX3. Both CRP and SAP bind to
several diﬀerent species of bacteria and fungi. The molecular
ligands recognized by CRP and SAP include phosphorylcholine and
phosphatidylethanolamine, respectively, which are found on
bacterial membranes and become exposed on apoptotic cells. CRP,
SAP, and PTX3 all activate complement by binding C1q and
initiating the classical pathway.
Plasma concentrations of CRP are very low in healthy individuals
but can increase up to 1000-fold during infections and in response
to other inﬂammatory stimuli. The increased CRP levels result from
increased synthesis by liver cells induced by the cytokines IL-6, IL-
1, and TNF, which are produced by phagocytes and DCs as part of
the innate immune response to infections or injury. Liver synthesis
and plasma levels of several other proteins, including SAP and
some unrelated to the pentraxins, also increase in response to IL-1,
IL-6, and TNF. All of these plasma proteins are called acute-phase
proteins because they are elevated in the blood during acute
inﬂammatory reactions, and their increased production is part of
the acute-phase response to infection and other insults.
PTX3 is produced by several cell types, including DCs,
macrophages, and endothelial cells, in response to TLR ligands and
inﬂammatory cytokines, such as TNF, and may be considered an
acute-phase reactant. PTX3 is also stored in neutrophil granules
and released as neutrophils die. PTX3 recognizes various molecules
on fungi, certain bacteria, and viruses, as well as apoptotic cells,
and activates the classical complement pathway. Studies with
knockout mice reveal that PTX3 provides protection against these
microbes, including the fungus Aspergillus fumigatus and the
inﬂuenza virus.
Collectins and Ficolins
The collectins are a family of trimeric or hexameric proteins, each
subunit of which contains a collagen-like tail connected by a neck
region to a calcium-dependent (C-type) lectin head. Three members
of this family serve as soluble eﬀector molecules in the innate
immune system; these are MBL and pulmonary surfactant proteins
SP-A and SP-D.
MBL, which is a soluble paĴern recognition receptor that binds
carbohydrates with terminal mannose and fucose, was discussed
earlier in relation to the lectin pathway of complement activation
(Fig. 4.13). MBL also functions as an opsonin by binding to and
enhancing phagocytosis of microbes. Recall that opsonins
simultaneously bind microbes and a surface receptor on phagocyte
membranes, and in the case of MBL, the surface receptor is called
the C1q receptor because it also binds C1q. This receptor mediates
the internalization of microbes that are opsonized by MBL. The
gene encoding MBL is polymorphic, and certain alleles are
associated with impaired hexamer formation and reduced blood
levels. Low MBL levels result in increased susceptibility to a variety
of infections, especially in individuals who have other immune
defects.
Surfactant protein A (SP-A) and surfactant protein D (SP-D) are
collectins with lipophilic properties shared by other surfactants.
They are found in the alveoli of the lungs, and their major functions
are to maintain the ability of alveoli to expand upon inhalation by
reducing surface tension of alveolar ﬂuid, and as mediators of
innate immune responses in the lung. They bind to various
microorganisms and act as opsonins, facilitating ingestion by
alveolar macrophages. SP-A and SP-D can also directly inhibit
bacterial growth, and they may activate macrophages. SP-A– and
SP-D–deﬁcient mice have impaired abilities to resist a variety of
pulmonary infections.
FIGURE 4.13  C1, mannose-binding lectin, and
ficolin.These three homologous hexameric
proteins can all initiate complement activation on
binding to their ligands on cell surfaces. C-type
lectin–like globular heads (H) at the end of
collagenous-like stalks in the C1q and mannose-
binding lectin proteins bind the Fc regions of
immunoglobulin M (IgM) or mannose on the
surface of microbes, respectively. Fibrinogen-like
globular heads on ficolin bind N-acetylglucosamine
on the surface of microbes. Binding results in
conformational changes that activate the serine
protease activity of C1r and C1s, associated with
C1q, or mannose-associated serine protease 1
(MASP1) and MASP2, associated with mannose-
binding lectin and ficolin.
Ficolins are plasma proteins that are structurally similar to
collectins. They possess a collagen-like domain, but instead of a C-
type lectin domain, they have a ﬁbrinogen-type carbohydrate
recognition domain (see Fig. 4.13). Ficolins have been shown to
bind several species of bacteria, opsonizing them and activating
complement in a manner similar to that of MBL. The ligands of the
ﬁcolins include N-acetylglucosamine and the lipoteichoic acid
component of the cell walls of gram-positive bacteria.
Now that we have discussed the general properties and various
components of the innate immune system, including the cells,
cellular pathogen recognition receptors, and soluble eﬀector
molecules, we can consider how these various components work to
protect against pathogens. The three major mechanisms by which
the innate immune system protects against infections are by
inducing inﬂammation, inducing antiviral defense, and stimulating
adaptive immunity.
The Inflammatory Response
The principal way by which the innate immune system deals with
infections and tissue injury is to stimulate acute inﬂammation,
which is the accumulation of leukocytes, plasma proteins, and ﬂuid
derived from the blood at an extravascular tissue site of infection or
injury (Fig. 4.14) . Leukocytes and plasma proteins, which are
critical for innate defense against microbes, normally circulate in
the blood and must be recruited to extravascular sites of infection
and injury, where they perform the eﬀector functions that kill
microbes and begin to repair damaged tissue. Acute inﬂammatory
responses begin with recognition of microbial PAMPs or DAMPs
from injured host cells by tissue sentinel cells, mainly
macrophages, DCs, and mast cells. These sentinels respond by
secreting mediators that act on small blood vessels in ways that
promote increased blood ﬂow, delivery of plasma proteins, and
migration of leukocytes into the tissues. Detailed descriptions of
the 
various 
mediators 
and 
pathologic 
manifestations 
of
inﬂammation can be found in pathology textbooks. We will focus
our discussion on particular aspects of the inﬂammatory process
that have broad relevance to both innate and adaptive immunity
and immune-mediated inﬂammatory diseases, beginning with a
description of the important cytokines in innate immune
inﬂammatory responses.
The Major Proinflammatory Cytokines of
Innate Immunity
One of the earliest responses of the innate immune system to
infection and tissue damage is the secretion of cytokines by tissue
cells, which is critical for the acute inﬂammatory response. The
cytokines of innate immunity have some important general
properties and functions (Table 4.5):
• They are produced mainly by tissue macrophages and DCs,
although other cell types, including mast cells, endothelial
cells, and some epithelial cells, can also produce them.
• Most of these cytokines act on cells close to their cell of
origin (paracrine action). In some severe infections, enough
of the cytokines may be produced so that signiﬁcant
amounts enter the circulation and act at a distance
(endocrine action).
FIGURE 4.14  Acute inflammatory
response.Acute inflammatory responses
begin when microbes transgress epithelial
barriers or when tissue is injured (1), and
then pathogen-associated molecular patterns
(PAMPs) and damage-associated molecular
patterns (DAMPs) activate sentinel cells,
such as macrophages, dendritic cells, mast
cells (2), to secrete cytokines and other
mediators (3). Some of these mediators
(e.g., histamine, prostaglandins) increase the
permeability of capillaries (4), leading to the
entry of plasma proteins (e.g., complement
proteins) into the tissues (5), and others
(interleukin-1, tumor necrosis factor) increase
expression of endothelial adhesion molecules
and chemokines that promote the movement
of leukocytes from the post-capillary venules
into the tissues (6), where the leukocytes
destroy microbes, clear damaged cells (7),
and promote more inflammation and repair.
• Diﬀerent cytokines have similar or overlapping actions or
are functionally unique. One cytokine may stimulate the
production of others, thus seĴing up cascades that amplify
the reaction or induce new reactions.
• The cytokines of innate immunity serve several roles:
inducing inﬂammation, inhibiting viral replication,
promoting T cell responses, and limiting innate immune
responses. These functions are described next and later in
the chapter.
• Many cytokines that are produced by innate immune cells,
such as TNF, IL-17, IL-5, and IFN-γ, are also produced by T
lymphocytes in adaptive immune responses.
• Three of the most important proinﬂammatory cytokines of
the innate immune system are TNF, IL-1 (both of which we
have mentioned several times), and IL-6. We will discuss
the major features of these cytokines, focusing mainly on
TNF and IL-1, before describing their role in acute
inﬂammation.
Tumor Necrosis Factor
TNF is a mediator of the acute inﬂammatory response to bacteria
and other infectious microbes. The name of this cytokine derives
from its original identiﬁcation as a serum substance (factor) that
caused necrosis of tumors, now known to be the result of
inﬂammation and thrombosis of tumor blood vessels. TNF is also
called TNF-α to distinguish it from the closely related TNF-β, which
is also called lymphotoxin. TNF is produced mainly by
macrophages, and also by other cell types, including DCs and mast
cells. In macrophages, it is synthesized as a nonglycosylated type II
membrane homotrimeric protein that is able to bind to one form of
TNF receptor. The membrane form of TNF is cleaved by a
membrane-associated metalloproteinase, releasing a polypeptide
fragment, and three of these polypeptide chains polymerize to form
a triangular pyramid-shaped circulating TNF protein (Fig. 4.15). The
receptor-binding sites are at the base of the pyramid, allowing
simultaneous binding of the cytokine to three receptor molecules.
TNF is a member of a large family of homologous proteins called
the TNF superfamily, all of which share the feature of forming
homotrimers (see Appendix II).
TABLE 4.5
DC, Dendritic cells; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin;
TNF, tumor necrosis factor. (Also see Appendix I.)
There are two distinct TNF receptors called type I (TNFRI) and
type II (TNFRII). The aﬃnities of TNF for its receptors are
unusually low for a cytokine, the K d being only approximately 1 ×
10 −9 M for binding to TNFRI and approximately 5 × 10 −10 M for
binding to TNFRII. Both TNF receptors are present on most cell
types. The TNF receptors are members of a large family of proteins
called the TNF receptor superfamily, many of which are involved in
immune and inﬂammatory responses. These receptors exist as
trimers in the plasma membrane. Ligand binding to some TNF
receptor family members, such as TNFRI, TNFRII, and CD40, leads
to the recruitment of proteins called TNF receptor–associated
factors (TRAFs) to the cytoplasmic domains of the receptors. The
TRAFs activate transcription factors, notably NF-κB and AP1 (see
Chapter 7). Cytokine binding to some family members, such as
TNFRI, may lead to recruitment of an adaptor protein that activates
caspases and triggers apoptosis. Thus, diﬀerent members of the
TNF receptor family can induce gene expression or cell death, and
some can do both.
FIGURE 4.15  Structure of the tumor necrosis factor
(TNF) receptor with bound TNF.The ribbon
structure depicts a top view (A) and a side
view (B) of a complex of three type II TNF
receptors (TNFR II) and one molecule of bound
trimeric TNF, revealed by x-ray crystallography.
The three TNFR II molecules, colored blue,
together bind one homotrimer of TNF, colored
green, with each receptor molecule interacting
with two different TNF monomers in the
homotrimer complex. The binding regions of one
of the three TNFR II molecules to two TNF
monomers are highlighted in the side view by
orange ovals. 
Modified from Mukai Y, Nakamura T, Yoshikawa M, et al. Solution of
the structure of the TNF-TNFR2 complex. Sci Signal. 2010;3:ra83.
TNF production by macrophages is stimulated by PAMPs and
DAMPs. TLRs, NLRs, RLRs, and CDSs can all induce TNF gene
expression, in part by activation of the NF-κB transcription factor.
Many diﬀerent microbial products can therefore induce TNF
production. TNF has multiple local and systemic eﬀects that
account for many of the reactions in inﬂammation (Fig. 4.16). TNF
is a major contributor to inﬂammation in several chronic
inﬂammatory diseases, and anti-TNF agents have become the
mainstay of treatment of many of these diseases. Large amounts of
this cytokine may be produced during infections with gram-
negative and gram-positive bacteria, which express and release the
cell wall TLR ligands LPS and lipoteichoic acid, respectively. Septic
shock, a life-threatening condition resulting from severe infections,
is mediated in large part by TNF. We will discuss septic shock later
in this chapter.
Interleukin-1
IL-1 is also a mediator of the acute inﬂammatory response and has
many actions similar to those of TNF. A major cellular source of IL-
1, like that of TNF, is activated mononuclear phagocytes. IL-1 is also
produced by many cell types other than macrophages, such as
neutrophils, DCs, epithelial cells (e.g., keratinocytes), and
endothelial cells. There are two forms of IL-1, called IL-1α and IL-
1β, that are less than 30% homologous to each other, but they bind
to the same cell surface receptors and have the same biologic
activities. The main biologically active secreted form in the seĴing
of infections and most immune responses is IL-1β.
IL-1 production usually requires two distinct signals, one that
activates new gene transcription and production of a 33-kD
precursor pro–IL-1β polypeptide and a second that activates the
inﬂammasome to proteolytically cleave the precursor to generate
the 17-kD mature IL-1β protein (see Fig. 4.6). As discussed earlier
in this chapter, IL-1β gene transcription is induced by TLR, NLR,
and RLR signaling pathways that activate NF-κB, whereas pro–IL-1β
cleavage is mediated by caspase-1, which is activated by
inﬂammasomes. TNF can also stimulate phagocytes and other cell
types to produce IL-1. This is an example of a cascade of cytokines
that have similar biologic activities. Unlike most secreted proteins,
neither IL-1α nor IL-1β has a hydrophobic signal sequence to target
the nascent polypeptide to the endoplasmic reticulum membrane.
As discussed earlier, IL-1β may be secreted through membrane
pores formed by gasdermin D.
FIGURE 4.16  Local and systemic actions of
cytokines in inflammation.Tumor necrosis factor
(TNF), interleukin-1 (IL-1), and IL-6 have multiple
local and systemic inflammatory effects. TNF and
IL-1 act on leukocytes and endothelium to induce
acute inflammation, and both cytokines induce the
expression of IL-6 from leukocytes and other cell
types. TNF, IL-1, and IL-6 mediate protective
systemic effects of inflammation, including
induction of fever, acute-phase protein synthesis
by the liver, and increased production of
leukocytes by the bone marrow. Systemic TNF
can cause the pathologic abnormalities that lead
to septic shock, including decreased cardiac
function, thrombosis, capillary leak, and metabolic
abnormalities due to insulin resistance.
IL-1 mediates its biologic eﬀects through a membrane receptor
called the type I IL-1 receptor, which is expressed on many cell
types, including endothelial cells, epithelial cells, and leukocytes.
This receptor is an integral membrane protein that contains an
extracellular ligand-binding Ig domain and a TIR signaling domain
in the cytosolic region, which we described earlier in reference to
TLRs. The signaling events that occur when IL-1 binds to the type I
IL-1 receptor are similar to those triggered by TLRs and result in
the activation of NF-κB and AP1 (activator protein 1) transcription
factors (see Chapter 7). A second IL-1 receptor, called the type II IL-
1 receptor, appears incapable of activating downstream signals, and
serves as a decoy receptor that limits responses to IL-1.
Interleukin-6
IL-6 is another important cytokine in acute inﬂammatory responses
that has both local and systemic eﬀects. It induces the synthesis of
acute-phase reactants by the liver and promotes the diﬀerentiation
of IL-17–producing helper T cells. IL-6 is synthesized by
mononuclear 
phagocytes, 
DCs, 
vascular 
endothelial 
cells,
ﬁbroblasts, and other cells in response to PAMPs and DAMPs and
in response to IL-1 and TNF. IL-6 is a homodimer that belongs to
the type I cytokine family (see Chapter 7). The receptor for IL-6
consists of a cytokine-binding polypeptide chain and a signal-
transducing subunit (called gp130) that is also the signaling
component of receptors for other cytokines. The gp130 subunit is
widely expressed on many cell types, but the IL-6 binding chain is
only expressed by leukocytes and hepatocytes, as a transmembrane
protein in association with gp130. However, a soluble form of the
IL-6 binding chain is generated by proteolytic cleavage of the
membrane form and is present in blood and tissue ﬂuids. This
soluble form can bind IL-6, and then the complex can associate with
the extracellular part of gp130 on many cell types and initiate
signaling. This mechanism is called trans-signaling. The IL-6
receptor 
engages 
a 
signaling 
pathway 
that 
activates 
the
transcription factor STAT3 (see Chapter 7). IL-6 is a major
contributor to inﬂammation in several human inﬂammatory
diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis, and antibodies speciﬁc for
the IL-6 receptor are used to treat some forms of arthritis. Some
lymphoproliferative disorders such as Castleman’s disease are
caused by human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8), a virus that encodes a
homolog of IL-6, and IL-6 blockade has been used to treat these
diseases.
Other Cytokines Produced During Innate Immune Responses
In addition to TNF, IL-1, and IL-6, DCs and macrophages activated
by PAMPs and DAMPs produce other cytokines that have
important roles in innate immune responses (see Table 4.5). We will
discuss the main features of some of these cytokines and their roles
in innate immunity in this section; interferons and inhibitory
cytokines are discussed later in the chapter.
IL-12 is secreted by DCs and macrophages and stimulates IFN-γ
production by ILC1s, NK cells, and T cells; enhances NK cell– and
CTL-mediated cytotoxicity; and promotes diﬀerentiation of Th1
cells. IL-12 exists as a disulﬁde-linked heterodimer of 35-kD (p35)
and 40-kD (p40) subunits. The p35 subunit is a member of the type
I cytokine family, and the p40 subunit is also a component of the
cytokine IL-23, which is involved in the diﬀerentiation of Th17 cells.
Therefore, an antibody speciﬁc for p40 blocks both IL-12 and IL-23
and thus inhibits the IL-12–dependent development of Th1 cells
and the IL-23–dependent development of Th17 cells. This antibody
is approved for the treatment of inﬂammatory bowel disease and
psoriasis, which are caused by Th1 and/or Th17 cytokines.
The principal sources of IL-12 are activated DCs and
macrophages. Many cells appear to synthesize the p35 subunit, but
macrophages and DCs are the main cell types that produce the p40
component and therefore the biologically active cytokine. During
innate immune reactions to microbes, IL-12 is produced in
response to TLR and other paĴern recognition receptor signaling
induced by many microbial stimuli, including bacterial LPS or
lipoteichoic acid and virus infections. IFN-γ produced by NK cells
or T cells also stimulates IL-12 production, contributing to a
positive feedback loop.
The receptor for IL-12 is a heterodimer composed of β1 and β2
subunits, both of which are members of the type I cytokine
receptor family. Both chains are required for high-aﬃnity binding
of IL-12 and for signaling, which activates the transcription factor
STAT4. Expression of the β2 chain of the IL-12 receptor is itself
enhanced by IFN-γ, whose production is stimulated by IL-12. This
is an example of a positive ampliﬁcation loop in immune responses.
Studies with gene knockout mice and the phenotype of rare
patients with mutations in the IL-12 receptor support the
conclusion that IL-12 is important for IFN-γ production by NK cells
and T cells and for host resistance to intracellular bacteria and
some viruses. For example, patients with mutations in the IL-12
receptor β1 subunit have been described, and they are highly
susceptible to infections with intracellular bacteria, notably
Salmonella and mycobacteria. IL-12 secreted by DCs during antigen
presentation to naive CD4+ T cells promotes the diﬀerentiation of
these cells into the Th1 subset of helper T cells, which are
important for defense against intracellular infections (see Chapter
10). This is a key way in which innate immunity shapes adaptive
immune responses.
IL-18 enhances the functions of NK cells, similar to IL-12. Recall
that the production of IL-18, like that of IL-1, is dependent on
inﬂammasomes. Also like IL-1, IL-18 binds to a receptor that
signals through a TIR domain. Children with gain-of-function
mutations in NLRC4 have very high levels of inﬂammasome-
generated IL-18 produced by intestinal epithelial cells and suﬀer
from a systemic macrophage activation syndrome, likely due to
excessive IL-18–driven production of IFN-γ from NK cells.
IL-15 stimulates growth and functions of ILC1s, NK cells, and
some T cells. IL-15 is structurally homologous to the T cell growth
factor IL-2, and the heterotrimeric IL-15 receptor shares two
subunits with the IL-2 receptor. An interesting feature of IL-15 is
that it can be expressed on the cell surface bound to the α chain of
its receptor and in this form can be presented to and stimulate
nearby cells that express a receptor composed of the other two
chains (β and γ). IL-15 presented this way by DCs to NK cells in
lymph nodes activates signaling pathways that promote NK cell
IFN-γ production. IL-15 also serves as a survival factor for NK and
memory CD8+ T cells.
IL-25, thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP), and IL-33 are
structurally unrelated cytokines produced by epithelial barrier
cells, as well as other cell types, which stimulate ILC2s, Th2 cells,
and mast cells to produce IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13. The laĴer cytokines
are important for defense against helminths, but also contribute to
allergic disease (see Chapter 20). IL-33 is constitutively expressed
by barrier epithelial cells and stored in their nuclei. It is often
called an alarmin because it is rapidly released from damaged
epithelial cells and then stimulates innate and adaptive responses.
In addition to the cytokines discussed here, other cytokines play
important roles in both innate and adaptive immune responses,
including IL-5, IL-17, and IFN-γ. These cytokines will be discussed
in detail in Chapter 10, when we consider helper T cell subsets that
produce them.
Sequence of Events in Inflammation:
Vascular Changes and Leukocyte Migration
Into Tissues
Acute inﬂammatory responses are initiated when sentinel cells,
including mast cells, tissue-resident macrophages, and DCs, which
are present in normal tissues before infection, use TLRs and cytosolic
innate paĴern recognition receptors to sense microbes and injured
cells (see Fig 4.14) . Mast cells respond to PAMPs and DAMPs by
secreting histamine and prostaglandins that cause vasodilation and
increased capillary permeability, which increases blood ﬂow
through tissues and increases movement of plasma proteins such
as complement proteins, pentraxins, collectins, and antibodies out
of the blood vessels. These soluble innate eﬀector molecules work
in tandem with leukocytes that are recruited into tissue from the
circulation.
Recruitment of large numbers of neutrophils, followed by
monocytes, from blood into tissues typically occurs as part of the
acute inﬂammatory response to infections and tissue injury. The
vasodilation 
caused 
by 
mast 
cell–derived 
histamine 
and
prostaglandins increases the number of these leukocytes entering
aﬀected tissues and also changes blood ﬂow characteristics that
enhance physical interactions of circulating leukocytes with blood
vessel walls. TNF, IL-1, IL-6, and chemokines, all of which are
produced by sentinel cells at the sites of infection or tissue injury,
have multiple eﬀects on capillaries, venules, leukocytes, and bone
marrow, which together increase the local delivery of cells that can
ﬁght infections and repair tissues (see Figs. 4.14 and 4.16; see also
Fig. 3.3). Leukocyte recruitment was described in Chapter 3 and will
be considered only brieﬂy here.
Postcapillary venule endothelial cells increase surface expression
of adhesion molecules for leukocytes. Expression of E-selectin and
ligands for integrins, including intercellular adhesion molecule 1
(ICAM-1) and vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1) are
induced by TNF and IL-1 activation of transcription factors,
including NF-κB. P-selectin stored in endothelial cell cytoplasmic
granules may be mobilized to the cell surface in response to
thrombin generated by the coagulation cascade.
TNF and IL-1 also stimulate various cells to secrete chemokines,
such as CXCL8 and CCL2, which bind to receptors on neutrophils
and monocytes, respectively. As discussed in Chapter 3, these
chemokines increase the aﬃnity of leukocyte integrins for their
ligands and stimulate directional movement of leukocytes. The
result of increased selectin, integrin, and chemokine expression is
an increase in neutrophil and monocyte adhesion to endothelial
cells and transmigration through the vessel wall. The leukocytes
accumulate in the tissues, forming an inﬂammatory inﬁltrate. The
actions of TNF on endothelium and leukocytes are critical for local
inﬂammatory responses to microbes. If inadequate quantities of
TNF are present (e.g., in patients treated with drugs that block TNF
p
g
p
g
or in TNF gene knockout mice), a consequence may be failure to
contain infections.
In addition, TNF, IL-1, and IL-6 produced at inﬂammatory sites
may enter the blood and be delivered to the bone marrow, where
they work in concert with colony-stimulating factors to enhance
production of neutrophils from bone marrow progenitors and
release of mature neutrophils into the blood. In this way, these
cytokines increase the supply of cells that can be recruited to the
sites of infection and replace leukocytes that are consumed during
inﬂammatory reactions (see Fig. 4.16).
Typically, the leukocyte that is recruited ﬁrst into sites of
inﬂammation is the neutrophil because it is the most abundant
leukocyte in the blood and the most rapid responder to chemotactic
signals. Blood monocytes, which become macrophages in the
tissue, become increasingly prominent over time and may be the
dominant population in some reactions. Neutrophils and
monocyte-derived macrophages phagocytose and kill microbes,
discussed later, and these functions are enhanced by the
opsonization of microbes by complement proteins, antibodies, and
other soluble mediators of innate immunity. Furthermore, the
recruited phagocytes, especially the macrophages, respond to the
microbes and injured cells by secreting more inﬂammatory
cytokines and chemokines, which promotes more leukocyte
recruitment and ampliﬁes the acute inﬂammatory response.
Acute inﬂammation can develop in minutes to hours and last for
days. Chronic inﬂammation is a process that takes over from acute
inﬂammation if the infection is not eliminated or the tissue injury
is prolonged. It usually involves recruitment and activation of
monocytes and lymphocytes. Chronic inﬂammatory sites also often
undergo tissue remodeling, with angiogenesis and ﬁbrosis.
Although 
innate 
immune 
stimuli 
contribute 
to 
chronic
inﬂammation, the adaptive immune system is usually also involved
and cytokines produced by T cells are powerful inducers of chronic
inﬂammation (see Chapter 10).
Ingestion and Killing of Microbes by
Activated Phagocytes
Neutrophils and macrophages that are recruited into sites of
infections ingest microbes into vesicles by the process of
phagocytosis and destroy these microbes (Fig. 4.17). Phagocytosis is
an active, energy-dependent process of engulfment of large
particles (greater than 0.5 µm in diameter) into vesicles. Phagocytic
vesicles fuse with lysosomes, and the ingested particles are
destroyed. In this way, the mechanisms of killing, which could
potentially injure the phagocyte, are isolated from the rest of the
cell.
FIGURE 4.17  Phagocytosis and intracellular
destruction of microbes.Microbes may be
ingested by different membrane receptors of
phagocytes; some directly bind microbes, and
others bind opsonized microbes. The microbes
are internalized into phagosomes, which fuse with
lysosomes to form phagolysosomes, where the
microbes are killed by reactive oxygen and
nitrogen species and proteolytic enzymes. IgG,
Immunoglobulin G; iNOS, inducible nitric oxide
synthase; NO, nitric oxide; ROS, reactive oxygen
species.
Neutrophils and macrophages express receptors that speciﬁcally
recognize microbes, and binding of microbes to these receptors is the
ﬁrst step in phagocytosis. Some of these receptors are paĴern
recognition receptors, including C-type lectins and scavenger
receptors, which we discussed earlier. PaĴern recognition receptors
can contribute to phagocytosis only of organisms that express
particular molecular paĴerns, such as mannose for the mannose
receptor. Phagocytes also have high-aﬃnity receptors for certain
opsonins, including antibody molecules, complement proteins, and
plasma lectins; these receptors are critical for phagocytosis of many
diﬀerent microbes that are coated with the opsonins. Coating
microbes with antibodies is one of the most eﬃcient systems for
opsonization. Phagocytes express a high-aﬃnity Fc receptor called
FcγRI, speciﬁc for one type of antibody called IgG (see Chapters 5
and 13). Thus, if an individual responds to an infection by making
IgG antibodies against microbial antigens, the IgG molecules bind
to these antigens, the Fc ends of the bound antibodies can interact
with FcγRI on phagocytes, and the end result is eﬃcient
phagocytosis of the microbes. Antibody-dependent phagocytosis
illustrates a link between innate and adaptive immunity—
antibodies are a product of the adaptive immune system (B
lymphocytes) that engages innate immune system eﬀector cells
(phagocytes) to perform their protective functions.
Once a microbe or particle binds to receptors on a phagocyte, the
plasma membrane in the region of the receptors begins to
invaginate and extends a cup-shaped projection around the
microbe. When the protruding membrane cup extends beyond the
diameter of the particle, the top of the cup closes over and pinches
oﬀ the interior of the cup to form an inside-out intracellular vesicle
(see Fig. 4.17). This vesicle, called a phagosome, contains the
ingested foreign particle, and it breaks away from the plasma
membrane. The cell surface receptors also deliver activating signals
that 
stimulate 
the 
microbicidal 
activities 
of 
phagocytes.
Phagocytosed microbes are destroyed, as described next. At the
same time, peptides are generated from microbial proteins and
presented to T lymphocytes to initiate adaptive immune responses
(see Chapter 6).
Activated neutrophils and macrophages kill phagocytosed
microbes by the action of microbicidal molecules in phagolysosomes
(see Fig. 4.17) . Signals from various receptors, including paĴern
recognition receptors (such as TLRs), opsonin receptors (such as Fc
and C3b receptors), receptors for cytokines (mainly IFN-γ), and
CD40, function cooperatively to activate phagocytes to kill ingested
microbes. Fusion of phagocytic vacuoles (phagosomes) with
lysosomes results in the formation of phagolysosomes, where most
of the microbicidal mechanisms are concentrated. Three classes of
microbicidal molecules are known to be the most important.
• Reactive oxygen species (ROS). Activated neutrophils and,
to a lesser extent, macrophages convert molecular oxygen
into ROS, which are highly reactive oxidizing agents with
free radicals that destroy microbes (and other cells). The
primary free radical–generating system is the phagocyte
oxidase system. Phagocyte oxidase is a multisubunit
enzyme that is assembled in activated phagocytes, mainly
in the phagolysosomal membrane. Phagocyte oxidase is
activated by many stimuli, including IFN-γ and signals
from TLRs. The function of this enzyme is to reduce
molecular oxygen into ROS such as superoxide radicals,
with the reduced form of nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) acting as a cofactor.
Superoxide is enzymatically dismutated into hydrogen
peroxide, which is used by the enzyme myeloperoxidase to
convert normally unreactive halide ions into reactive
hypohalous acids that are toxic for bacteria. The process by
which ROS are produced is called the respiratory burst,
because it requires oxygen consumption (cellular
respiration). A disease called chronic granulomatous
disease is caused by an inherited deﬁciency of one of the
components of phagocyte oxidase; this deﬁciency
compromises the capacity of phagocytes to kill certain
species of bacteria (see Chapter 21).
• Nitric oxide (NO). Macrophages produce reactive nitrogen
species, mainly NO, by the action of an enzyme called
inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS). iNOS is a cytosolic
enzyme that is absent in resting macrophages but can be
induced in response to microbial products that activate
TLRs, especially in combination with IFN-γ. iNOS catalyzes
the conversion of arginine to citrulline, and freely diﬀusible
NO gas is released. Within phagolysosomes, NO may
combine with hydrogen peroxide or superoxide, generated
by phagocyte oxidase, to produce highly reactive
peroxynitrite radicals that can kill microbes. The
cooperative and redundant function of ROS and NO is
demonstrated by the ﬁnding that knockout mice lacking
both iNOS and phagocyte oxidase are more susceptible to
bacterial infections than single phagocyte oxidase or iNOS
knockout animals.
• Proteolytic enzymes. Activated neutrophils and
macrophages produce several proteolytic enzymes in the
phagolysosomes that function to destroy microbes. One of
the important enzymes in neutrophils is elastase, a broad-
spectrum serine protease known to be required for killing
p
p
q
g
many types of bacteria. Another important enzyme is
cathepsin G. Mouse gene knockout studies have conﬁrmed
the essential requirement for these enzymes in phagocyte
killing of bacteria.
Microbes within macrophages may also be killed when the
macrophages undergo inﬂammasome-mediated pyroptosis, as
described earlier.
Neutrophils also kill microbes by extruding their DNA and granule
contents, which form extracellular threads on which bacteria and
fungi are trapped and killed. The extruded chromatin contents,
which are called neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs), are
composed of strands of DNA and histones to which high
concentrations of antimicrobial granule contents are bound,
including lysozyme, elastase, and defensins. NET formation
requires citrullination of histones by the enzyme peptidylarginine
deiminase (PAD4), as well as neutrophil serine protease elastase,
myeloperoxidase, and phagocyte oxidase. The extrusion of nuclear
contents during NET formation leads to neutrophil cell death,
referred to as NETosis. The importance of NETs in innate
protection against infections remains unclear, but growing
evidence indicates that excessive NET formation contributes to
autoimmune and other inﬂammatory diseases.
Role of Macrophages in Tissue Repair
Acute inﬂammation is often associated with signiﬁcant death of
host cells, including tissue cells killed by microbes or from
collateral damage by microbicidal activities of recruited leukocytes.
Once the oﬀending agents are eliminated, the damaged tissue has
to be repaired. Macrophages play a critical role in the repair process
because of several activities. Macrophages clear dead cells and
secrete growth factors that promote regeneration and angiogenesis.
Macrophages also secrete TGF-β and other cytokines that stimulate
collagen synthesis by ﬁbroblasts, thus promoting the formation of
scar tissue to replace the damaged parts. Macrophages activated in
diﬀerent ways are responsible for diﬀerent functions: classically
activated macrophages are microbicidal and promote inﬂammation
early in the reaction, and alternatively activated macrophages
promote tissue repair later. These pathways of macrophage
activation are discussed in more detail in Chapter 10.
Systemic and Pathologic Consequences of
Inflammation
TNF, IL-1, and IL-6 produced during the innate immune response to
infection or tissue damage have systemic eﬀects that contribute to
host defense and are responsible for many of the clinical
manifestations of infection and inﬂammatory disease (see Fig. 4.16) .
• Fever. TNF and IL-1 act on the hypothalamus to induce an
increase in body temperature (fever). These cytokines are
therefore called endogenous pyrogens (i.e., host-derived
fever-causing agents, to distinguish them from LPS, which
was considered an exogenous [microbe-derived] pyrogen).
This distinction is mainly of historical signiﬁcance because
we now know that even LPS induces fever by stimulating
production of the cytokines TNF and IL-1. These cytokines
increase synthesis of prostaglandins in hypothalamic cells,
and prostaglandins stimulate the production of
neurotransmiĴers that reset the body’s steady-state
temperature to a higher level by reducing heat loss (via
vasoconstriction) and increasing heat generation (through
eﬀects on skeletal muscle and fat). Prostaglandin synthesis
inhibitors, such as aspirin, reduce fever by blocking this
action of the cytokines. The role of fever in host defense is
not well understood but may relate to enhanced metabolic
functions of immune cells, impaired metabolic functions of
microbes, and changes in the behavior of the febrile host
that reduces risk for worsening infections and injury.
• Leukocytosis. TNF, IL-1, and IL-6 produced at inﬂammatory
sites circulate to the bone marrow and promote the release
of neutrophils and monocytes, and other cytokines called
colony stimulating factors (see Chapter 2) stimulate
production of these cells, leading to elevated numbers of
white cells in the blood (leukocytosis). This enhances
leukocyte migration into tissues, which can aid in
antimicrobial defense but can also contribute to
inﬂammatory damage to tissues.
• Acute-phase response. TNF, IL-1 and IL-6 induce
hepatocytes to produce acute-phase proteins, including
CRP, SAP, and ﬁbrinogen, which are secreted into the
blood. Elevated plasma levels of these proteins are
commonly used clinically as signs of infection or other
inﬂammatory processes. The pentraxins CRP and SAP play
protective roles in infections, as we discussed earlier in the
chapter, and ﬁbrinogen, the precursor of ﬁbrin, contributes
to hemostasis and tissue repair.
In severe infections, TNF may be produced in large amounts and
causes systemic clinical and pathologic abnormalities. If the
stimulus for cytokine production is suﬃciently strong, large
amounts of TNF may be made, enter the bloodstream, and act at
distant sites (see Fig. 4.16). The principal pathologic actions of TNF
are as follows:
• TNF inhibits myocardial contractility and vascular smooth
muscle tone, resulting in a marked decrease in blood
pressure, or shock.
• TNF causes intravascular thrombosis, mainly as a result of
impairment of the normal anticoagulant properties of the
endothelium. TNF stimulates endothelial cell expression of
tissue factor, a potent activator of coagulation, and inhibits
expression of thrombomodulin, an inhibitor of coagulation.
The endothelial alterations are exacerbated by activation of
neutrophils, leading to vascular plugging by these cells.
• Prolonged production of TNF causes wasting of muscle and
fat cells, called cachexia. This wasting results from TNF-
induced appetite suppression and reduced synthesis of
lipoprotein lipase, an enzyme needed to release faĴy acids
from circulating lipoproteins so they can be used by the
tissues.
A systemic complication of severe infection, usually bacterial or
fungal, is a syndrome called sepsis, clinically characterized by fever,
fast heart and respiratory rates, metabolic abnormalities, and
mental disturbances. The infection may involve microbes in the
blood, but this is not documented in most cases. Bacterial sepsis is
most often initiated by LPS (also called endotoxin) released from
gram-negative bacteria or lipoteichoic acid released from gram-
positive bacteria, which may enter the blood stream. TLR signaling
is then induced in cells in many organs by LPS or lipoteichoic acid,
leading to the production of TNF and other cytokines, including IL-
12, IFN-γ, IL-6, and IL-1. In the most severe form of sepsis, called
septic shock, there is vascular collapse and disseminated
intravascular coagulation, caused by the eﬀects of high doses of
TNF discussed earlier. The concentration of serum TNF may be
predictive of the outcome of severe sepsis. Septic shock can be
reproduced in experimental animals by administration of LPS,
lipoteichoic acid, or TNF. Antagonists of TNF can prevent mortality
in the experimental models, but clinical trials with anti-TNF
antibodies or with soluble TNF receptors have not shown beneﬁt in
patients with sepsis. The cause of this therapeutic failure is not
known, but it may be because other cytokines elicit the same
responses as TNF.
A syndrome similar to septic shock may occur as a complication
of noninfectious disorders, such as severe burns, trauma,
pancreatitis, and other serious conditions. This has been called the
systemic inﬂammatory response syndrome (SIRS).
Acute inﬂammation may cause tissue injury because the eﬀector
mechanisms that leukocytes use to kill microbes are also toxic to
host tissues. The proteolytic enzymes ROS and NO, produced by
phagocytes that accumulate at a site of infection, can injure host
cells and degrade extracellular matrix if they are generated in large
quantities, especially if the microbes resist being killed and
continue to stimulate innate immune responses. In fact, at least
part of the pathologic process associated with infections is due to
the inﬂammatory responses and not the direct toxic eﬀects of the
microbes. Acute inﬂammation also causes tissue damage in the
seĴing of autoimmune diseases, in which case neutrophils and
macrophages accumulate and become activated as a result of
stimulation of the adaptive immune system by self antigens (see
Chapter 15). As in inﬂammation induced by infections, TNF, IL-1,
IL-6, and IL-12 are key inducers of inﬂammation in autoimmune
diseases. Antagonists against all of these cytokines or their
receptors are in clinical use to reduce inﬂammation in patients with
inﬂammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, inﬂammatory
bowel disease, and psoriasis.
The Antiviral Response
The major way by which the innate immune system blocks viral
infections is to induce the expression of type I IFNs, whose most
important action is to inhibit viral replication. Earlier in the
chapter, we discussed how several paĴern recognition receptors,
including some TLRs, NLRs, RLRs, and CDSs, generate signals that
stimulate IFN-α and IFN-β gene expression in many diﬀerent cell
types. These type I IFNs are secreted from the cells and act on other
cells to prevent the spread of viral infection. In this section, we will
describe the properties of type I IFNs and the antiviral actions of
these cytokines (Fig. 4.18). The antiviral functions of type I
interferons are mimicked by type III interferons, made up of four
members of the IFN-λ family, which are the main antiviral
interferons made by many epithelia and by conventional dendritic
cells.
FIGURE 4.18  Biologic actions of type I
interferons.Type I interferons (IFN-α, IFN-β) are
produced by virus-infected cells in response to
intracellular Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling and
other sensors of viral RNA. Type I IFNs bind to
receptors on neighboring uninfected cells and
activate JAK-STAT signaling pathways, which
induce expression of genes whose products
interfere with viral replication. Type I IFNs also
bind to receptors on infected cells and induce
expression of genes whose products enhance the
cell’s susceptibility to cytotoxic T lymphocyte
(CTL)-mediated killing. dsRNA, Double-stranded
RNA; PKR, double-stranded RNA-activated
protein kinase.
Type I IFNs are a large family of structurally related cytokines
that mediate the early innate immune response to viral infections.
The term interferon derives from the ability of these cytokines to
interfere with viral replication. There are many type I IFNs, which
are structurally homologous and are encoded by genes in a single
cluster on chromosome 9. The most important type I IFNs in viral
defense are IFN-α, which includes 13 closely related proteins, and
IFN-β, which is a single protein. Plasmacytoid DCs are the major
sources of IFN-α, but it also may be produced by mononuclear
phagocytes. IFN-β is produced by many cell types in response to
viral infection. The most potent stimuli for type I IFN synthesis are
viral nucleic acids. Recall that RIG-like receptors and DNA sensors
in the cytosol and TLRs 3, 7, 8, and 9 in endosomal vesicles
recognize microbial nucleic acids and initiate signaling pathways
that activate the IRF family of transcription factors, which stimulate
the transcription of type I IFN genes (see Fig. 4.3).
The receptor for type I IFNs, which binds both IFN-α and IFN-β,
is a heterodimer of two structurally related polypeptides, IFNAR1
and IFNAR2, which are expressed on all nucleated cells. This
receptor signals to activate STAT1, STAT2, and IRF9 transcription
factors, which induce expression of several diﬀerent genes whose
protein products contribute to antiviral defense in various ways:
• Type I IFNs activate transcription of several genes that
confer on cells a resistance to viral infection called an
antiviral state (see Fig. 4.18). Type I IFN–induced genes
include double-stranded RNA–activated serine/threonine
protein kinase (PKR), which blocks viral transcriptional and
translational events, and 2,5-oligoadenylate synthetase and
RNase L, which promote viral RNA degradation. The
antiviral action of type I IFN is primarily a paracrine action
in that a virally infected cell or a plasmacytoid DC activated
by viral PAMPs secretes IFN to act on and protect
neighboring cells that are not yet infected. The eﬀects of
type I INFs are not speciﬁc to viral gene expression, and
part of the ability of these cytokines to block the spread of
infection is due to their toxicity to host cells that are near
infected cells. INF secreted by an infected cell may also act
in an autocrine fashion to inhibit viral replication in that
cell.
• Type I IFNs cause sequestration of lymphocytes in lymph
nodes, thus maximizing the opportunity for encounter with
microbial antigens. The mechanism for this eﬀect of type I
IFNs is the induction of a molecule on the lymphocytes
called CD69, which forms a complex with and reduces
surface expression of the sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P)
receptor S1PR1. Recall from Chapter 3 that lymphocyte
egress from lymphoid tissues depends on S1P binding to
S1PR1. Therefore, reduced S1PR1 inhibits this egress and
keeps lymphocytes in lymphoid organs.
• Type I IFNs increase the cytotoxicity of NK cells and CD8 +
CTLs and promote the diﬀerentiation of naive T cells to the
Th1 subset of helper T cells. These eﬀects of type I IFNs
enhance both innate and adaptive immunity against
intracellular infections, including viruses and some
bacteria.
• Type I IFNs upregulate expression of class I MHC molecules
and thereby increase the probability that virally infected
cells will be recognized and killed by CD8 + CTLs. Virus-
speciﬁc CD8+ CTLs recognize peptides derived from viral
proteins bound to class I MHC molecules on the surface of
infected cells. (We will discuss the details of T cell
recognition of peptide-MHC and CTL killing of cells in
Chapters 6 and 11.) Therefore, by increasing the amount of
class I MHC synthesized by a virally infected cell, type I
IFNs will increase the number of viral peptide–class I MHC
complexes on the cell surface that the CTLs can see and
respond to. The end result is increased killing of virus-
infected cells and eradication of viral infections.
Thus, the principal activities of type I IFN work in concert to
combat viral infections. Patients who develop severe COVID-19
disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus often show defects in type
I IFN. About 10% of severely ill patients produce autoantibodies
against their own type I IFN (which may predate the infection), and
another 3.5% to 4% have inherited mutations that aﬀect type I IFN
production or signaling. Knockout mice lacking the receptor for
type I IFNs are susceptible to viral infections. IFN-α is in clinical
use as an antiviral agent in certain forms of viral hepatitis. IFN-α is
also used for the treatment of some tumors, perhaps because it
boosts CTL activity or inhibits cell proliferation. IFN-β is used as a
therapy for multiple sclerosis, but the mechanism of its beneﬁcial
eﬀect in this disease is not known.
Protection against viruses is due in part to the activation of
intrinsic apoptotic death pathways in infected cells and enhanced
sensitivity to extrinsic inducers of apoptosis. Viral proteins
synthesized in infected cells may be misfolded, and their
accumulation triggers an unfolded protein response that may
culminate in apoptosis of the infected cells if the misfolded protein
accumulation cannot be corrected. In addition, virally infected cells
are hypersensitive to TNF-induced apoptosis. Abundant TNF is
made by plasmacytoid DCs and macrophages in response to viral
infections, in addition to type I IFNs. The type I TNF receptor
engages both proinﬂammatory and proapoptosis pathways, and
viral infection can shift this balance toward apoptosis.
Stimulation of Adaptive Immunity
The innate immune response provides signals that function in concert
with antigen to stimulate the proliferation and diﬀerentiation of
antigen-speciﬁc T and B lymphocytes. Because the innate immune
response is providing the initial defense against microbes, it also
sets in motion the adaptive immune response. The activation of
lymphocytes requires two distinct signals, the ﬁrst being antigen
and the second being molecules that are produced during innate
immune responses to microbes or injured cells (Fig. 4.19). This idea
is called the two-signal hypothesis for lymphocyte activation. The
requirement for antigen (so-called signal 1) ensures that the
ensuing immune response is speciﬁc. The requirement for
additional stimuli triggered by innate immune reactions to
microbes (signal 2) ensures that adaptive immune responses are
induced when there is a dangerous infection and not when
lymphocytes recognize harmless antigens, including self antigens.
The molecules produced during innate immune reactions that
function as second signals for lymphocyte activation include
costimulators (for T cells), cytokines (for both T and B cells), and
complement breakdown products (for B cells). We will return to the
nature of second signals for lymphocyte activation in Chapters 9
and 12.
FIGURE 4.19  Stimulation of adaptive immunity by
innate immune responses.Antigen recognition by
lymphocytes provides signal 1 for the activation of
the lymphocytes, and molecules induced on host
cells during innate immune responses to microbes
provide signal 2. In this illustration, the
lymphocytes are B cells, but the same principles
apply to T lymphocytes. The nature of second
signals differs for B and T cells and is described
in later chapters.
The second signals generated during innate immune responses to
diﬀerent microbes not only enhance the magnitude of the subsequent
adaptive immune response but also inﬂuence the nature of the
adaptive response. A major function of T cell–mediated immunity is
to activate macrophages to kill intracellular microbes and to induce
robust inﬂammatory responses so that a suﬃciently large army of
phagocytes is called into a site of infection. When DCs or
phagocytes 
encounter 
microbes, 
TLRs 
and 
other 
paĴern
recognition receptors stimulate the secretion of cytokines and
induce on antigen-presenting cells the expression of molecules,
called costimulators, all of which promote T cell activation (see
Chapter 9). Thus, the innate immune response to microbes in
macrophages stimulates the adaptive T cell response that helps the
macrophages to destroy such microbes.
By contrast, many extracellular microbes that enter the blood
activate the alternative complement pathway, and some of the
proteolytic products of complement activation enhance the
production of antibodies by B lymphocytes (see Chapter 12). These
antibodies opsonize the microbes and thereby promote their
phagocytosis by neutrophils and macrophages, or kill the microbes
by 
complement-dependent 
mechanisms. 
Thus, 
blood-borne
microbes induce an innate response (complement activation) that
triggers the adaptive response that is designed to eliminate these
extracellular pathogens.
Cytokines produced by cells during innate immune responses to
microbes or cell injury stimulate the proliferation and diﬀerentiation
of lymphocytes in adaptive immune responses. Examples of
cytokines secreted during innate immune reactions acting on B
cells, CD4+ T cells, and CD8+ T cells are given here. We have
mentioned these cytokines previously and will discuss the details of
their roles in lymphocyte responses in later chapters.
• IL-12 stimulates the diﬀerentiation of naive CD4+ T cells to
the Th1 subset of eﬀector cells (see Chapter 10) and naive
CD8+ T cells to CTLs.
• IL-1, IL-6, and IL-23 stimulate the diﬀerentiation of naive
CD4+ T cells to the Th17 subset of eﬀector cells (see Chapter
10).
• IL-25, IL-33, and TSLP stimulate the diﬀerentiation of naive
CD4+ T cells to the Th2 subset of eﬀector cells.
• IL-15 promotes the survival of memory CD8+ T cells.
• IL-6 promotes the survival of antibody-producing plasma
cells.
Adjuvants are substances that need to be administered together
with puriﬁed protein antigens to elicit maximal T cell–dependent
immune responses (see Chapter 6). They work by stimulating
innate immune responses at the site of antigen exposure that
promote subsequent adaptive immunity. Adjuvants are useful in
experimental immunology and in clinical vaccines. Many adjuvants
in experimental use are microbial products that engage TLRs, such
as killed mycobacteria and LPS. The most commonly used adjuvant
in human vaccines is alum, which is composed of either aluminum
hydroxide or aluminum phosphate, and may work by causing
inﬂammasome activation. CpG, the ligand for TLR9, is used in some
hepatitis B virus vaccines. Among their important eﬀects, adjuvants
activate DCs to express more major histocompatibility molecules
that are part of the antigen (signal 1) that T cells recognize, increase
the expression of costimulators (signal 2) and cytokines needed for
T cell activation, and stimulate migration of the DCs to lymph
nodes where T cells are located.
Mechanisms that Limit Innate Immune
Responses
The magnitude and duration of innate immune responses are
regulated by a variety of inhibitory mechanisms that limit potential
damage to tissues. Whereas the inﬂammatory response is critically
important for protection against microbes, it has the potential to
cause tissue injury and disease. Several mechanisms have evolved
to provide a brake on inﬂammation, and these mechanisms come
into play at the same time as or shortly after the initiation of
inﬂammation. Furthermore, the stimuli for the initiation of many of
these control mechanisms include the same PAMPs and DAMPs
that induce inﬂammation. We will describe a selected group of
these regulatory mechanisms.
IL-10 is a cytokine that is produced by and inhibits activation of
macrophages and DCs. IL-10 inhibits the production of various
inﬂammatory cytokines by activated macrophages and DCs,
including IL-1, TNF, and IL-12. Because it is both produced by
macrophages and DCs and inhibits the functions of these cells, IL-
10 is an example of a negative feedback regulator. Alternatively
activated macrophages make more IL-10 than classically activated
macrophages. IL-10 is produced by some nonhematopoietic cell
types (e.g., keratinocytes). IL-10 is also produced by regulatory T
cells, and we will discuss the details of IL-10 in this context in
Chapter 15. Loss-of-function mutations in the IL-10 receptor result
in severe colitis developing in infancy.
Macrophages produce a natural antagonist of IL-1 that is
structurally homologous to the cytokine and binds to the same
receptors but is biologically inactive, so that it functions as a
competitive inhibitor of IL-1. It is therefore called IL-1 receptor
antagonist (IL-1RA). Synthesis of IL-1RA is induced by many of the
same stimuli that induce IL-1 production. Some studies in IL-1RA–
deﬁcient mice suggest that this inhibitory cytokine is required to
prevent inﬂammatory diseases of joints and other tissues, and a
rare disease caused by genetic deﬁciency of IL-1RA in humans is
characterized by severe bone and skin inﬂammation. Recombinant
IL-1RA has been developed as a drug for the treatment of
rheumatoid arthritis and familial fever syndromes in which IL-1
production 
is 
dysregulated. 
Regulation 
of 
IL-1–mediated
inﬂammation may also occur by expression of the type II receptor,
which binds IL-1 but does not transduce an activating signal. The
major function of this receptor may be to act as a decoy that
competitively inhibits IL-1 binding to the type I signaling receptor.
There are numerous negative regulatory signaling pathways that
block the activating signals generated by paĴern recognition
receptors and inﬂammatory cytokines. Suppressors of cytokine
p
ﬂ
y
y
pp
y
signaling (SOCS) proteins are inhibitors of JAK-STAT signaling
pathways 
linked 
to 
cytokine 
receptors. 
TLR 
signaling 
in
macrophages and DCs induces the expression of SOCS proteins,
which limit responses of these cells to exogenous cytokines such as
type I IFNs. Proinﬂammatory responses of cells to TLR signaling
are negatively regulated by SHP1, an intracellular protein
phosphatase that negatively regulates numerous tyrosine kinase–
dependent signaling pathways in lymphocytes. There are many
other examples of kinases and phosphatases that inhibit TLR, NLR,
and RLR signaling and small inhibitory RNAs that inhibit
production of many of the mediators of innate immunity.
Summary
• The innate immune system provides the ﬁrst line of host
defense against microbes, before adaptive immune
responses have had suﬃcient time to develop. The
mechanisms of innate immunity exist before exposure to
microbes. The cellular components of the innate immune
system include epithelial barriers and leukocytes
(neutrophils, macrophages, natural killer [NK] cells,
lymphocytes with invariant antigen receptors, and mast
cells).
• The innate immune system uses cell-associated paĴern
recognition receptors, present on plasma and endosomal
membranes and in the cytosol, to recognize structures
called pathogen-associated molecular paĴerns (PAMPs),
which are shared by microbes, are not present on
mammalian cells, and are often essential for survival of the
microbes, thus limiting the capacity of microbes to evade
detection by mutating or losing expression of these
molecules. In addition, these receptors recognize molecules
made by the host but whose expression or location
indicates cellular damage; these are called damage-
associated molecular paĴerns (DAMPs).
• Toll-like receptors (TLRs), present on the cell surface and in
endosomes, are an important family of paĴern recognition
receptors, recognizing a wide variety of ligands, including
bacterial cell wall components and microbial nucleic acids.
Cytosolic paĴern recognition receptors exist that recognize
microbial molecules. These receptors include the retinoic
acid–inducible gene (RIG)-like receptors (RLRs), which
recognize viral RNA; cytosolic DNA sensors (CDSs), which
recognize microbial DNA; and NOD-like receptors (NLRs),
which recognize bacterial cell wall constituents and also
serve as recognition components of many inﬂammasomes.
• PaĴern recognition receptors, including TLRs, NLRs, and
RLRs, signal to activate the transcription factor NF-κB,
which stimulates expression of cytokines, costimulators,
and other molecules involved in inﬂammation, and the
interferon response factor (IRF) transcription factors, which
stimulate expression of the antiviral type I interferon (IFN)
genes.
• The inﬂammasome, a specialized caspase-1–containing
enzyme complex that forms in response to a wide variety of
PAMPs and DAMPs, includes recognition structures, which
are often NLR family proteins, an adaptor, and the enzyme
caspase-1, the main function of which is to produce active
forms of the inﬂammatory cytokines interleukin 1 (IL-1)
and IL-18.
• Inﬂammasome-mediated proteolytic processing of the
cytosolic protein gasdermin generates membrane pores,
which are a conduit for release of IL-1 from the cell and also
cause osmotic cell death, called pyroptosis.
• Soluble eﬀector molecules of innate immunity are found in
the plasma and include pentraxins (e.g., C-reactive protein
[CRP]), collectins (e.g., mannose-binding lectin [MBL]), and
ﬁcolins. These molecules bind microbial ligands and
enhance clearance by complement-dependent and
complement-independent mechanisms.
• Innate lymphoid cells are cells with lymphocyte morphology
and functions similar to those of T lymphocytes, but they
do not express clonally distributed T cell antigen receptors.
Three helper subsets of ILCs secrete the same cytokines as
Th1, Th2, and Th17 helper T cells.
• NK cells have cytotoxic functions and secrete interferon-γ
(IFN-γ), similar to cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs). NK cells
defend against intracellular microbes by killing infected
cells and providing a source of the macrophage-activating
cytokine IFN-γ. NK cell recognition of infected cells is
regulated by a combination of activating and inhibitory
receptors. Inhibitory receptors recognize class I major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules, because of
which NK cells do not kill normal host cells but do kill cells
in which class I MHC expression is reduced, such as virus-
infected cells.
• The complement system includes several plasma proteins
that become activated in sequence by proteolytic cleavage to
generate fragments of the C3 and C5 proteins, which
promote inﬂammation, or opsonize and promote
phagocytosis of microbes. Complement activation also
generates membrane pores that kill some types of bacteria.
The complement system is activated on microbial surfaces
and not on normal host cells, because microbes lack
regulatory proteins that inhibit complement. In innate
immune responses, complement is activated mainly
spontaneously on microbial cell surfaces and by MBL to
initiate the alternative and lectin pathways, respectively.
• The two major eﬀector functions of innate immunity are to
induce inﬂammation, which involves the delivery of
microbe-killing leukocytes and soluble eﬀector molecules
from blood into tissues, and to block viral infection of cells
mainly by the antiviral actions of type I IFNs. Both types of
eﬀector mechanisms are induced by PAMPs and DAMPs.
• Several cytokines produced mainly by macrophages,
dendritic cells (DCs), and other innate immune cells
mediate inﬂammation. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and IL-
1 activate endothelial cells, stimulate chemokine
production, and increase neutrophil production in the bone
marrow. IL-1 and TNF both induce IL-6 production, and all
three cytokines mediate systemic eﬀects, including fever
and acute-phase protein synthesis by the liver. IL-12 and IL-
18 stimulate production of the macrophage-activating
cytokine IFN-γ by NK cells and T cells. These cytokines
function in innate immune responses to diﬀerent classes of
microbes, and some (IL-1, IL-6, IL-12, IL-18) modify
adaptive immune responses that follow the innate immune
response.
• Neutrophils and monocytes (the precursors of tissue
macrophages) migrate from blood into inﬂammatory sites
during innate immune responses because of the eﬀects of
cytokines and chemokines produced by PAMP- and DAMP-
stimulated tissue cells.
• Neutrophils and macrophages phagocytose microbes and
kill them by producing reactive oxygen species, nitric oxide,
and enzymes in phagolysosomes. Macrophages also
produce cytokines that stimulate inﬂammation and
promote tissue repair at sites of infection. Phagocytes
recognize and respond to microbial products by several
diﬀerent types of receptors, including TLRs, C-type lectins,
scavenger receptors, and N-formyl met-leu-phe receptors.
• Molecules produced during innate immune responses
stimulate adaptive immunity and inﬂuence the nature of
adaptive immune responses. DCs activated by microbes
produce cytokines and costimulators that enhance T cell
activation and diﬀerentiation into eﬀector T cells.
Complement fragments generated by the alternative
pathway provide second signals for B cell activation and
antibody production.
• Innate immune responses are regulated by negative
feedback mechanisms that limit potential damage to
tissues. IL-10 is a cytokine that is produced by and inhibits
y
p
y
activation of macrophages and DCs. Inﬂammatory cytokine
secretion is regulated by autophagy gene products.
Negative signaling pathways block the activating signals
generated by paĴern recognition receptors and
inﬂammatory cytokines.
Selected Readings
∗Indicates publications of historical interest, generally reporting
the discovery of a phenomenon or process that was later shown to
be of fundamental importance in the immune system. Many (but
not all) of these discoveries led to Nobel Prizes for the
discoverer(s). The nature of the discovery is summarized brieﬂy in
each reference.
Pattern Recognition Molecules
Chen G, Shaw M.H, Kim Y.G, Nunez G. Nod-like receptors: role in innate immunity and
inﬂammatory disease.  Annu Rev Pathol . 2009;4:365–398.
Dambuza I.M, Brown G.D. C-type lectins in immunity: recent developments.  Curr Opin
Immunol . 2015;32:21–27.
Evavold C.L, Kagan J.C. Inﬂammasomes: threat-assessment organelles of the innate
immune system.  Immunity . 2019;51:609–624.
Fiĵgerald K.A, Kagan J.C. Toll-like receptors and the control of immunity.  Cell
. 2020;180:1044–1066.
Goubau D, Deddouche S, Reis e Sousa C. Cytosolic sensing of viruses.  Immunity
. 2013;38:855–869.
Hornung V, Laĵ E. Intracellular DNA recognition.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2010;10:123–130.
Hu M.M, Shu H.B. Innate immune response to cytoplasmic DNA: mechanisms and
diseases.  Annu Rev Immunol . 2019;38:79–98.
Kawai T, Akira S. Toll-like receptors and their crosstalk with other innate receptors in
infection and immunity.  Immunity . 2011;34:637–650.
Kesavardhana S, Malireddi R.K.S, Kanneganti T.D. Caspases in cell death, inﬂammation,
and gasdermin-induced pyroptosis.  Annu Rev Immunol . 2020;38:567–595.
Lamkanﬁ M, Dixit V.M. Mechanisms and functions of inﬂammasomes.  Cell
. 2014;157:1013–1022.
∗Lemaitre B, Nicolas E, Michaut L, et al. The dorsoventral regulatory gene casseĴe
späĵle/Toll/cactus controls the potent antifungal response in Drosophila adults. Cell.
1996;86:973-983. (The discovery that the Drosophila signaling protein Toll and its ligand are
required for antifungal immunity in the ﬂy led to the elucidation of Toll-like receptors as
fundamental components in mammalian innate immunity. Hoﬀmann received the Nobel Prize
for this discovery. See  hĴps://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/2011/hoﬀmann/lecture .)
Ma Z, Ni G, Damania B. Innate sensing of DNA virus genomes.  Annu Rev Virol
. 2018;5:341–362.
∗Martinon F, Burns K, Tschopp J. The inﬂammasome: a molecular platform triggering
activation of inﬂammatory caspases and processing of proIL-1-beta.  Mol Cell
. 2002;10:417–426 (The ﬁrst description of the molecular structure and function of an
inﬂammasome.).
∗Medzhitov R, Preston-Hurlburt P, Janeway Jr. C.A. A human homologue of the Drosophila
Toll protein signals activation of adaptive immunity.  Nature . 1997;388:394–397 (The ﬁrst
demonstration that activation of an innate paĴern recognition receptor induced expression of
molecules required for initiation of adaptive immune responses.).
Osorio F, Reis e Sousa C, Myeloid. C-type lectin receptors in pathogen recognition and host
defense.  Immunity . 2011;34:651–664.
Place D.E, Kanneganti T.D. Recent advances in inﬂammasome biology.  Curr Opin Immunol
. 2018;50:32–38.
∗Poltorak A, He X, Smirnova I, et al. Defective LPS signaling in C3H/HEJ and
C57BL/10SCCR mice: mutations in TLR4 gene. Science. 1998;282:2085-2088. (The ﬁrst
demonstration that bacterial lipopolysaccharide, a potent inducer of innate immune responses,
binds to a TLR. Beutler received the Nobel Prize for this work. See 
hĴps://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/2011/beutler/lecture .)
Swanson K.V, Deng M, Ting J.P. The NLRP3 inﬂammasome: molecular activation and
regulation to therapeutics.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2019;19:477–489.
Tan X, Sun L, Chen J, Chen Z.J. Detection of microbial infections through innate immune
sensing of nucleic acids.  Annu Rev Microbiol . 2018;72:447–478.
Yoneyama M, Onomoto K, Jogi M, et al. Viral RNA detection by RIG-I-like receptors.  Curr
Opin Immunol . 2015;32:48–53.
Soluble Effector Molecules of Innate Immunity
BoĴazzi B, Doni A, Garlanda C, Mantovani A. An integrated view of humoral innate
immunity: pentraxins as a paradigm.  Annu Rev Immunol . 2010;28:157–183.
Howard M, Farrar C.A, Sacks S.H. Structural and functional diversity of collectins and
ﬁcolins and their relationship to disease.  Semin Immunopathol . 2018;40:75–85.
Mookherjee N, Anderson M.A, Haagsman H.P, Davidson D.J. Antimicrobial host defence
peptides: functions and clinical potential.  Nat Rev Drug Disc . 2020;19:311–332.
Murugaiah V, Tsolaki A.G, Kishore U. Collectins: innate immune paĴern recognition
molecules.  Adv Exp Med Biol . 2020;1204:75–127.
Cells of the Innate Immune System
Castanheira F.V.S, Kubes P. Neutrophils and NETs in modulating acute and chronic
inﬂammation.  Blood . 2019;133:2178–2185.
Kadri N, Wagner A.K, Ganesan S, et al. Dynamic regulation of NK cell responsiveness.  Curr
Top Microbiol Immunol . 2016;395:95–114.
Kolaczkowska E, Kubes P. Neutrophil recruitment and function in health and
inﬂammation.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2013;13:159–175.
Lancaster C.E, Ho C.Y, Hipolito V.E.B, et al. Phagocytosis: what’s on the menu? (1).  Biochem
Cell Biol . 2019;97:21–29.
Lemke G. How macrophages deal with death.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2019;19:539–549.
Locati M, Curtale G, Mantovani A. Diversity, mechanisms, and signiﬁcance of macrophage
plasticity.  Annu Rev Pathol . 2020;15:123–147.
Murray P.J, Wynn T.A. Protective and pathogenic functions of macrophage subsets.  Nat
Rev Immunol . 2011;11:723–737.
Ng L.G, Ostuni R, Hidalgo A. Heterogeneity of neutrophils.  Nat Rev Immunol
. 2019;19:255–265.
Papayannopoulos V. Neutrophil extracellular traps in immunity and disease.  Nat Rev
Immunol . 2018;18:134–147.
Sonnenberg G.F, Artis D. Innate lymphoid cells in the initiation, regulation and resolution of
inﬂammation.  Nat Med . 2015;21:698–708.
Vivier E, Artis D, Colonna M, et al. Innate lymphoid cells: 10 years on.  Cell
. 2018;174:1054–1066.
Zhou J, Tian Z, Peng H. Tissue-resident NK cells and other innate lymphoid cells.  Adv
Immunol . 2020;145:37–53.
Zook E.C, Kee B.L. Development of innate lymphoid cells.  Nat Immunol . 2016;17:775–782.
Functional Responses of Innate immunity: Inflammation, Cell
Death, and Antiviral Responses
Abe T, Marutani Y, Shoji I. Cytosolic DNA-sensing immune response and viral infection. 
Microbiol Immunol . 2019;63:51–64.
Hornung V, Hartmann R, Ablasser A, Hopfner K.P. OAS proteins and cGAS: unifying
concepts in sensing and responding to cytosolic nucleic acids.  Nat Rev Immunol
. 2014;14:521–528.
Kolaczkowska E, Kubes P. Neutrophil recruitment and function in health and
inﬂammation.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2013;13:159–175.
Liu X, Lieberman J. Knocking ‘em dead: pore-forming proteins in immune defense.  Annu
Rev Immunol . 2020;39:455–485.
Majzoub K, Wrensch F, Baumert T.F. The innate antiviral response in animals: an
evolutionary perspective from ﬂagellates to humans.  Viruses . 2019;11:758.
Netea M.G, Dominguez-Andres J, Barreiro L.B, et al. Deﬁning trained immunity and its role
in health and disease.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2020;20:375–388.
Zindel J, Kubes P. DAMPs, PAMPs, and LAMPs in immunity and sterile inﬂammation. 
Annu Rev Pathol . 2020;15:493–518.
Diseases Caused by Innate Immunity
Angus D.C, van der Poll T. Severe sepsis and septic shock.  N Engl J Med . 2013;369:840–
851.
Manthiram K, Zhou Q, Aksentijevich I, Kastner D.L. The monogenic autoinﬂammatory
diseases deﬁne new pathways in human innate immunity and inﬂammation.  Nat
Immunol . 2017;18:832–842.
Savic S, Caseley E.A, McDermoĴ M.F. Moving towards a systems-based classiﬁcation of
innate immune-mediated diseases.  Nat Rev Rheumatol . 2020;16:222–237.
Chapter 5: Antibodies and
Antigens 
Antibody Structure,
General Features of Antibody Structure,
Structural Features of Antibody Variable
Regions,
Structural Features of Antibody Constant
Regions,
Monoclonal Antibodies,
Synthesis, Assembly, and Expression of Immunoglobulin
Molecules,
Half-Life of Antibodies,
Antibody Binding of Antigens,
Features of Biologic Antigens,
Structural and Chemical Basis of Antigen
Binding,
Structure-Function Relationships in Antibody Molecules,
Features Related to Antigen Recognition,
Features Related to Effector Functions,
Summary,
Antibodies are circulating proteins that are produced in vertebrates
in response to exposure to foreign structures known as antigens
and are the mediators of humoral immunity against all classes of
microbes. Antibodies are extremely diverse and speciﬁc in their
ability to recognize foreign molecular structures. Because these
proteins were discovered as circulating molecules that provided
protection against diphtheria toxin, they were initially called
antitoxins. When it was appreciated that similar proteins could be
generated against many substances, not just microbial toxins, they
were given the general name antibodies. The substances that
stimulated production of or were recognized by antibodies were
then called antigens. Antibodies and T cell antigen receptors (see
Chapter 7) are the two classes of molecules used by the adaptive
immune system to speciﬁcally recognize and respond to antigens
(Table 5.1). Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules also
bind peptide antigens, but their speciﬁcity is very diﬀerent and
their function is to passively display peptides to T cell antigen
receptors, not to respond to antigens in the way that antibodies on
B lymphocytes and T cell receptors (TCRs) on T lymphocytes do
(see Chapter 6). Antibodies were discovered almost a century
before antigen receptors were identiﬁed on T cells, and in
comparison to TCRs and MHC molecules, antibodies recognize a
wider range of antigenic structures, have a greater ability to
discriminate among diﬀerent antigens, and bind antigens with the
greatest strength. In this chapter we describe the structure and
antigen-binding properties of antibodies.
Antibodies are synthesized only by cells of the B lymphocyte
lineage and exist in two forms: membrane-bound antibodies on the
surface of B lymphocytes function as antigen receptors, and secreted
antibodies function to protect against microbes. The recognition of
antigens by membrane-bound antibodies on naive B cells activates
these lymphocytes and initiates a humoral immune response. The
activated B cells diﬀerentiate into plasma cells that secrete
antibodies of the same speciﬁcity as the antigen receptor. Secreted
forms of antibodies are present in the plasma (the ﬂuid portion of
the blood), in mucosal secretions, and in the interstitial ﬂuid of
tissues.
Antibodies recognize antigens and also have eﬀector functions
that contribute to the elimination of the antigens. Secreted
antibodies neutralize microbial toxins, prevent the entry and
spread of pathogens, and trigger several eﬀector mechanisms that
eliminate the microbes. As we will discuss later, diﬀerent regions of
antibody molecules are responsible for recognition of antigens and
many of the eﬀector functions, but all functions of antibodies are
initiated by speciﬁc antigen recognition. The elimination of
antigens often requires interaction of antibodies with other
components of the immune system, including molecules such as
complement proteins and cells such as phagocytes and mast cells.
Antibody-mediated eﬀector functions include neutralization of
microbes or toxic microbial products; activation of the complement
system; opsonization of pathogens for enhanced phagocytosis;
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity, by which antibodies
target infected cells for lysis by cells of the innate immune system;
and antibody-mediated mast cell activation to expel parasitic
worms. We will describe these functions of antibodies in detail in
Chapter 13.
When blood or plasma removed from an individual and placed in
a tube forms a clot, antibodies remain in the residual ﬂuid, which is
called serum. Serum lacks coagulation factors (which are consumed
during clot formation) but contains all the other proteins found in
plasma. Any serum sample that contains detectable antibody
molecules that bind to a particular antigen is commonly called an
antiserum. The study of antibodies and their reactions with
antigens is therefore called serology. The concentration of antibody
molecules in serum speciﬁc for a particular antigen is often
estimated by determining how many serial dilutions of the serum
can be made before binding to the antigen can no longer be
g
g
g
detected. This process of determining the concentration of any
substance by testing serial dilutions is called titration, and the
antibody concentration determined by this method is the titer. The
more dilutions that are required, the higher is the titer of the
antibody molecules speciﬁc for a particular antigen.
TABLE 5.1
Features of Antigen Binding by Antigen Receptors a
Feature
Immunoglobulin
(Ig)
T Cell Receptor (TCR)
Antigen-
binding site
Made up of three
CDRs in VH and
three CDRs in
VL domains
Made up of three CDRs
in Vα and three
CDRs in Vβ domains
(in the most common
form of TCR)
Nature of
antigen that
may be
bound
Macromolecules
(proteins, lipids,
polysaccharides)
and small
chemicals
Peptide-MHC complexes
Nature of
antigenic
determinants
recognized
Linear and
conformational
determinants of
various
macromolecules
and chemicals
Linear determinants of
peptides; only few
amino acid residues
of a peptide bound to
an MHC molecule
Feature
Immunoglobulin
(Ig)
T Cell Receptor (TCR)
Aﬃnity of
antigen
binding
K d 10 −7–10 −11   M;
average aﬃnity
of Igs increases
during immune
response
K d 10 −5–10 −7   M
On-rate and oﬀ-
rate
Rapid on-rate,
variable oﬀ-rate
Slow on-rate, slow oﬀ-
rate
CDR, Complementarity-determining region; K d , dissociation constant; MHC, major
histocompatibility complex; V H , variable domain of heavy chain Ig; V L , variable domain of
light chain Ig; Vα, Vβ, variable domains of TCR α and β chains.
a  The structure and function of TCR molecules are discussed in Chapter 7.
A healthy 70-kg adult human produces about 2 to 3 g of
antibodies every day. Almost two-thirds of this is a type of antibody
called immunoglobulin A (IgA), most of which is produced by
intestinal plasma cells and secreted into the gut lumen.
Antibody Structure
An understanding of the structure of antibodies has provided
important insights into their function. The analysis of antibody
structure also laid the foundation for elucidating the mechanisms
of antigen receptor diversity that we will consider in depth in
Chapter 8.
Early studies of antibody structure relied on antibodies puriﬁed
from the blood of individuals immunized with various antigens. It
was not possible, using this approach, to deﬁne antibody structure
precisely because serum contains a mixture of diﬀerent antibodies
produced by many clones of B lymphocytes that may each bind to
diﬀerent portions (epitopes) of an antigen. These antibody mixtures
are called polyclonal antibodies. A major breakthrough in
obtaining antibodies whose structures could be elucidated was the
discovery that patients with multiple myeloma, a monoclonal
tumor of antibody-producing plasma cells, often have large
amounts of biochemically identical antibody molecules (produced
by the neoplastic clone) in their blood and urine. Immunologists
found that these antibodies could be puriﬁed to homogeneity and
analyzed. The realization that myeloma cells make one type of
immunoglobulin led to the development of the technology to
produce monoclonal antibodies, described later in the chapter. The
availability of homogeneous populations of antibodies and
monoclonal antibody–producing plasma cells facilitated the
detailed structural analysis of antibody molecules and the
molecular cloning of the genes for individual antibodies. These
were important advances in our understanding of the adaptive
immune system.
General Features of Antibody Structure
Plasma or serum proteins can be physically separated based on
solubility characteristics into albumins and globulins and may be
more precisely separated, based on diﬀerences in charge, using a
technique called electrophoresis. In electrophoretic separations of
serum or plasma, most antibodies are found in the third-fastest
migrating group of globulins, named gamma globulins for the third
leĴer of the Greek alphabet. (Note that gamma globulins include
all classes of antibodies, described later, not just the IgG class.)
Another common name for antibody is immunoglobulin (Ig),
referring to the immunity-conferring portion of the globulin
fraction of serum or plasma. The terms immunoglobulin and
antibody are used interchangeably throughout this book.
All antibody molecules share the same basic structural
characteristics but display remarkable variability in the regions that
bind antigens. This variability of the antigen-binding regions
accounts for the capacity of diﬀerent antibodies to bind a
tremendous number of structurally diverse antigens. In every
individual, there are millions of diﬀerent clones of B cells, each
producing antibody molecules with identical antigen-binding sites
but that diﬀer from the antigen-binding sites of antibodies
produced by other clones. The eﬀector functions and common
physicochemical properties of antibodies are associated with the
non–antigen-binding 
portions, 
which 
exhibit 
relatively 
few
variations among diﬀerent antibodies.
FIGURE 5.1  Structure of an antibody molecule. (A)
Schematic diagram of a secreted immunoglobulin
G (IgG) molecule. The antigen-binding sites are
formed by the juxtaposition of VL and VH domains.
The heavy chain C regions end in tail pieces. The
locations of complement-binding and Fc receptor–
binding sites within the heavy chain constant
regions are approximations. B, Schematic
diagram of a membrane-bound IgM molecule on
the surface of a B lymphocyte. The IgM molecule
has one more CH domain than IgG has, and the
membrane form of the antibody has C-terminal
transmembrane and cytoplasmic portions that
anchor the molecule in the plasma membrane. C,
Structure of a human IgG molecule as revealed by
x-ray crystallography. In this ribbon diagram of a
secreted IgG molecule, the identical heavy chains
are colored blue and red so that they can be
easily visualized, although they are identical, and
the light chains are colored green; carbohydrates
that are covalently bound to the Ig heavy chain
proteins are shown in gray. 
Courtesy Dr. Alex McPherson, University of California, Irvine.
An antibody molecule has a symmetric core structure composed of
two identical light chains and two identical heavy chains (Fig. 5.1).
Both the light chains and heavy chains contain a series of repeating
homologous structural units, each about 110 amino acid residues in
length, that fold independently in a globular motif that is called an
Ig domain, which we introduced in Chapters 3 and 4. An Ig domain
contains two layers of β-pleated sheet, each layer composed of three
to ﬁve strands of antiparallel polypeptide chain (Fig. 5.2). The two
layers are held together by a disulﬁde bridge, and adjacent strands
of each β sheet are connected by short loops. It is the amino acids
in some of these loops that are the most variable and critical for
antigen recognition, as discussed later in the chapter.
FIGURE 5.2  Structure of an immunoglobulin
domain.Each domain is composed of two
antiparallel arrays of β strands, colored yellow
and red, to form two β-pleated sheets held
together by a disulfide bond. The diagram shows
an immunoglobulin constant (C) domain containing
three and four β strands in the two adjacent
sheets. N and C at the ends of polypeptide chains
refer to the amino and carboxy termini,
respectively.
Antibody heavy chains and light chains both consist of amino-
terminal variable (V) regions that participate in antigen recognition
and carboxy-terminal constant (C) regions; the C regions of the
heavy chains help mediate some of the eﬀector functions of
antibodies. In the heavy chains, the V region is composed of one Ig
domain, and the C region is composed of three or four Ig domains.
Each light chain is composed of one V region Ig domain and one C
region Ig domain. Variable regions are so named because their
amino acid sequences vary among antibodies made by diﬀerent B
cell clones. The V region of one heavy chain (VH) and the adjacent V
region of one light chain (VL) form an antigen-binding site (see Fig.
5.1). Because the core structural unit of each antibody molecule
contains two heavy chains and two light chains, every antibody
molecule has at least two antigen-binding sites.
The C region Ig domains are spatially separated from the
antigen-binding sites and do not participate in antigen recognition.
The heavy chain C regions interact with other molecules and cells
of the immune system and therefore help mediate most of the
eﬀector functions of antibodies. In addition, heavy chains exist in
two forms that diﬀer at their carboxy-terminal ends: one form of the
heavy chain anchors membrane-bound antibodies in the plasma
membranes of B lymphocytes, and the other form is found only in
secreted antibodies. The C regions of light chains do not participate
in eﬀector functions and are not directly aĴached to cell
membranes.
Heavy and light chains are covalently linked by disulﬁde bonds
formed between cysteine residues in the carboxy terminus of the
light chain and the CH1 domain of the heavy chain. Noncovalent
interactions between the VL and VH domains and between the CL
and CH1 domains may also contribute to the association of heavy
and light chains. The two heavy chains of each antibody molecule
are also covalently linked by disulﬁde bonds. There are diﬀerent
kinds of antibodies, called classes or isotypes, that have diﬀerent
heavy chain structures, discussed in detail later in the chapter. In
the IgG isotype, these disulﬁde bonds are formed between cysteine
residues in the CH2 domains, close to an unfolded segment called
the hinge region, which connects the CH1 domain to the CH2
region; this segment is described in more detail later in the chapter.
In other isotypes, the disulﬁde bonds may be in diﬀerent locations.
Noncovalent interactions (e.g., between the third CH domains
[CH3s]) also contribute to heavy chain pairing.
The antigen-binding portion of an antibody molecule is the Fab
region, and the C-terminal end that is involved in eﬀector functions
is the Fc region. These regions were originally identiﬁed by
proteolysis of rabbit IgG molecules. In these molecules, the hinge
region between the CH1 and CH2 domains of the heavy chain is the
segment most susceptible to proteolytic cleavage, because this
region is unfolded and proteolytic sites are thus easily accessible. If
rabbit IgG is treated with the enzyme papain under conditions of
limited proteolysis, the enzyme acts on the hinge region and
cleaves the IgG into three separate pieces (Fig. 5.3A). Two of the
pieces are identical to each other and consist of the complete light
chain (VL and CL) associated with a VH-CH1 fragment of the heavy
chain. These fragments retain the ability to bind antigen because
each contains paired VL and VH domains, and they are called Fab
(fragment, antigen binding). The third piece is composed of two
identical disulﬁde-linked peptides, each containing the heavy chain
CH2 and CH3 domains. This piece of IgG has a propensity to self-
associate and to crystallize into a laĴice and is therefore called Fc
(fragment, crystallizable). When pepsin (instead of papain) is used
to cleave rabbit IgG under limiting conditions, proteolysis occurs
distal to the hinge region, generating a F(ab′)2 fragment of IgG with
the hinge and the interchain disulﬁde bonds intact and two
identical antigen-binding sites (Fig. 5.3B).
The basic organization of the antibody molecule deduced from
the rabbit IgG proteolysis experiments is common to all Ig
molecules of all classes and all species, and the terms Fab, F(ab′)2,
and Fc are widely used to describe these diﬀerent portions of
antibodies. In fact, these experiments provided the ﬁrst evidence
that the antigen recognition functions and the eﬀector functions of
Ig molecules are spatially separated.
Many other proteins in the immune system, as well as numerous
proteins with no known immunologic function, contain domains
with an Ig fold structure—that is, two adjacent β-pleated sheets
held together by a disulﬁde bridge. All molecules that contain this
type of domain are said to belong to the Ig superfamily, and all
gene segments encoding the Ig domains of these molecules are
thought to have evolved from one ancestral gene. Ig domains are
classiﬁed as V-like or C-like on the basis of closest homology to
either Ig V or Ig C domains. V domains are formed from a longer
polypeptide than C domains and contain two extra β strands within
the β sheet sandwich. Some members of the Ig superfamily were
described in Chapter 3 (endothelial adhesion molecules ICAM-1
and VCAM-1) and Chapter 4 (NK cell KIR receptors). Examples of
Ig superfamily members of relevance in the immune system are
depicted in Fig. 5.4.
FIGURE 5.3  Proteolytic fragments of an
immunoglobulin G (IgG) molecule.Early studies of
the properties of proteolytic fragments of rabbit Ig
provided key insights into the general structural
features of all Ig molecules. Rabbit IgG molecules
are cleaved by the enzymes papain (A) and
pepsin (B) at the sites indicated by arrows.
Papain digestion allows separation of two antigen-
binding regions (the Fab fragments) from the
portion of the IgG molecule that binds to
complement and Fc receptors (the Fc fragment).
Pepsin generates a single bivalent antigen-binding
fragment, F(ab′)2. N and C at the ends of
polypeptide chains refer to the amino and carboxy
termini, respectively.
Structural Features of Antibody Variable
Regions
Most of the sequence diﬀerences and variability among diﬀerent
antibodies are conﬁned to three short stretches in the V region of the
heavy chain and to three stretches in the V region of the light chain.
These segments of the greatest diversity are known as
hypervariable regions. They correspond to three protruding loops
connecting adjacent strands of the β sheets that make up the V
domains of Ig heavy and light chain proteins (Fig. 5.5). The
hypervariable regions are each about 10 amino acid residues long,
and they are held in place by the more conserved framework
sequences that make up the Ig domain of the V region. Because
these sequences form a surface that is complementary to the three-
dimensional shape of the bound antigen, the hypervariable regions
are also called complementarity-determining regions (CDRs).
Proceeding from either the VL or the VH amino terminus, these
regions are called CDR1, CDR2, and CDR3. Sequence diﬀerences
among the CDRs of diﬀerent antibody molecules contribute to
distinct interaction surfaces and therefore to speciﬁcities of
individual antibodies. The CDR3s of both the VH segment and the
VL segment are the most variable of the CDRs. As we will discuss in
Chapter 8, there are special mechanisms for generating more
sequence diversity in CDR3 than in CDR1 and CDR2. In an
antibody molecule, the three hypervariable regions of a VL domain
and the three hypervariable regions of a VH domain are brought
together to create an antigen-binding surface. The hypervariable
loops can be thought to resemble ﬁngers protruding from each
variable domain, with three ﬁngers from the heavy chain and three
ﬁngers from the light chain coming together to form the antigen-
binding site (Fig. 5.6). The ability of a V region to fold into an Ig
domain is mostly determined by the conserved sequences of the
framework regions adjacent to the CDRs. Conﬁnement of the
sequence variability to three short stretches allows the basic
structure of all antibodies to be maintained despite the variability
that contributes to the speciﬁcities of diﬀerent antibodies.
FIGURE 5.4  Examples of immunoglobulin (Ig)
superfamily proteins in the immune system.Shown
here are a membrane-bound IgG molecule; the T
cell receptor; a major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) class I molecule; the CD4 coreceptor of T
cells; CD28, a costimulatory receptor on T cells;
and the adhesion molecule ICAM-1. N and C at
the ends of polypeptide chains refer to the amino
and carboxy termini, respectively.
Crystallographic analyses of antigen-antibody complexes show
that the amino acid residues of the CDRs form multiple contacts
with bound antigens (see Fig. 5.6). The most extensive contact is
with the third hypervariable region (CDR3). However, antigen
binding is not solely a function of the CDRs, and framework
residues also may contact the antigen. Moreover, in the binding of
some antigens by speciﬁc antibody molecules, one or more of the
CDRs may be outside the region of contact with the antigen, and
therefore binding to certain antigens may occur independently of
some of the Ig heavy or light chain CDRs.
FIGURE 5.5  Hypervariable regions in
immunoglobulin (Ig) molecules. A, The vertical
lines depict the extent of variability, defined as the
number of differences in each amino acid residue
among various independently sequenced Ig light
chains, plotted against amino acid residue
number, measured from the amino terminus. This
analysis indicates that the most variable residues
are clustered in three “hypervariable” regions,
colored blue, yellow, and red, corresponding to
complementarity-determining regions (CDRs)
CDR1, CDR2, and CDR3, respectively. Three
hypervariable regions are also present in heavy
chains (not shown). This way of displaying amino
acid variability in Ig molecules is called a Kabat-
Wu plot after the two scientists who devised the
assay. B, Three-dimensional view of the
hypervariable CDR loops in a light chain V
domain. The V region of a light chain is shown
with CDR1, CDR2, and CDR3 loops, colored
blue, yellow, and red, respectively. These loops
correspond to the hypervariable regions in the
variability plot in A. Heavy chain hypervariable
regions (not shown) are also located in three
loops, and all six loops are juxtaposed in the
antibody molecule to form the antigen-binding
surface (see Fig. 5.6). Note that in Fig. 5.2 an Ig
constant domain, which does not have CDRs, is
depicted. 
A, Courtesy Dr. E.A. Kabat, Department of Microbiology, Columbia
University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York.
FIGURE 5.6  Binding of an antigen by an antibody.
A, A schematic view of complementarity-
determining regions (CDRs) generating an
antigen-binding site. CDRs from the heavy chain
and the light chain are loops that protrude from
the surface of the two immunoglobulin V domains
and in combination create an antigen-binding
surface. B, This model of a globular protein
antigen (hen egg lysozyme) bound to an antibody
molecule shows how the antigen-binding site can
accommodate soluble macromolecules in their
native (folded) conformation. The heavy chains of
the antibody are red, the light chains are yellow,
and the antigen is blue. C, A view of the
interacting surfaces of hen egg lysozyme (in
green) and a Fab fragment of a monoclonal anti–
hen egg lysozyme antibody (VH in blue and VL in
yellow) is provided. The residues of hen egg
lysozyme and of the Fab fragment that interact
with each other are shown in red. A critical
glutamine residue on lysozyme (in magenta) fits
into a “cleft” in the antibody. 
B, Courtesy Dr. Dan Vaughn, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold
Spring Harbor, New York. C, Reprinted with permission from Amit
AG, Mariuzza RA, Phillips SE, Poljak RJ. Three dimensional
structure of an antigen antibody complex at 2.8A resolution.
Science. 1986;233:747–753. Copyright 1986 by AAAS.
Structural Features of Antibody Constant
Regions
Antibody molecules can be divided into distinct classes and
subclasses on the basis of diﬀerences in the structure of their heavy
chain C regions. The diﬀerent antibody molecules are called classes
or isotypes and are named IgA, IgD, IgE, IgG, and IgM (Table 5.2).
In humans, IgA and IgG isotypes can be further subdivided into
closely related subclasses, or subtypes, called IgA1 and IgA2 and
IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, and IgG4. (Mice, which are often used in the
study of immune responses, diﬀer from humans in that the IgG
isotype is divided into the IgG1, IgG2a, IgG2b, and IgG3 subclasses;
certain strains of mice, including C57BL/6, lack the gene for IgG2a
but produce a related isotype called IgG2c.) The heavy chain C
regions of all antibody molecules of one isotype or subtype have
essentially the same amino acid sequence. This sequence is
diﬀerent in antibodies of other isotypes or subtypes. Heavy chains
are designated by the leĴer of the Greek alphabet corresponding to
the isotype of the antibody: IgA1 contains α1 heavy chains; IgA2,
α2; IgD, δ; IgE, ε; IgG1, γ1; IgG2, γ2; IgG3, γ3; IgG4, γ4; and IgM, µ.
In human IgM and IgE antibodies, the C regions contain four
tandem Ig domains (see Fig. 5.1). The C regions of IgG, IgA, and
IgD contain only three Ig domains. These domains are generically
designated CH domains and are numbered sequentially from amino
terminus to carboxy terminus (e.g., CH1, CH2, and so on). In each
isotype, these regions may be designated more speciﬁcally (e.g.,
Cγ1, Cγ2 in IgG).
Diﬀerent isotypes and subtypes of antibodies perform diﬀerent
eﬀector functions. The reason for this is that most of the eﬀector
functions of antibodies are mediated by the binding of heavy chain
C regions to Fc receptors (FcRs) on diﬀerent cells, such as
phagocytes, natural killer (NK) cells, and mast cells, and to plasma
proteins, such as complement proteins. Antibody isotypes and
subtypes diﬀer in their C regions and therefore in what they bind to
and what eﬀector functions they perform. The eﬀector functions
mediated by each antibody isotype are listed in Table 5.2 and are
discussed in more detail later in this chapter and in Chapter 13.
Antibody molecules are ﬂexible, permiĴing them to bind to
diﬀerent arrays of antigens. Every antibody contains at least two
antigen-binding sites, each formed by a pair of VH and VL domains.
Many Ig molecules can orient these binding sites so that two
antigen molecules on a planar (e.g., cell) surface may be engaged at
once (Fig. 5.7). This ﬂexibility is conferred, in large part, by the
hinge region located between CH1 and CH2 in certain isotypes. The
hinge region varies in length from 10 to more than 60 amino acid
residues in diﬀerent isotypes. Portions of this sequence assume an
unfolded and ﬂexible conformation, permiĴing molecular motion
between the CH1 and CH2 domains. Some of the greatest
diﬀerences between the constant regions of the IgG subclasses are
concentrated in the hinge. This leads to diﬀerent overall shapes of
the IgG subtypes. In addition, some ﬂexibility of antibody
molecules is due to the ability of each VH domain to rotate with
respect to the adjacent CH1 domain.
TABLE 5.2
Ig, Immunoglobulin.
a  The effector functions of antibodies are discussed in detail in Chapter 13.
There are two classes, or isotypes, of light chains, called κ and λ,
that have distinct carboxy-terminal constant (C) regions. Each
antibody molecule has either two identical κ light chains or two
identical λ light chains but never one of each. In humans, about
60% of antibody molecules have κ light chains and about 40% have
λ light chains. Marked changes in this ratio can occur in patients
with B cell tumors because the many neoplastic cells, being derived
from one B cell clone, produce a single species of antibody
molecules, all with the same light chain. In fact, an abnormal
predominance of either κ-bearing cells or λ-bearing cells is often
used clinically for the diagnosis of B cell lymphomas. In mice, κ-
containing antibodies are about 10 times more abundant than λ-
containing antibodies. Unlike in heavy chain isotypes, there are no
known diﬀerences in function between κ-containing antibodies and
λ-containing antibodies.
Secreted and membrane-associated antibodies diﬀer in the amino
acid sequence of the carboxy-terminal end of the heavy chain C
region. The secreted form, found in blood, mucosal secretions, and
other extracellular ﬂuids, contains a carboxy-terminal hydrophilic
region called the tail piece. The membrane-bound form of antibody
contains a carboxy-terminal stretch that includes two segments: a
hydrophobic α-helical transmembrane region, followed by an
intracellular tail, which contains a juxtamembrane positively
charged region of three amino acids (Fig. 5.8). The positively
charged amino acids bind to negatively charged phospholipid head
groups on the inner leaﬂet of the plasma membrane and help
anchor the protein in the membrane, and are sometimes called a
stop-transfer sequence. In membrane IgM and IgD molecules, the
cytoplasmic portion of the heavy chain is short (only three amino
acid residues in length). In membrane IgG and IgE molecules, the
tail is approximately 30 amino acid residues in length and contains
a signaling motif that contributes to memory B cell activation (see
Chapters 7 and 12).
FIGURE 5.7  Flexibility of antibody molecules.The
two antigen-binding sites of an immunoglobulin
(Ig) monomer can simultaneously bind to two
determinants separated by varying distances. In
(A) an Ig molecule is depicted binding to two
widely spaced determinants on a cell surface, and
in (B) the same antibody is binding to two
determinants that are close together. This
flexibility is mainly due to the hinge regions located
between the CH1 and CH2 domains, which permit
independent movement of antigen-binding sites
relative to the rest of the molecule.
Secreted IgG and IgE and all membrane Ig molecules, regardless
of isotype, are monomeric with respect to the basic antibody
structural unit (i.e., they contain two heavy chains and two light
chains). In contrast, the secreted forms of IgM and IgA form
multimeric complexes in which two or more of the four-chain core
antibody structural units are covalently joined. IgM is secreted
mainly as pentamers but also some hexamers of the core four-chain
structure, whereas IgA is usually secreted as a dimer. These
complexes are formed by interactions between the tail pieces that
are located at the carboxy-terminal ends of the secreted forms of µ
and α heavy chains (see Table 5.2). Multimeric IgM and IgA
molecules contain an additional non-Ig 15-kD polypeptide called
the joining (J) chain, which is disulﬁde bonded to the tail pieces of
the Ig C regions and serves to stabilize the multimeric complexes
and to transport multimers across epithelial cells from the
basolateral to the luminal end. As we will see later, multimeric
forms of antibodies bind to antigens more avidly than monomeric
forms.
Antibodies of diﬀerent species diﬀer from each other in the C
regions and in framework parts of the V regions. Therefore, when
Ig molecules from one species are introduced into another (e.g.,
horse serum antibodies or mouse monoclonal antibodies injected
into humans), the recipient sees them as foreign, mounts an
immune response, and makes antibodies largely against the C
regions of the introduced Ig. The negative impact of this anti-Ig
response on the use of antibodies as therapeutic agents is
discussed in more detail later in the chapter.
Smaller sequence diﬀerences are present in antibodies from
diﬀerent individuals even of the same species, reﬂecting inherited
polymorphisms in the genes encoding the C regions of Ig heavy
and light chains. When polymorphic forms of an immunoglobulin
found only in some individuals of a species can be recognized by
antibodies, the sequences that diﬀer among individuals are called
allotypes, and the antibody that recognizes an allotypic variation is
called an anti-allotypic antibody. Even in the same individual,
diﬀerences among diﬀerent antibodies that are concentrated in the
CDRs constitute the idiotypes of antibodies. An antibody that
recognizes some aspect of the CDRs of another antibody is
therefore called an anti-idiotypic antibody. There have been
interesting 
theories 
that 
individuals 
produce 
anti-idiotypic
antibodies against their own antibodies that control immune
responses, but there is liĴle evidence to support the importance of
this potential mechanism of immune regulation.
FIGURE 5.8  Membrane and secreted forms of
immunoglobulin (Ig) heavy chains.The membrane
forms of the Ig heavy chains, but not the secreted
forms, contain transmembrane regions made up
of hydrophobic amino acid residues and
cytoplasmic domains that differ significantly
among the different isotypes. The cytoplasmic
portion of the membrane form of the μ chain and
the δ chain contains only three residues, whereas
the cytoplasmic region of IgG and IgE membrane
heavy chains (membrane γ and ε heavy chains)
contains 20 to 30 residues. The secreted forms of
the antibodies end in C-terminal tail pieces, which
also differ among isotypes: μ has a long tail piece
(21 residues) that is involved in pentamer
formation, IgG has a short tail piece (3 residues).
Monoclonal Antibodies
Monoclonal antibodies are collections of identical antibodies. All
molecules of a monoclonal antibody are produced by the progeny
of a single B cell clone, and all the molecules therefore have the
same V region and bind to the same antigen that originally
triggered that B cell. A tumor of plasma cells (myeloma, or
plasmacytoma), like most tumors of any cellular origin, is
monoclonal and therefore produces antibodies of a single
speciﬁcity. In most cases, the speciﬁcity of the tumor-derived
antibody is not known, so the myeloma antibody cannot be used to
detect or bind to molecules of interest. However, the discovery of
monoclonal antibodies produced by these tumors led to the idea
that it may be possible to produce similar monoclonal antibodies of
any desired speciﬁcity by immortalizing individual antibody-
secreting cells from an animal immunized with a known antigen. A
technique to accomplish this was described by Georges Kohler and
Cesar Milstein in 1975, and this has proved to be one of the most
valuable advances in biology and medicine. The method relies on
fusing B cells from an immunized animal (typically a mouse) with
an immortal myeloma cell line and growing the cells under
conditions in which only the fused normal and tumor cells can
survive (Fig. 5.9). The resultant fused cells that grow out are called
hybridomas because they are hybrids of normal B cells and a
myeloma tumor. Each hybridoma makes only one Ig, derived from
one B cell from the immunized animal. The antibodies secreted by
many hybridoma clones are screened for binding to the antigen of
interest, and the clone with the desired speciﬁcity is selected and
expanded. The products of these individual clones are monoclonal
antibodies, and each monoclonal antibody is speciﬁc for a single
epitope on the antigen used to immunize the animal.
Monoclonal antibodies have many applications in research and in
medical diagnosis and therapy. Some of their common applications
include the following:
• Identiﬁcation of phenotypic markers unique to particular cell
types. The basis for the modern classiﬁcation of
lymphocytes and other leukocytes is the recognition of
individual cell populations by speciﬁc monoclonal
antibodies, most often by using ﬂow cytometry and related
techniques (see Appendix III). These antibodies have been
used to deﬁne clusters of diﬀerentiation (CD) markers for
various cell types (see Chapter 2 and Appendix I).
• Immunodiagnosis. The diagnosis of many infectious and
systemic diseases, and even of pregnancy, relies on the
detection of particular antigens or antibodies in the blood,
urine, or tissues by use of monoclonal antibodies in
immunoassays (see Appendix III).
• Tumor identiﬁcation. Labeled monoclonal antibodies
speciﬁc for various cell proteins are used to determine the
tissue source of tumors by staining histologic tumor
sections.
• Therapy. Advances in medical research have led to the
identiﬁcation of cells and molecules that are involved in the
pathogenesis of many diseases. Monoclonal antibodies,
because of their exquisite speciﬁcity, provide a means of
targeting these cells and molecules. Many monoclonal
antibodies are used therapeutically today (Table 5.3). Some
examples include antibodies speciﬁc for the cytokine tumor
necrosis factor (TNF) used to treat rheumatoid arthritis and
other inﬂammatory diseases, antibodies against CD20 for
the treatment of B cell–derived tumors and for depleting B
cells in certain autoimmune disorders, antibodies speciﬁc
for the T cell regulatory molecules PD-1 and CTLA-4 used
in therapy for many types of cancers, antibodies that bind
to epidermal growth factor receptors to target cancer cells,
antibodies against vascular endothelial growth factor (a
cytokine that promotes angiogenesis) in patients with
macular degeneration, and so on.
• Functional analysis of cell surface and secreted molecules. In
biologic research, monoclonal antibodies that bind to cell
surface molecules and either stimulate or inhibit particular
cellular functions are invaluable tools for deﬁning the
functions of these molecules, including receptors for
antigens. Monoclonal antibodies are also widely used to
purify selected cell populations from complex mixtures to
facilitate the analysis of the properties and functions of
y
p
p
these cells, and to block or deplete secreted molecules and
particular cells for studying their functions.
One of the limitations of monoclonal antibodies for therapy is
that these antibodies are most easily produced by immunizing
mice, but patients treated with mouse antibodies will make
antibodies against the mouse Ig, called human antimouse antibody
(HAMA). These anti-Ig antibodies block the function or enhance
clearance of the injected monoclonal antibody and also can cause
serum sickness (see Chapter 19). Genetic engineering techniques
have been used to replace the mouse sequences in the monoclonal
antibody with human sequences and thereby avoid an anti-Ig
response. The complementary DNAs (cDNAs) that encode the
polypeptide chains of a monoclonal antibody can be isolated from a
hybridoma, and these genes can be manipulated in vitro. As
discussed earlier, only small portions of the antibody molecule are
responsible for binding to antigen; the remainder of the antibody
molecule can be thought of as a framework. This structural
organization allows the DNA segments encoding the antigen-
binding sites from a mouse monoclonal antibody to be inserted
into a cDNA encoding a human myeloma protein, creating a hybrid
gene. When it is expressed, the resultant protein, which retains the
antigen speciﬁcity of the original mouse monoclonal but has the
core structure of a human Ig, is referred to as a humanized
antibody. Fully human monoclonal antibodies are also in clinical
use. These are derived using phage display methods or in mice with
B cells expressing human Ig transgenes. The phage display
technology for generating monoclonal antibodies against speciﬁc
targets involves screening bacteriophage libraries in which each
bacteriophage displays on its surface one synthetically created
antigen-binding site of human Ig. By screening millions of such
synthetic antibody-binding sites for binding to the antigen of
interest, one that is speciﬁc for the target antigen can be identiﬁed.
FIGURE 5.9  The generation of monoclonal
antibodies.In this procedure, spleen B cells from a
mouse that has been immunized with a known
antigen or mixture of antigens are fused with an
enzyme-deficient partner myeloma cell line, with
use of chemicals such as polyethylene glycol that
can facilitate the fusion of plasma membranes and
the formation of hybrid cells that retain many
chromosomes from both fusion partners. The
myeloma partner used is one that does not
secrete its own immunoglobulin (Ig). These hybrid
cells are then placed in a selection medium that
permits the survival of only immortalized hybrids;
these hybrid cells are then grown as single cell
clones and tested for the secretion of the antibody
of interest. The selection medium includes
hypoxanthine, aminopterin, and thymidine and is
therefore called HAT medium. There are two
pathways of purine synthesis in most cells, a de
novo pathway that needs tetrahydrofolate and a
salvage pathway that uses the enzyme
hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase
(HGPRT). Myeloma cells that lack HGPRT are
used as fusion partners, and they normally survive
using de novo purine synthesis. In the presence of
aminopterin, tetrahydrofolate is not made,
resulting in a defect in de novo purine synthesis
and also a specific defect in pyrimidine
biosynthesis, namely, in generating thymidine
monophosphate (TMP) from deoxyuridine
monophosphate (dUMP). Hybrid cells receive
HGPRT from the splenic B cells and acquire the
capacity for uncontrolled proliferation from the
myeloma partner; if they are given hypoxanthine
and thymidine, these cells can make DNA in the
absence of tetrahydrofolate. As a result, only
hybrid cells survive in HAT medium.
TABLE 5.3
CNS, Central nervous system; IgE, immunoglobulin E; IL, interleukin; RANK, receptor
activator of nuclear factor-κB; RSV, respiratory syncytial virus; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
a  Additional anticytokine antibodies in clinical use are listed in Table 19.5, Chapter 19.
Humanized 
antibodies 
are 
far 
less 
likely 
than 
mouse
monoclonals to appear foreign in humans and to induce anti-
antibody responses. However, a proportion of subjects receiving
fully humanized monoclonal antibodies for therapy develop
blocking anti-antibodies, known as human-antihuman antibodies
(HAHAs). Why this happens in some individuals is not
understood.
Synthesis, Assembly, and Expression of
Immunoglobulin Molecules
Immunoglobulin heavy and light chains, like most secreted and
membrane 
proteins, 
are 
synthesized 
on 
membrane-bound
ribosomes in the rough endoplasmic reticulum. The protein is
translocated into the endoplasmic reticulum, and Ig heavy chains
are N-glycosylated during the translocation process. The proper
folding of Ig heavy chains and their assembly with light chains are
regulated by proteins resident in the endoplasmic reticulum called
chaperones. These proteins, which include calnexin and a molecule
called binding protein (BiP), bind to newly synthesized Ig
polypeptides and ensure that they are retained or targeted for
degradation unless they fold properly and assemble into complete
Ig molecules. The covalent association of heavy and light chains is
stabilized by the formation of disulﬁde bonds, which also occurs in
the endoplasmic reticulum during the assembly process. After
assembly, the Ig molecules are released from chaperones,
transported into the cisternae of the Golgi complex, where
carbohydrates are modiﬁed, and then routed to the plasma
membrane in vesicles. Antibodies of the membrane form are
anchored in the plasma membrane, and the secreted form is
transported out of the cell.
The maturation of B cells from bone marrow progenitors is
accompanied by speciﬁc changes in Ig gene expression, resulting in
the production of Ig molecules in diﬀerent forms (Fig. 5.10) . The
earliest cell in the B lymphocyte lineage that produces Ig
polypeptides, called the pre-B cell, synthesizes the membrane form
of the µ heavy chain. These µ chains associate with proteins called
surrogate light chains to form the pre-B cell receptor, which is
expressed on the cell surface and provides signals that promote
maturation. Immature and mature B cells produce κ or λ light
chains, which associate with µ proteins to form IgM molecules.
Mature B cells express membrane forms of IgM and IgD (the µ and
δ heavy chains associated with κ or λ light chains). These
membrane Ig receptors serve as cell surface receptors that
recognize antigens and initiate the process of B cell activation. The
pre-B cell receptor and the B cell antigen receptor are noncovalently
associated with two other integral membrane proteins, Igα and Igβ,
which serve signaling functions and are essential for surface
expression of IgM and IgD. We will discuss the molecular and
cellular events in B cell maturation underlying these changes in
antibody expression in Chapter 8.
FIGURE 5.10  Immunoglobulin (Ig) expression during
B lymphocyte maturation.Stages in B lymphocyte
maturation are shown with associated changes in
the production of Ig heavy and light chains. IgM
heavy chains are shown in red, IgD heavy chains
in blue, and light chains in green. The molecular
events accompanying these changes are
discussed in Chapters 8 and 12.
When mature B lymphocytes are activated by antigens and other
stimuli, the cells diﬀerentiate into plasmablasts and then into
antibody-secreting plasma cells. This process is also accompanied
by changes in the paĴern of Ig production. One such change is
increased production of the secreted form of Ig relative to the
membrane form. This alteration occurs at the level of post-
transcriptional processing. The second change is the expression of
Ig heavy chain isotypes other than IgM and IgD, by a process called
heavy chain isotype (or class) switching. A third change involves
the introduction of new amino acid substitutions into the variable
domains of the antibody heavy and light chains to create high-
aﬃnity antibodies, resulting in a change in antibodies that is called
aﬃnity maturation. Changes in antibody expression that occur after
B cell activation will be discussed later in this chapter and in more
detail in Chapter 12.
Half-Life of Antibodies
The half-life of circulating antibodies is a measure of how long
those antibodies remain in blood after secretion from B cells (or
after injection in the case of an administered antibody). The half-
life is the mean time before the number of antibody molecules is
reduced by half. Diﬀerent antibody isotypes have very diﬀerent
half-lives in circulation. IgE has a very short half-life of about 2 days
in the circulation (although cell-bound IgE associated with the
high-aﬃnity IgE receptor on mast cells has a very long half-life; see
Chapter 20). Circulating IgA has a half-life of about 3 days
(although most IgA is produced at mucosal sites and is secreted
directly into the lumen of the gut or airway), and circulating IgM
has a half-life of about 4 days. In contrast, circulating IgG
molecules have a half-life of about 21 to 28 days.
The long half-life of IgG is aĴributed to its ability to bind to a
speciﬁc Fc receptor called the neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn), so-called
because it is involved in the transport of IgG from the maternal
circulation into the fetus. FcRn structurally resembles MHC class I
molecules (described in Chapter 6). It is expressed in the placenta,
where it transports IgG molecules from the maternal blood, across
cells, and into the fetal circulation (see Chapter 14). In adult
vertebrates, FcRn is found on endothelial cells, macrophages, and
other cell types, and binds to IgG that is ingested from the blood by
pinocytosis into endosomes. The IgG remains bound to FcRn in the
acidic environment of the endosomes. FcRn does not target the
bound IgG to lysosomes (the usual fate of many ingested
molecules) but recycles it to the cell surface and releases it in the
neutral pH of the blood, returning the IgG to the circulation (Fig.
5.11). This intracellular sequestration of IgG away from lysosomes
prevents the IgG from being degraded as rapidly as most other
plasma proteins, including other antibody isotypes, and as a result
the IgG isotype has a relatively long half-life. There are some
diﬀerences in the half-lives of the four human IgG subtypes. IgG3
is relatively short-lived because it binds poorly to FcRn. IgG1, IgG2,
and IgG4 are long-lived.
The long half-life of IgG has been used to provide a therapeutic
advantage for certain injected proteins by producing fusion
g
j
p
y p
g
proteins containing the biologically active part of the protein and
the Fc portion of IgG. The Fc portion enables the proteins to bind to
the FcRn and thus extends the half-lives of the injected proteins.
One therapeutically useful Fc fusion protein is TNFR-Ig, which
consists of the extracellular domain of the type II TNF receptor
(TNFR) fused to an IgG Fc domain. TNFR-Ig binds to TNF and
blocks its inﬂammatory actions, similar to an anti-TNF antibody,
and is used to treat certain immune disorders such as rheumatoid
arthritis, inﬂammatory bowel disease, and psoriasis (Fig. 5.12).
Another Fc fusion protein used therapeutically is CTLA4-Ig,
containing the extracellular domain of the CTLA-4 receptor, which
binds to and blocks B7 costimulators, fused to the Fc portion of
human IgG; it has also been used in the treatment of rheumatoid
arthritis and kidney transplant rejection.
FIGURE 5.11  Neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn)
contributes to the long half-life of immunoglobulin
G (IgG) molecules.Micropinocytosed IgG
molecules in endothelial cells bind the FcRn, an
IgG-binding receptor in the acidic environment of
endosomes. In endothelial cells, FcRn directs the
IgG molecules away from lysosomal degradation
and releases them when vesicles fuse with the
cell surface, exposing FcRn-IgG complexes to
neutral pH.
FIGURE 5.12  A monoclonal antibody and a cytokine
receptor–immunoglobulin G (IgG) Fc fusion
protein, both used therapeutically.An antibody
specific for the cytokine tumor necrosis factor
(TNF) (left) can bind to and block the activity of
the cytokine. The extracellular domain of the TNF
receptor (right) is also an antagonist of the
cytokine, and linking this soluble receptor domain
to an IgG Fc domain (by recombinant DNA
technology) increases the half-life of the receptor
in the circulation.
Antibody Binding of Antigens
All of the functions of antibodies depend on their ability to
speciﬁcally bind antigens. We will now consider the nature of
antigens and how they are recognized by antibodies.
Features of Biologic Antigens
An antigen is any substance that may be speciﬁcally bound by an
antibody molecule or TCR. The antigens that are recognized by
antibodies may be almost every kind of biologic molecule,
including 
simple 
intermediary 
metabolites, 
sugars, 
lipids,
autacoids, and hormones, as well as macromolecules such as
complex carbohydrates, phospholipids, nucleic acids, and proteins.
This is in contrast to most T cells, which only recognize peptides
(see Chapter 6).
Not all antigens recognized by speciﬁc lymphocytes or by secreted
antibodies are capable of activating lymphocytes. Molecules that
stimulate 
immune 
responses 
are 
called 
immunogens.
Macromolecules are eﬀective at stimulating B lymphocytes to
initiate humoral immune responses because B cell activation
requires the bringing together (cross-linking) of multiple antigen
receptors. Small chemicals, such as dinitrophenol, may bind to
antibodies and are therefore antigens, but they cannot activate B
cells on their own because they can bind to only one B cell receptor
at a time. To generate antibodies speciﬁc for such small chemicals,
immunologists commonly aĴach multiple copies of the small
molecules to a protein or polysaccharide before immunization. In
these cases, the small chemical is called a hapten, and the large
molecule to which it is conjugated is called a carrier. The hapten-
carrier complex, unlike free hapten, can bind to multiple antigen
receptors on a B cell and hence act as an immunogen. This
phenomenon has been exploited to produce eﬀective vaccines (see
Chapter 12).
Macromolecules, such as proteins, polysaccharides, and nucleic
acids, are usually much larger than the antigen-binding region of
an antibody molecule (see Fig. 5.6). Therefore, any antibody binds
to only a portion of the macromolecule, which is called a
determinant or an epitope. These two words are synonymous and
are used interchangeably throughout this book. The portion of the
antibody that directly interacts with the epitope has been called the
paratope. Macromolecules typically contain multiple determinants,
some of which may be repeated and each of which, by deﬁnition,
can be bound by an antibody. The presence of multiple identical
determinants in an antigen is referred to as polyvalency or
multivalency. Most globular proteins do not contain multiple
identical determinants and are not individually polyvalent, but
y p
y
many identical proteins may be displayed in a polyvalent array on
cell surfaces, including the surface of microbes. In the case of
polysaccharides and nucleic acids, many identical epitopes may be
regularly spaced and repeated in the same molecule, and these
molecules are said to be polyvalent. Polyvalent arrays of
carbohydrate antigens also can be displayed on cell surfaces.
Polyvalent antigens can induce clustering of the B cell receptor and
thus initiate the process of B cell activation (see Chapter 12).
FIGURE 5.13  The nature of antigenic
determinants.Antigenic determinants (shown in
orange, red, and blue) may depend on protein
folding (conformation) and on primary structure.
Some determinants are accessible in native
proteins and are lost on denaturation (A),
whereas others are exposed only on protein
unfolding (B). Neodeterminants arise from
postsynthetic modifications such as peptide bond
cleavage (C). N and C at the ends of polypeptide
chains refer to the amino and carboxy termini,
respectively.
The spatial arrangement of diﬀerent epitopes on a single protein
molecule may inﬂuence the binding of antibodies in several ways.
When determinants are well separated, two or more antibody
molecules can be bound to the same protein antigen without
inﬂuencing each other; such determinants are said to be
nonoverlapping. When two determinants are close to each other,
the binding of antibody to the ﬁrst determinant may cause steric
interference with the binding of antibody to the second; such
determinants are said to be overlapping. In rare cases, the binding
of one antibody may cause a conformational change in the structure
of the antigen, positively or negatively inﬂuencing the binding of a
second antibody at another site on the protein by means other than
steric hindrance. Such interactions are called allosteric eﬀects.
Any available shape or surface on a molecule that is recognized by
an antibody constitutes an antigenic determinant or epitope.
Antigenic determinants may be present on any type of molecule,
including but not restricted to carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, and
nucleic acids. In the case of proteins, the formation of some
epitopes depends only on the primary structure, and the formation
of other determinants reﬂects tertiary structure, or conformation
(shape) (Fig. 5.13). Epitopes formed by several adjacent amino acid
residues are called linear epitopes. The antigen-binding site of an
antibody can usually accommodate a linear epitope made up of
about six amino acids. If linear epitopes appear on the external
surface or in a region of extended conformation in the native folded
protein, they may be accessible to antibodies. In other cases, linear
epitopes may be inaccessible in the native conformation and appear
only when the protein is denatured. In contrast, conformational
epitopes are formed by amino acid residues that are not in a
sequence but become spatially juxtaposed in the folded protein.
Antibodies speciﬁc for certain linear epitopes and antibodies
speciﬁc for conformational epitopes can be used to ascertain
whether a protein is denatured or in its native conformation,
respectively. Proteins may be subjected to modiﬁcations such as
glycosylation, phosphorylation, ubiquitination, acetylation, and
proteolysis. These modiﬁcations, by altering the structure of the
p
y
y
g
protein, can produce new epitopes. New epitopes also may be
generated in a tumor by mutations of genes encoding self proteins.
Such epitopes, induced by post-translational modiﬁcations or by
mutation, are called neoantigenic epitopes, and they too may be
recognized by speciﬁc antibodies (and T cells).
Structural and Chemical Basis of Antigen
Binding
The antigen-binding sites of many antibodies are planar surfaces
that can accommodate conformational epitopes of macromolecules,
allowing the antibodies to bind large macromolecules (see Fig. 5.6) .
The six CDRs, three from the heavy chain and three from the light
chain, can spread out to form a broad surface. In a number of
antibodies speciﬁc for small molecules, such as monosaccharides
and drugs, the antigen is bound in a cleft generated by the close
apposition of CDRs from the VL and VH domains.
The recognition of antigens by antibodies involves noncovalent,
reversible binding. Various types of noncovalent interactions may
contribute to antibody binding of antigens, including electrostatic
forces, hydrogen bonds, van der Waals forces, and hydrophobic
interactions. The relative importance of each of these depends on
the structures of the binding site of the individual antibody and of
the antigenic determinant. The strength of the binding between a
single combining site of an antibody and an epitope of an antigen is
called the aﬃnity of the antibody. The aﬃnity is commonly
represented by a dissociation constant (Kd), which indicates how
easy it is to separate (dissociate) an antigen-antibody complex into
its constituents by changing their concentration. A smaller Kd
indicates a stronger or higher aﬃnity interaction because a lower
concentration of antigen and of antibody is required for complex
formation. The Kd of antibodies produced in typical humoral
immune responses usually varies from about 10 −7 to 10 −11 M.
Serum from an immunized individual will contain a mixture of
antibodies with diﬀerent aﬃnities for the antigen.
Because the hinge region of antibodies gives them ﬂexibility, a
single antibody may aĴach to a single multivalent antigen by more
than one binding site. For IgG or IgE, this aĴachment can involve,
at most, two binding sites, one on each Fab. For pentameric IgM,
however, a single antibody may bind at up to 10 diﬀerent sites (Fig.
5.14). Polyvalent antigens will have more than one copy of a
particular determinant. Although the aﬃnity of any one antigen-
binding site will be the same for each epitope of a polyvalent
antigen, the strength of aĴachment of the antibody to the antigen
must take into account all the binding sites of the antibody and all
the available epitopes of the antigen. This overall strength of
aĴachment is called the avidity and is much greater than the
aﬃnity of any one antigen-binding site. Thus, a low-aﬃnity IgM
molecule can still bind tightly to a polyvalent antigen because many
low-aﬃnity interactions (up to 10 per IgM molecule) can produce a
high-avidity interaction.
Polyvalent antigens are important from the viewpoint of B cell
activation, as discussed earlier. Polyvalent interactions between
antigens and antibodies are also of biologic signiﬁcance because
many eﬀector functions of antibodies are triggered optimally when
two or more antibody molecules are brought close together by
binding to a polyvalent antigen. If a polyvalent antigen is mixed
with a speciﬁc antibody in a test tube, the two interact to form
immune complexes (Fig. 5.15). At the correct concentration, called a
zone of equivalence, antibody and antigen form an extensively
cross-linked network of aĴached molecules such that most or all of
the antigen and antibody molecules are complexed into large
masses. Immune complexes may be dissociated into smaller
aggregates either by increasing the concentration of antigen so that
free antigen molecules will displace antigen bound to the antibody
(zone of antigen excess) or by increasing antibody so that free
antibody molecules will displace bound antibody from antigen
determinants (zone of antibody excess). If a zone of equivalence is
reached in vivo, large immune complexes can form in the
circulation. Immune complexes that are trapped or formed in the
walls of blood vessels can initiate an inﬂammatory reaction,
resulting in immune complex diseases (see Chapter 19).
Structure-Function Relationships in Antibody
Molecules
Many structural features of antibodies are critical for their ability to
recognize antigens and for their eﬀector functions. In the following
section, we will summarize how the structure of antibodies
contributes to their functions.
Features Related to Antigen Recognition
The ability of antibodies to speciﬁcally recognize a wide variety of
antigens with varying aﬃnities reﬂects the properties of the V
regions.
Specificity
Antibodies can be remarkably speciﬁc for antigens, distinguishing
between small diﬀerences in chemical structure. The ﬁne speciﬁcity
of antibodies applies to the recognition of all classes of molecules.
For example, antibodies can distinguish between two linear protein
determinants diﬀering by only a single conservative amino acid
substitution that has liĴle eﬀect on secondary structure. This high
degree of speciﬁcity is necessary so that antibodies generated in
response to the antigens of one microbe usually do not react with
structurally similar self molecules or with the antigens of other
microbes. However, some antibodies produced against one antigen
may bind to a diﬀerent but structurally related antigen. This is
referred to as a cross-reaction. Antibodies that are produced in
response to a microbial antigen sometimes cross-react with self
antigens, and this may be the basis of certain immunologic diseases
(see Chapter 19).
Diversity
As we discussed earlier in this chapter, an individual is capable of
making a tremendous number of structurally distinct antibodies,
on the order of millions, each with a distinct speciﬁcity. The ability
of antibodies in any individual to speciﬁcally bind a large number
of diﬀerent antigens is a reﬂection of antibody diversity, and the
total collection of antibodies with diﬀerent speciﬁcities represents
the antibody repertoire. The genetic mechanisms that generate
such a large antibody repertoire are active only in B lymphocytes
(and the same mechanisms for generating TCR diversity are active
in T cells). This diversity is generated by random recombination of
a limited set of inherited germline DNA sequences to form
functional genes that encode the V regions of heavy and light
chains as well as by the addition of nucleotide sequences during the
recombination process. We will discuss these mechanisms in detail
in Chapter 8. The millions of resulting variations in structure are
concentrated in the antigen-binding hypervariable regions of both
heavy and light chains and thereby determine speciﬁcity for
antigens.
FIGURE 5.14  Valency and avidity of antibody-
antigen interactions.Monovalent antigens, or
epitopes spaced far apart on cell surfaces, will
interact with a single binding site of one antibody
molecule. Although the affinity of this interaction
may be high, the overall avidity may be relatively
low. When repeated determinants on a cell
surface are close enough, both the antigen-
binding sites of a single immunoglobulin G (IgG)
molecule can bind, leading to a higher-avidity
bivalent interaction. The hinge region of the IgG
molecule accommodates the shape change
needed for simultaneous engagement of both
binding sites. IgM molecules have 10 identical
antigen-binding sites that can theoretically bind
simultaneously with 10 repeating determinants on
a cell surface, resulting in a polyvalent, high-
avidity interaction.
FIGURE 5.15  Antigen-antibody complexes.The sizes
of antigen-antibody (immune) complexes are a
function of the relative concentrations of antigen
and antibody. Large complexes are formed at
concentrations of multivalent antigens and
antibodies that are termed the zone of
equivalence; the complexes are smaller in relative
antigen or antibody excess.
FIGURE 5.16  Changes in antibody structure during
humoral immune responses.The illustration depicts
the changes in the structure of antibodies that
may be produced by the progeny of activated B
cells (one clone) and the related changes in
function. During affinity maturation, mutations in
the V region (indicated by yellow dots) lead to
changes in fine specificity without changes in C
region–dependent effector functions. Activated B
cells may shift production from largely membrane-
bound antibodies containing transmembrane and
cytoplasmic regions to secreted antibodies.
Secreted antibodies may or may not show V gene
mutations (i.e., secretion of antibodies occurs
before and after affinity maturation). In isotype
switching, the C regions change (indicated by
color change from purple to green, yellow, or
pink) without changes in the antigen-binding V
region. Isotype switching is seen in membrane-
bound and secreted antibodies. We will discuss
the molecular basis for these changes in Chapter
12.
Affinity Maturation
The ability of antibodies to neutralize toxins and infectious
microbes is dependent on tight binding of the antibodies. As we
have discussed, tight binding is achieved by high-aﬃnity and high-
avidity interactions. A mechanism for the generation of high-
aﬃnity antibodies involves subtle changes in the structure of the V
regions of antibodies during humoral immune responses to protein
antigens. These changes come about by a process of somatic
mutation in antigen-stimulated B lymphocytes that generates new
V domain structures, some of which bind the antigen with greater
aﬃnity than the original V domains (Fig. 5.16). Those B cells
producing higher-aﬃnity antibodies preferentially bind to the
antigen and, as a result of selection, become the dominant B cells
with each subsequent exposure to the antigen. This process, called
aﬃnity maturation, results in an increase in the average binding
aﬃnity of antibodies for an antigen as a humoral immune response
evolves. Thus, an antibody produced during a primary immune
response to a protein antigen often has a Kd in the range of 10 −7 to
10 −9 M; in subsequent responses to the same antigen (secondary
responses), as may occur in repeated infections with the same
species of microbe or repeated immunizations, the aﬃnity
increases, often resulting in a Kd of 10 −11 M or even less. We will
discuss the mechanism of aﬃnity maturation in Chapter 12.
Features Related to Effector Functions
Many of the eﬀector functions of antibodies are mediated by the Fc
portions of the molecules, and Ig isotypes that diﬀer in these Fc
regions perform distinct functions. We have mentioned previously
that the eﬀector functions of antibodies require the binding of
heavy chain C regions, which make up the Fc portions, to other cells
and plasma proteins. For example, IgG coats microbes and targets
them for phagocytosis by neutrophils and macrophages. This
occurs because the IgG molecule is able to simultaneously bind
through its Fab region to the microbe, and through its Fc region to
IgG heavy chain–speciﬁc Fc receptors that are expressed on
neutrophils and macrophages. In contrast, IgE binds to mast cells
and triggers their degranulation because mast cells express IgE-
speciﬁc Fc receptors. Another Fc-dependent eﬀector mechanism of
humoral immunity is activation of the classical pathway of the
complement system. The system generates inﬂammatory mediators
and promotes microbial phagocytosis and lysis. It is initiated by the
binding of a complement protein called C1q to the Fc portions of
antigen-complexed IgG or IgM. The Fc receptor–binding and
complement-binding sites of antibodies are found within the heavy
chain C domains of the diﬀerent isotypes (see Fig. 5.1). We will
discuss the structure and functions of Fc receptors and complement
proteins in Chapter 13.
The eﬀector functions of antibodies are initiated only by Ig
molecules that have bound antigens and not by free Ig. The reason
that only antibodies with bound antigens activate eﬀector
mechanisms is that two or more adjacent antibody Fc portions are
needed to bind to and trigger various eﬀector systems, such as
complement proteins and Fc receptors of phagocytes (see Chapter
13). This requirement for adjacent antibody molecules ensures that
the eﬀector functions are targeted speciﬁcally toward eliminating
antigens that are recognized by the antibody and that circulating
free antibodies do not, inappropriately and dangerously, trigger
eﬀector responses.
Changes in the isotypes of antibodies during humoral immune
responses inﬂuence how the responses work to eradicate antigens.
After stimulation by an antigen, a single clone of B cells may
produce antibodies with diﬀerent isotypes that nevertheless
possess identical V domains and therefore identical antigen
speciﬁcity. Naive B cells simultaneously produce IgM and IgD that
function as membrane receptors for antigens. When these B cells
are activated by foreign antigens, typically of microbial origin, they
y
g
g
yp
y
g
y
may undergo a process called isotype (or class) switching, in which
the type of CH region, and therefore the antibody isotype, produced
by the B cell changes, but the V regions and the speciﬁcity do not
(see Fig. 5.16). As a result of isotype switching, diﬀerent progeny of
the original IgM- and IgD-expressing naive B cell may produce
isotypes and subtypes that are best able to eliminate the antigen.
For example, the antibody response to many bacteria and viruses in
the blood is dominated by IgG antibodies, but the same microbes
in mucosal tissues (intestines and airways) elicit much more IgA,
which is eﬃciently secreted into the lumens of these organs.
Switching to the IgG isotype also prolongs the eﬀectiveness of
humoral immune responses because of the long half-life of IgG
antibodies. We will discuss the mechanisms and functional
signiﬁcance of isotype switching in Chapter 12.
The heavy chain C regions of antibodies also determine the tissue
distribution of antibody molecules. As we mentioned earlier, after B
cells are activated, they gradually lose expression of the membrane-
bound antibody and express more of it as a secreted protein (see
Fig. 5.16). IgA can be secreted eﬃciently across mucosal epithelia
and is the major class of antibody in mucosal secretions and milk
(see Chapter 14). Neonates are protected from infections by IgG
antibodies they acquire from their mothers through the placenta
during gestation. This transfer of maternal IgG is mediated by the
FcRn, which we described earlier as the receptor responsible for the
long half-life of IgG antibodies.
Summary
• Antibodies, or immunoglobulins (Igs), are a family of
glycoproteins produced in membrane-bound or secreted
form by B lymphocytes.
• Membrane-bound antibodies serve as receptors that
mediate the antigen-triggered activation of B cells.
• Secreted antibodies function as mediators of speciﬁc
humoral immunity by neutralizing microbes and toxins and
by engaging various eﬀector mechanisms that serve to
eliminate the bound antigens.
• The antigen-binding regions of antibody molecules are
highly variable, and any one individual has the potential to
produce millions of diﬀerent antibodies, each with distinct
antigen speciﬁcity.
• All antibodies have a common symmetric core structure of
two identical covalently linked heavy chains and two
identical light chains, each linked to one of the heavy
chains. Each chain consists of two or more independently
folded Ig domains of about 110 amino acids containing
conserved sequences and intrachain disulﬁde bonds.
• The N-terminal domains of heavy and light chains form the
V regions of antibody molecules, which diﬀer among
antibodies of diﬀerent speciﬁcities. The V regions of heavy
and light chains each contain three separate hypervariable
regions of about 10 amino acids that are spatially
assembled to form the antigen-combining site of the
antibody molecule.
• Antibodies are classiﬁed into diﬀerent isotypes and
subtypes on the basis of diﬀerences in the heavy chain C
regions, which consist of three or four Ig C domains, and
these classes and subclasses have diﬀerent functional
properties. The antibody classes are called IgM, IgD, IgG,
IgE, and IgA. Both light chains of a single Ig molecule are
of the same isotype, either κ or λ, which diﬀer in their
single C domains.
• Most of the eﬀector functions of antibodies are mediated by
the C regions of the heavy chains, but these functions are
triggered by binding of antigens to the combining site in
the V region.
• Monoclonal antibodies are produced from a single clone of
B cells and recognize a single antigenic determinant.
Monoclonal antibodies can be generated in the laboratory
and are widely used in research, diagnosis, and therapy.
• Antigens are substances speciﬁcally bound by antibodies or
T lymphocyte antigen receptors. Antigens that bind to
antibodies include a wide variety of biologic molecules,
including sugars, lipids, carbohydrates, proteins, and
nucleic acids. This is in contrast to most T cell antigen
receptors, which recognize only peptide antigens.
• Macromolecular antigens contain multiple epitopes, or
determinants, each of which may be recognized by an
antibody. Linear epitopes of protein antigens consist of a
sequence of adjacent amino acids, and conformational
determinants are formed by folding of a polypeptide chain.
• The aﬃnity of the interaction between the combining site of
a single antibody molecule and a single epitope is generally
represented by the Kd calculated from binding data.
Polyvalent antigens contain multiple identical epitopes to
which identical antibody molecules can bind. Antibodies
can bind to 2 or, in the case of IgM, up to 10 identical
epitopes simultaneously, leading to enhanced avidity of the
antibody-antigen interaction.
• The relative concentrations of polyvalent antigens and
antibodies may favor the formation of immune complexes
that may deposit in tissues and cause damage.
• Antibody binding to antigen can be highly speciﬁc,
distinguishing small diﬀerences in chemical structures, but
cross-reactions may also occur in which two or more
antigens may be bound by the same antibody.
• Several changes in the structure of antibodies made by one
clone of B cells may occur in the course of an immune
response. B cells initially produce only membrane-bound
Ig, but in activated B cells and plasma cells, Ig with the
same antigen-binding speciﬁcity as the original membrane-
bound Ig receptor is secreted. Changes in the use of C
region gene segments without changes in V regions are the
basis of isotype switching, which leads to changes in
eﬀector function without a change in speciﬁcity. Point
mutations in the V regions of an antibody speciﬁc for an
antigen lead to increased aﬃnity for that antigen (aﬃnity
maturation).
Selected Readings
∗Indicates publications of historical interest, generally reporting
the discovery of a phenomenon or process that was later shown to
be of fundamental importance in the immune system. Many (but
not all) of these discoveries led to Nobel Prizes for the
discoverer(s). The nature of the discovery is summarized brieﬂy in
each reference.
Antibody Structure
Chiu ML, Goulet DR, Teplyakov A, Gilliland GL. Antibody structure and function: the basis
for engineering therapeutics. Antibodies (Basel) . 2019;8:55.
∗ Edelman G.M, Poulik M.D. Studies on structural units of the gamma-globulins.  J Exp
Med . 1961;13:861–884 and.
Poulik MD, Edelman GM. Comparison of reduced alkylated derivatives of some myeloma
globulins and Bence-Jones proteins. Nature . 1961;191:1274–1276. (These studies
established that antibodies are made up of two disulﬁde linked chains. They led to the Nobel
Prize for Gerald Edelman.
See hĴps://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/1972/edelman/lecture.)
∗Ehrlich P. Experimental investigations on Immunity I . On ricin. Deutsch med
Wochenschr. 1891;17:976–979; and
Ehrlich P. Experimental investigations on immunity II. On Abrin. Deutsch med Wochenschr.
1891;17:1218–1219.
∗Porter RR. The hydrolysis of rabbit γ-globulin and antibodies with crystalline papain.
Biochem J . 1959;73:119–126; and
Porter RR. Separation and isolation of fractions of rabbit gamma-globulin containing the
antibody and antigenic combining sites. Nature . 1958;182:670–671. (These studies on the
identiﬁcation of the Fab and Fc fragments of antibodies led to a Nobel prize for Rodney
Porter. See hĴps://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/1972/porter/lecture.)
Stanﬁeld RL, Wilson IA. Antibody structure. Microbiol Spectrum. 2014;2.
Antibody Production and Monoclonal Antibodies
Carter PJ, Lazar GA. Next generation antibody drugs: pursuit of the ‘high-hanging fruit’.
Nat Rev Drug Discov .2018;17:197-223.
∗Clackson T, Hoogenboom HR, Griﬃths AD, Winter G. Making antibody fragments using
phage display libraries. Nature . 1991;352:624–628. (Greg Winter received the Nobel Prize
for the concept of phage display libraries and the generation of antibodies without
immunization. See hĴps://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/chemistry/2018/winter/lecture .)
∗Kohler G, Milstein C. Continuous cultures of fused cells secreting antibody of predeﬁned
speciﬁcity. Nature . 1975;56:495–497. (The ﬁrst experimental generation of monoclonal
antibodies. Georg Kohler and Cesar Milstein received the Nobel prize for this work.
See hĴps://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/1984/kohler/lecture and
hĴps://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/1984/milstein/lecture.)
Lerner RA. Combinatorial antibody libraries: new advances, new immunological insights.
Nat Rev Immunol . 2016;16:498–508.
Antibody Half-Life
Baldwin 3rd WM, Valujskikh A, Fairchild RL. The neonatal Fc receptor: key to homeostasic
control of IgG and IgG-related biopharmaceuticals. Am J Transplant . 2019;19:1881–1887,
2019.
Rath T, Baker K, Dumont JA, et al. Fc-fusion proteins and FcRn: structural insights for
longer-lasting and more eﬀective therapeutics. Crit Rev Biotechnol . 2015;35:235–254.
Ward ES, Devanaboyina SC, Ober RJ. Targeting FcRn for the modulation of antibody
dynamics. Mol Immunol . 2015;67:131–141.
Therapeutic Applications of Antibodies
Beers SA, Glennie MJ, White AL. Inﬂuence of immunoglobulin isotype on therapeutic
antibody function. Blood . 2016;127:1097–1101.
∗Behring E, Kitasato S. Anti-toxic immunity to diphtheria and tetanus. Deutsch med
Wochenschr . 1890;16:1113–1116. (The discovery of antitoxins against diphtheria and
tetanus. Emil Behring received the Nobel Prize for the use of serum therapy for the treatment
of diphtheria and other infectious diseases.
See hĴps://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/1901/behring/lecture .)
Crowe Jr JE. Principles of broad and potent antiviral human antibodies: insights for vaccine
design. Cell Host Microbe . 2017;22:193–206.
Martin F. Antibodies as leading tools to unlock the therapeutic potential in human disease.
Immunol Rev . 2016;270:5–7.
Tiller KE, Tessier PM. Advances in antibody design. Annu Rev Biomed Eng . 2015;17:191–
216.
Chapter 6: Antigen Presentation
to T Lymphocytes and the
Function of Major
Histocompatibility Complex
Molecules 
Properties of Antigens Recognized by T Lymphocytes,
Antigen Capture and the Functions of Antigen-Presenting
Cells,
General Properties of Antigen-Presenting
Cells,
Role of Dendritic Cells in Antigen Capture and
Display,
Functions of Other Antigen-Presenting Cells,
The Major Histocompatibility Complex,
Discovery of the MHC,
MHC Genes,
Structure of MHC Molecules,
Binding of Peptides to MHC Molecules,
Processing of Protein Antigens,
The Class I MHC Pathway for Processing and
Presentation of Cytosolic Proteins,
The Class II MHC Pathway for Presentation of
Proteins Degraded in Acidic Vesicles,
Physiologic Significance of MHC–Associated
Antigen Presentation,
Presentation of Nonprotein Antigens to T Cells,
Summary,
The principal functions of T lymphocytes are to eradicate infections
by intracellular microbes and to activate other cells, such as
macrophages and B lymphocytes. The activation and functions of T
cells have several features that reﬂect the special properties of this
cell type.
To initiate immune responses, antigens are captured from their site
of entry and concentrated in secondary (peripheral) lymphoid organs
through which naive T cells circulate constantly. Microbes and other
antigens most often enter the body through epithelium-lined
surfaces, which interface with the external environment. Microbes
may also colonize any tissue, and antigens may be produced in
these tissues. Because the the total number of lymphocytes in the
body is ﬁnite and the immune system generates a large number of
lymphocyte clones each with a diﬀerent speciﬁcity, there are very
few naive T and B cells speciﬁc for any one antigen, in the range of 1
in 105 or 106 lymphocytes. This small number of naive T cells has to
be able to locate and respond to the foreign antigen. It is
impossible for the few T cells speciﬁc for any antigen to constantly
patrol all the possible tissues where antigens may enter or be
produced. The mechanism that solves this problem is a specialized
system for capturing an antigen from its site of entry or production
and bringing it to secondary lymphoid organs through which naive
T cells circulate. The cells that capture antigens and display them to
T lymphocytes are called antigen-presenting cells (APCs). Once
helper and cytotoxic eﬀector T cells are produced, they leave the
lymphoid organs and migrate to sites of infection and then
recognize the same antigens that initiated the response again
presented by cells at these sites. Some helper T cells migrate toward
follicles and then recognize the same antigens presented by B cells.
This second round of antigen presentation activates the eﬀector
functions of the T cells so that they can eliminate the microbes or
activate the B cells.
T lymphocytes recognize and respond to cell-associated antigens
and not to soluble, cell-free antigens. A principal function of T
lymphocytes is to eliminate microbes that survive inside cells. In
addition, T cells help B cells produce antibodies that kill microbes
outside of cells. In both cases, the T cells must interact with and
activate other cells, such as macrophages and B lymphocytes. Other
T cells kill virus-infected cells and tumors. T cell antigen receptors
have evolved to see antigens that are derived from proteins that are
inside cells and are displayed by cell surface molecules, which
ensures that T cells recognize cell-associated and not free antigens
and interact with other cells. This is in striking contrast to B
lymphocytes, whose antigen receptors and secreted products,
antibodies, can recognize intact antigens on microbial and host cell
surfaces, and soluble cell-free antigens. The task of displaying host
cell–associated antigens for recognition by CD4+ and CD8+ T cells is
performed by specialized proteins called major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) molecules, which are expressed on the surfaces of
host cells.
TABLE 6.1
Features of Major Histocompatibility Complex–Dependent
Antigen Recognition by T Lymphocytes
Features of Antigens
Recognized by T Cells
Explanation
Most T cells recognize
peptides and no
other molecules.
Only peptides bind to MHC molecules.
T cells recognize linear
peptides and not
conformational
determinants of
protein antigens.
Linear peptides bind to clefts of MHC
molecules, and protein
conformation is lost during the
generation of these peptides.
T cells recognize cell-
associated and not
soluble antigens.
Most T cell receptors recognize only
peptide-MHC complexes, and MHC
molecules are membrane proteins
that display stably bound peptides
on cell surfaces.
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells
preferentially
recognize antigens
ingested from the
extracellular
environment into
vesicles and
antigens present in
the cytosol,
respectively.
Pathways of assembly of MHC
molecules ensure that class II MHC
molecules display peptides that are
proteolytically degraded in vesicles
in APCs and class I MHC molecules
present peptides from cytosolic
proteins that are degraded by
cytosolic proteasomes.
APCs, Antigen-presenting cells; MHC, major histocompatibility complex.
MHC 
molecules 
display 
antigens 
from 
diﬀerent 
cellular
compartments to diﬀerent classes of T cells, such that the correct
type of T cell recognizes the type of microbe that T cell is best at
eliminating. For instance, defense against microbes in the
circulation has to be mediated by antibodies, and the production of
the most eﬀective antibodies requires the participation of CD4+
helper T cells. But if the same microbe (e.g., a virus) infects a tissue
cell, it becomes inaccessible to the antibody, and its eradication
may require that CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) kill the
infected cells and eliminate the reservoir of infection. MHC
molecules play a critical role in displaying antigens that are
internalized from outside cells to CD4+ T lymphocytes and those
that are produced inside cells to CD8+ T cells.
Elucidation of the cell biology and molecular basis of antigen
presentation has been an impressive accomplishment, based on
functional experiments, biochemical analyses, and structural
biology. In this chapter, we will describe how antigens are captured
and displayed to T cells. In Chapter 7, we will describe the antigen
receptors of T cells, and in Chapters 9, 10, and 11, we will discuss
the activation and eﬀector functions of T lymphocytes.
Properties of Antigens Recognized by T
Lymphocytes
Research on the nature of T cell antigen recognition showed as
early as the 1960s that the physicochemical forms of antigens that
are recognized by T cells are diﬀerent from those recognized by B
lymphocytes and antibodies. This knowledge led to the discovery of
how antigens are seen by T cells. Several features of antigen
recognition are unique to T lymphocytes (Table 6.1).
Most T lymphocytes recognize only short peptides, whereas B cells
can recognize peptides, intact folded proteins, nucleic acids,
carbohydrates, lipids, and small chemicals. As a result, T cell–
mediated immune responses are usually induced by foreign protein
antigens (the natural source of foreign peptides), whereas humoral
immune responses are induced by protein and nonprotein
antigens. Some T cells are speciﬁc for small chemical substances
such as urushiol of poison ivy, β-lactams of penicillin antibiotics,
and even metal ions such as nickel and beryllium. In these
situations, it is likely that the chemicals bind to self proteins,
including MHC molecules, and that T cells recognize the modiﬁed
self peptides or altered MHC molecules. The peptide speciﬁcity of T
cells is true for CD4+ and CD8+ cells; as we will discuss at the end of
this chapter, there are some other, small populations of T cells that
are capable of recognizing nonprotein antigens.
FIGURE 6.1  A model for T cell recognition of a
peptide-major histocompatibility complex. This
schematic illustration shows an MHC molecule
binding and displaying a peptide and a T cell
receptor recognizing the complex of peptide and
MHC molecule. As discussed later in the text,
MHC-associated peptides contain some residues
that anchor them into pockets in the cleft of the
MHC molecule and other residues that are
recognized by T cell antigen receptors. MHC
residues that may vary among individuals
(polymorphic residues) are also recognized by the
T cell receptor. Thus, T cells see both peptide
antigens and MHC molecules.
The antigen receptors of CD4 +   and CD8 +   T cells are speciﬁc for
peptide antigens that are displayed by MHC molecules (Fig. 6.1) .
The function of MHC molecules is to bind and display peptides for
recognition by CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. As we will see in Chapter 8,
MHC recognition is also required for the maturation of these T
cells, ensuring that mature T cells are restricted to recognizing only
MHC molecules with bound antigens. MHC molecules can bind
and display peptides and no other types of molecules; this is why
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells recognize peptides. MHC molecules are
highly polymorphic, and variations in MHC molecules among
individuals inﬂuence both peptide binding and T cell recognition.
A single T cell can recognize a speciﬁc peptide displayed by only
one of the large number of diﬀerent MHC molecules that exist. This
phenomenon is called MHC restriction, and we will describe its
molecular basis later in this chapter. There are two classes of MHC
molecules, called class I and class II. CD4+ T cells recognize
peptides displayed by class II MHC, and CD8+ T cells recognize
peptides displayed by class I. The underlying mechanisms and
functional importance of this separation are discussed later.
FIGURE 6.2  Functions of different antigen-
presenting cells.The three major types of antigen-
resenting cells for CD4+ T cells function to display
antigens at different stages and in different types
of immune responses. Note that effector T cells
activate macrophages and B lymphocytes by
production of cytokines and by expressing surface
molecules; these will be described in later
chapters.
We will start our discussion of antigen presentation by
describing how APCs capture antigens and transport them to T
cells.
Antigen Capture and the Functions of
Antigen-Presenting Cells
The realization that various cells other than T cells are needed to
present antigens to T lymphocytes ﬁrst came from studies in which
protein antigens that were known to elicit T cell responses were
labeled and injected into mice, to determine which cells bound
(and, by implication, recognized) these antigens. The result was
that 
the 
injected 
antigens 
were 
associated 
mainly 
with
nonlymphoid cells, which was a surprise because it was known that
lymphocytes were the cells that speciﬁcally recognized and
responded to foreign antigens. This type of experiment was quickly
followed by studies showing that protein antigens that were
physically associated with macrophages were much more
immunogenic, on a molar basis, than the same antigens injected
into mice in soluble form. In these early experiments, the
macrophage populations studied may have contained dendritic
cells (DCs), because, as we will discuss in the following section,
naive T cells are best activated by antigens presented by DCs.
Subsequent cell culture experiments showed that puriﬁed CD4+ T
cells could not respond to protein antigens, but they responded
very well if non-T cells such as DCs or macrophages were added to
the cultures. These results led to the concept that a critical step in
the induction of a T cell response is the presentation of the antigen
to T lymphocytes by other cells, which were named antigen-
presenting 
cells 
(APCs). 
The 
ﬁrst 
APCs 
identiﬁed 
were
macrophages, and the responding T cells were CD4+ helper cells. It
soon became clear that several cell populations can function as
APCs in diﬀerent situations. By convention, APC is still the term
used to refer to specialized cells that display antigens to CD4+ T
lymphocytes. As we will see later in this chapter, all nucleated cells
can display peptide antigens to CD8+ T lymphocytes, but they are
not all called APCs.
General Properties of Antigen-Presenting
Cells
Diﬀerent cell types function as APCs to activate naive T cells or
previously diﬀerentiated eﬀector T cells (Fig. 6.2 and Table 6.2) . DCs
are the most eﬀective APCs for activating naive T cells and
therefore for initiating T cell responses. Macrophages and B
lymphocytes also function as APCs, but mostly for previously
activated CD4+ helper T cells rather than for naive T cells. Their
roles as APCs are described later in this chapter and in more detail
in Chapters 10 and 12. DCs, macrophages, and B lymphocytes
express class II MHC molecules and are therefore capable of
activating CD4+ T lymphocytes. For this reason, these three cell
types have been called professional APCs; however, this term is
sometimes used to refer only to DCs because of their unique role in
naive T cell activation.
TABLE 6.2
IFN-γ, Interferon-γ; IL-4, interleukin-4; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; MHC, major histocompatibility
complex.
a  As mentioned in the text, class I MHC molecules are expressed on all nucleated cells and
display peptides to CD8+ T lymphocytes.
APCs display peptide-MHC complexes for recognition by T cells
and also provide additional stimuli that are required for the full
responses of the T cells. Antigen is the ﬁrst signal, and these
additional stimuli are sometimes called second signals. They are
more important for activation of naive T cells than for restimulation
of previously activated eﬀector and memory cells. The membrane-
bound molecules of APCs that function together with antigens to
stimulate T cells are called costimulators. APCs also secrete
cytokines that play critical roles in the diﬀerentiation of naive T
cells into eﬀector cells. These costimulators and cytokines are
described in Chapters 9 and 10.
The antigen-presenting function of APCs is enhanced by exposure
to microbial products. This is one reason that the immune system
responds beĴer to microbes than to harmless, nonmicrobial
substances. DCs and macrophages express Toll-like receptors and
other innate immune microbial sensors (see Chapter 4) and
respond to microbes by increasing the expression of MHC
molecules and costimulators, by improving the eﬃciency of antigen
presentation, and by activating the APCs to produce cytokines, all
of which help stimulate T cell responses. In addition, DCs that are
activated by microbes express chemokine receptors that facilitate
their migration to sites where naive T cells are present. The
induction of optimal T cell responses to puriﬁed protein antigens in
the absence of infection requires that the antigens be administered
with substances called adjuvants. Adjuvants either are products of
microbes, such as killed mycobacteria (used experimentally), or
substances that elicit innate immune responses, like microbes do,
and thus enhance the expression of costimulators and cytokines
and also stimulate the antigen-presenting functions of APCs.
Adjuvants are routinely used in animal studies of immune
responses and in human vaccines.
APCs that present antigens to T cells also receive signals back
from these lymphocytes that enhance the antigen-presenting function
of the APCs. In particular, CD4+ T cells that are activated by antigen
recognition and costimulation express surface molecules, notably
one called CD40 ligand (CD154), which binds to CD40 on DCs and
macrophages, and the T cells also secrete cytokines, such as
interferon-γ (IFN-γ), that bind to their receptors on these APCs.
The combination of CD40 signals and cytokines activates the APCs,
resulting in increased ability to process and present antigens,
increased expression of costimulators, and secretion of cytokines
that activate the T cells. This bidirectional interaction between
APCs displaying the antigen and T lymphocytes that recognize the
antigen functions as a positive feedback loop that plays an
important role in maximizing the immune response (see Chapter
9).
Role of Dendritic Cells in Antigen Capture
and Display
Microbes and protein antigens that enter through epithelia are
concentrated in lymph nodes, and blood-borne antigens are captured
mostly in the spleen (Fig. 6.3) . The common routes through which
foreign antigens, such as microbes, enter a host are the skin and the
epithelia of the gastrointestinal and respiratory systems. In
addition, microbial antigens may be produced in any tissue that has
been colonized or infected by a microbe. The skin, mucosal
epithelia, and parenchymal organs contain numerous lymphatic
capillaries that drain lymph from these sites and into the regional
lymph nodes. Some antigens are transported in the lymph by APCs
(primarily DCs) that capture the antigen and enter lymphatic
vessels, and other antigens enter the lymphatics in cell-free form.
Thus, the lymph contains a sampling of all the soluble and cell-
associated antigens that enter through epithelia and are present in
tissues. The antigens become concentrated in lymph nodes, which
are interposed along lymphatic vessels and act as ﬁlters that sample
the lymph before it reaches the blood (see Chapter 2). Antigens
that enter the blood stream may be sampled by APCs that are
resident in the spleen or captured by circulating DCs and taken to
the spleen.
FIGURE 6.3  Routes of antigen entry.Microbial
antigens commonly enter through the skin and
gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts, where they
are captured by dendritic cells and transported to
regional lymph nodes. Antigens that enter the
bloodstream are captured by antigen-presenting
cells in the spleen.
DCs are the cells that are best able to capture and transport
antigens for presentation to naive T cells. DCs were introduced in
Chapter 2, and their functions as tissue-resident sentinels that
recognize microbes and trigger innate immune reactions were
discussed in Chapter 4. Here we describe the role of these cells in
antigen presentation to T lymphocytes.
DCs are divided into several subsets based on phenotypes and
functions.
• Conventional (or classical) DCs (cDCs) are present in most
epithelia that interface with the external environment, such
as the skin and the intestinal and respiratory tracts, and in
tissues, and are enriched in lymphoid organs. They are the
DC subset that captures antigens and transports them to
secondary lymphoid organs and are thus involved in
antigen presentation to naive CD4+ and CD8+ T cells.
Conventional DCs are divided into two groups.
○ Type 1 cDCs (cDC1) are especially eﬃcient at
transferring ingested antigens from vesicles into the
cytosol. As we will discuss later, this is an essential step
in the process of cross-presentation, in which ingested
antigens are presented on class I MHC molecules to
CD8+ T cells.
○ Type 2 cDCs (cDC2) are the major DC subset that
presents captured antigens to CD4+ T cells, and thus
the subset that is most important for initiating
responses of these T cells.
• Plasmacytoid DCs (pDC) are the body’s major source of type
I IFN and are thus essential for innate immune responses
to viruses. pDCs also may capture antigens in the blood and
transport them to the spleen.
• Monocyte-derived DCs (moDC) can be induced to develop
from monocytes under inﬂammatory conditions. Their roles
in immune responses are not clear.
• Langerhans cells of the epidermis were one of the earliest
DCs identiﬁed. These cells are related to tissue-resident
macrophages and develop early in life from progenitors in
the yolk sac or fetal liver and seed the skin. Their function is
probably similar to that of cDC2.
DCs that are resident in epithelia and tissues capture protein
antigens. Tissue-resident cDCs express numerous membrane
receptors, such as C-type lectins, that bind microbes. DCs use these
receptors to capture and endocytose microbes or microbial proteins
and then process the ingested proteins into peptides capable of
binding to MHC molecules. In addition to receptor-mediated
endocytosis and phagocytosis, DCs can ingest antigens by
pinocytosis, a process that does not involve speciﬁc recognition
receptors but serves to internalize whatever molecules might be in
the ﬂuid phase in the vicinity of the DCs.
Simultaneously with antigen capture, DCs are activated by
microbial products to mature into APCs that transport the captured
antigens to draining lymph nodes (Fig. 6.4). At the time that
microbial antigens are being captured, microbial products (i.e.,
pathogen-associated molecular paĴerns [PAMPs]), diﬀerent from
the protein antigens that T cells recognize, are recognized by Toll-
like receptors and other innate paĴern recognition receptors in the
DCs and other cells, generating innate immune responses (see
Chapter 4). The DCs are activated by these signals and by cytokines,
such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF), produced in response to the
microbes. The activated DCs (also called mature DCs) lose their
adhesiveness for epithelia or tissues and begin to express a
chemokine receptor called CCR7 that is speciﬁc for two
chemokines, CCL19 and CCL21, that are produced in lymphatic
vessels and in the T cell zones of lymph nodes. These chemokines
aĴract the DCs bearing microbial antigens into draining lymphatics
and ultimately into the T cell zones of the regional lymph nodes.
Naive T cells also express CCR7, and this is why they localize to the
same regions of lymph nodes where antigen-bearing DCs are
concentrated (see Chapter 3), although their route into the lymph
node is via the blood. The colocalization of antigen-bearing
activated DCs and naive T cells maximizes the chance of T cells with
receptors for the antigen ﬁnding that antigen.
FIGURE 6.4  Role of dendritic cells in antigen
capture and presentation. A, Immature dendritic
cells (DCs) in the skin (Langerhans cells) or
dermis (dDCs) capture antigens that enter through
the epidermis and transport the antigens to
regional lymph nodes. During this migration, the
dendritic cells mature and become efficient APCs.
B, The table summarizes some of the changes
during DC maturation that are important in the
functions of these cells. Half-life is an estimate of
how long the molecules are expressed on cells.
The number of surface molecules is per class II--
expressing cell. ICAM-1, Intercellular adhesion
molecule 1; IL-12, interleukin-12; MHC, major
histocompatibility complex.
Activation also converts the DCs from cells whose primary
function is to capture antigen into cells that are able to present
antigens to naive T cells and to activate the lymphocytes. Activated
DCs express high levels of MHC molecules with bound peptides
and costimulators required for T cell activation. Thus, by the time
these cells arrive in the lymph nodes, they have developed into
potent APCs with the ability to activate T lymphocytes. Naive T
cells that recirculate through lymph nodes encounter these APCs,
and the T cells that are speciﬁc for the displayed peptide-MHC
complexes are activated. This is the initial step in the induction of T
cell responses to protein antigens.
In the absence of infection or inﬂammation, conventional DCs
capture antigens in the tissues but are not activated to produce the
high levels of cytokines and costimulators that are required to
induce eﬀective immune responses. The function of these DCs may
be to present self antigens to self-reactive T cells and thereby cause
inactivation or death of the T cells or generate regulatory T cells.
These mechanisms play a role in maintaining self-tolerance and
preventing autoimmunity (see Chapter 15).
Antigens are also transported to lymphoid organs in soluble
form. Resident DCs in the lymph nodes and spleen may capture
lymph- and blood-borne antigens, respectively, and also may be
driven to mature by microbial products. When lymph enters a
lymph node through an aﬀerent lymphatic vessel, it drains into the
subcapsular sinus, and some of the lymph enters ﬁbroblast
reticular cell (FRC) conduits that originate from the sinus and
traverse the cortex (see Chapter 2). Once in the conduits, low-
molecular-weight antigens can be extracted by DCs that line the
outside surfaces of the conduits and whose processes interdigitate
between the FRCs. Other antigens in the subcapsular sinus are
taken up by macrophages, which carry the antigens into follicles
and present these antigens to resident B cells. B cells in the node
may also recognize and internalize soluble antigens.
The collection and concentration of foreign antigens in lymph
nodes are supplemented by other anatomic adaptations that serve
similar functions. The mucosal surfaces of the GI and respiratory
systems, in addition to being drained by lymphatic capillaries,
contain specialized collections of secondary lymphoid tissue that
can directly sample the luminal contents of these organs for the
presence of antigenic material. The best characterized of these
mucosal lymphoid organs are Peyer’s patches of the ileum and the
y
p
g
y
p
pharyngeal tonsils (see Chapter 14). APCs in the spleen monitor
the blood stream for any antigens that reach the circulation. Such
antigens may reach the blood either directly from the tissues or by
way of the lymph from the thoracic duct.
Several properties of conventional DCs make them the most
eﬃcient APCs for initiating primary T cell responses.
• DCs are strategically located at the common sites of entry of
microbes and foreign antigens (in epithelia) and in tissues
that may be colonized by microbes.
• DCs express receptors that enable them to capture and
respond to microbes.
• In response to chemokines, activated DCs migrate from
epithelia and tissues via lymphatics, preferentially into the
T cell zones of lymph nodes, and naive T lymphocytes also
circulate through the same regions of the lymph nodes.
• Mature DCs express high levels of peptide-MHC complexes,
costimulators, and cytokines, all of which are needed to
activate naive T lymphocytes.
• Specialized DCs (cDC1) can transfer internalized proteins
from phagosomes into the cytosol and are thus eﬃcient at
cross-presenting antigens to CD8+ T cells. As we will see
later, this process is essential for initiating CD8+ T cell
responses to many viruses and tumors.
Functions of Other Antigen-Presenting Cells
Although DCs have a critical role in initiating primary T cell
responses, other cell types are also important APCs in diﬀerent
situations (see Fig. 6.2 and Table 6.2).
In cell-mediated immune responses, macrophages present the
antigens of phagocytosed microbes to eﬀector T cells, which respond
by activating the macrophages to kill the ingested microbes. This
process is central to cell-mediated immunity (see Chapter 10).
Circulating monocytes are able to migrate to any site of infection
and inﬂammation, where they diﬀerentiate into macrophages and
phagocytose microbes as a prelude to destruction. Tissue-resident
macrophages serve the same functions. CD4+ T cells recognize
microbial antigens being presented by the macrophages and
provide signals that enhance the microbicidal activities of these
macrophages. The requirement for speciﬁc antigen recognition
means that T cells activate only macrophages containing the
microbe that is the source of the antigen.
In humoral immune responses, B lymphocytes internalize protein
antigens and present peptides derived from these proteins to helper T
cells. This antigen-presenting function of B cells is essential for
helper T cell–dependent antibody production and for maintaining
speciﬁcity in humoral immune responses (see Chapter 12).
All nucleated cells can present peptides, derived from cytosolic
protein antigens, to CD8 +   CTLs. All nucleated cells are susceptible
to viral infections and cancer-causing mutations. Therefore, it is
important that the immune system be able to recognize cytosolic
antigens, such as viral antigens and mutated proteins, in any cell
type. CD8+ CTLs are the cell population that recognizes these
antigens and eliminates the cells in which the antigens are
produced. CD8+ CTLs may also recognize phagocytosed microbes if
these microbes or their antigens escape from phagocytic vesicles
into the cytosol.
Other cell types that express class II MHC molecules and may
present antigens to T cells include endothelial and some epithelial
cells. Vascular endothelial cells may present antigens to blood T
cells that adhere to vessel walls, but the role of this process in cell-
mediated immune reactions is unclear. Endothelial cells in grafts
also are targets of T cells reacting against graft antigens (see
Chapter 17). Various epithelial and mesenchymal cells may express
class II MHC molecules in response to the cytokine IFN-γ. The
physiologic signiﬁcance of antigen presentation by these cell
populations is not established. Because most of them do not
express costimulators and are not eﬃcient at processing proteins
into MHC-binding peptides, it is unlikely that they contribute
signiﬁcantly to the majority of T cell responses. Thymic epithelial
cells constitutively express MHC molecules and play a critical role
in presenting peptide-MHC complexes to maturing T cells in the
thymus as part of the selection processes that shape the repertoire
of T cell speciﬁcities (see Chapter 8).
Now that we have described the functions of APCs and how
antigens are captured from the environment and taken to lymphoid
organs, we turn to the mechanism of antigen display and especially
the role of MHC molecules in this process.
The Major Histocompatibility Complex
The discovery of the role of the MHC in antigen recognition by
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells has been fundamental to our current
understanding of the activation and functions of lymphocytes. The
MHC was discovered from studies of tissue transplantation in mice,
and it was many years later that the structure and function of MHC
molecules were elucidated.
Discovery of the MHC
The Mouse MHC (H-2 Complex)
It was known from the early days of transplantation that tissues,
such as skin, exchanged between nonidentical individuals are
rejected, whereas the same grafts between identical twins are
accepted. This result showed that tissue rejection is a genetically
determined process. Early in the 20th century, inbred mouse strains
were created by repetitive mating of siblings. Inbred mice are
homozygous at every genetic locus (i.e., they have two copies of the
same allele of every gene, one from each parent), and every mouse
of an inbred strain is genetically identical (syngeneic) to every other
mouse of the same strain (i.e., they all express the same alleles).
Diﬀerent strains may express diﬀerent alleles and are said to be
allogeneic to one another. In the 1940s, George Snell and colleagues
created substrains of inbred mice called congenic mice that were
identical at all loci except for one on chromosome 17. This
diﬀerence allowed one congenic strain with a speciﬁc allele on
chromosome 17 to reject a graft from another strain that had a
diﬀerent allele at this locus, but was otherwise genetically identical.
Because this allelic locus determined the compatibility of tissue
grafts 
among 
diﬀerent 
strains, 
it 
was 
called 
the 
major
histocompatibility locus (histo, tissue). The particular locus that was
identiﬁed in mice contained a gene encoding a blood group antigen
called antigen II, and, therefore, this region was named
histocompatibility-2, or simply H-2. Initially, this locus was thought
to contain a single gene that controlled tissue compatibility.
However, occasional recombination events occurred within the H-2
locus during interbreeding of diﬀerent strains, indicating that it
actually contained several diﬀerent but closely linked genes, many
of which were involved in graft rejection. The genetic region that
controlled graft rejection and contained several linked genes was
named the major histocompatibility complex (MHC). Although not
known at the time of the initial experiments, transplant rejection is
in large part a T cell–mediated process (see Chapter 17), and,
therefore, it is not surprising that there is a relationship between
graft rejection and MHC genes, which encode the peptide-binding
MHC molecules that T cells recognize.
The Human MHC (Human Leukocyte Antigen Locus)
The human MHC was discovered by searching for cell surface
molecules in one individual that would be recognized as foreign by
another individual. This task became feasible when it was
discovered that individuals who had received multiple blood
transfusions and patients who had received kidney transplants had
antibodies that recognized cells from the blood or kidney donors,
and that multiparous women had circulating antibodies that
recognized paternal cells. The proteins recognized by these
antibodies were called human leukocyte antigens (HLAs)
(leukocyte because the antibodies were tested by binding to the
leukocytes of other individuals, and antigens because the molecules
were recognized by antibodies). Subsequent analyses showed that
as in mice, the inheritance of genes (HLA alleles) encoding
particular HLA antigens is a major determinant of graft acceptance
or rejection (see Chapter 17). Biochemical studies gave the
satisfying result that the proteins encoded in the mouse H-2 locus
and the HLA proteins identiﬁed in humans had very similar basic
structures. From these results came the conclusion that genes that
determine the fate of grafted tissues are present in all mammalian
species and are homologous to the H-2 genes ﬁrst identiﬁed in
mice; these are called MHC genes. Other polymorphic genes that
contribute to graft rejection to a lesser degree are called minor
histocompatibility genes; we will return to these in Chapter 17,
when we discuss transplantation immunology.
Immune Response Genes
For almost 20 years after the MHC was discovered, its only
documented role was in graft rejection. This was a puzzle to
immunologists 
because 
transplantation 
is 
not 
a 
natural
phenomenon and there was no reason that a set of genes should be
preserved through evolution if the only function of the genes was to
stimulate the rejection of foreign tissue grafts. In the 1960s and
1970s, it was discovered that MHC genes are of fundamental
importance for all immune responses to protein antigens. Baruj
Benacerraf, Hugh McDeviĴ, and colleagues found that inbred
strains of a single species (guinea pigs or mice) diﬀered in their
ability to make antibodies against some simple synthetic
polypeptides and responsiveness was inherited as a dominant
Mendelian trait. The relevant genes were called immune response
(Ir) genes, and they were all located in the MHC. We now know that
Ir genes are, in fact, class II MHC genes that encode class II MHC
molecules that diﬀer in their ability to bind and display peptides
derived from various protein antigens. Responder strains, which
can mount immune responses to a particular polypeptide antigen,
inherit MHC alleles whose products can bind peptides derived
from these antigens, forming peptide-MHC complexes that can be
recognized by helper T cells. These T cells then help B cells to
produce antibodies. Nonresponder strains express MHC molecules
that are not capable of binding peptides derived from the
polypeptide antigen, and, therefore, these strains cannot generate
helper T cells or antibodies speciﬁc for the antigen. It was also later
found that many autoimmune diseases were associated with the
inheritance of particular MHC alleles, ﬁrmly placing these genes at
the center of the mechanisms that control immune responses. Such
studies provided the impetus for more detailed analyses of MHC
genes and proteins.
The Phenomenon of MHC Restriction
The formal proof that the MHC is involved in antigen recognition
by T cells came from the experimental demonstration of MHC
restriction by Rolf Zinkernagel and Peter Doherty. In their classic
study, reported in 1974, these investigators examined the
recognition of virus-infected cells by virus-speciﬁc CTLs in inbred
mice. If a mouse is infected with a virus, CD8+ T cells speciﬁc for
the virus are activated and diﬀerentiate into CTLs in the animal.
When the function of these CTLs is analyzed in vitro, they
recognize and kill virus-infected cells only if the infected cells
express MHC molecules that are expressed in the animal from
which the CTLs were obtained (Fig. 6.5). Thus, T cells must be
speciﬁc not only for the antigen but also for MHC molecules, and T
cell antigen recognition is restricted by the MHC molecules a T cell
sees. Subsequent studies established that the recognition of
antigens by CD8+ CTLs is restricted by class I MHC molecules, and
the responses of CD4+ helper T lymphocytes to antigens are
restricted by class II MHC molecules.
We will continue our discussion of the MHC by describing the
properties of the genes and then the proteins, and we will conclude
by describing how these proteins bind and display foreign
antigens.
MHC Genes
The MHC locus contains two types of polymorphic MHC genes, the
class I and class II MHC genes, which encode two groups of
structurally 
distinct 
but 
homologous 
proteins, 
and 
other
nonpolymorphic genes whose products are involved in antigen
presentation (Fig. 6.6) . Polymorphism refers to variations in a gene
among individuals in an outbred population. The class I and class
II MHC molecules are the ones whose function is to display peptide
antigens for recognition by CD8+ and CD4+ T cells, respectively.
The nonpolymorphic molecules encoded in the MHC do not
present peptides for T cell recognition.
FIGURE 6.5  Experimental demonstration of the
phenomenon of major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) restriction of T lymphocytes.Virus-specific
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) generated from
virus-infected strain A mice kill only syngeneic
(strain A) target cells infected with that virus. The
CTLs do not kill infected strain B targets (which
express different MHC alleles than does strain A).
By use of congenic mouse strains that differ only
at class I MHC loci, it has been proved that
recognition of antigen by CD8+ CTLs is self class I
MHC restricted. LCMV, Lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus.
Diﬀerent human class I HLA molecules were ﬁrst distinguished
by serologic approaches (antibody binding). Diﬀerent class II MHC
molecules were identiﬁed by use of assays in which T cells from one
individual would be activated by cells of another individual (called
the mixed lymphocyte reaction). Currently, DNA sequencing is
used to distinguish diﬀerent MHC alleles and their encoded
proteins.
Class I and class II MHC genes are the most polymorphic genes
present in any mammalian genome. A remarkable feature to emerge
from the studies of human MHC genes is the unexpected extent of
polymorphism. In the population, the total number of HLA alleles
with diﬀerent amino acid sequences is estimated to be over 14,000,
with more than 3500 variants for the HLA-B locus alone. The
variations in MHC molecules (accounting for the polymorphism)
result from inheritance of distinct DNA sequences and are not
induced by gene recombination (as they are in antigen receptors;
see Chapter 8). Because the products of diﬀerent MHC alleles bind
and display diﬀerent peptides, diﬀerent individuals in a population
may present diﬀerent peptides even from the same protein antigen.
The high degree of polymorphism of the MHC helps provide
protection of mammalian populations from a virtually unlimited
diversity of microbes and therefore prevents loss of entire
populations from emerging infections. In other words, because of
the preservation of a large number of diﬀerent MHC molecules in
the population, there will almost always be individuals able to
present peptides from almost any microbe to their T cells. The
evolution of new MHC alleles is an ongoing process. It occurs by a
mechanism called gene conversion, which involves the copying of
nucleotide sequences from one allele to another during meiosis.
The selective pressures that drive this process and have preserved
such a vast number of alleles in the population are not understood.
FIGURE 6.6  Schematic maps of human and mouse
major histocompatibility complex loci.The basic
organization of the genes in the MHC locus is
similar in humans and mice. Sizes of genes and
intervening DNA segments are not shown to
scale. Class II loci are shown as single blocks,
but each locus consists of several genes. HLA,
Human leukocyte antigen; LT, lymphotoxin; TAP,
transporter associated with antigen processing;
TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
MHC genes are codominantly expressed in each individual. In
other words, for a given MHC gene, each individual expresses the
alleles that are inherited from both parents. For the individual, this
maximizes the number of MHC molecules available to bind
peptides for presentation to T cells.
Human and Mouse MHC Gene Loci
In humans the MHC is located on the short arm of chromosome 6
and occupies a large segment of DNA, extending about 3500
kilobases (kb). In classical genetic terms, the MHC locus extends
about 4 centimorgans, meaning that crossovers within the MHC
occur in about 4% of meioses. A molecular map of the human MHC
is shown in Fig. 6.7.
There are three class I MHC genes called HLA-A, HLA-B, and
HLA-C, which encode three types of class I MHC molecules with
the same names. There are three class II HLA gene loci called HLA-
DP, HLA-DQ, and HLA-DR. Each class II MHC molecule is
composed of a heterodimer of α and β polypeptides. The DP, DQ,
and DR loci on each chromosome contain separate genes
designated A and B, encoding the α and β chains, respectively.
Every individual has two HLA-DP genes (called DPA1 and DPB1),
two HLA-DQα genes (DQA1, 2), one HLA-DQβ gene (DQB1), one
HLA-DRα gene (DRA1), and one or two HLA-DRβ genes (DRB1 and
DRB3, 4, or 5). The nomenclature of the HLA locus takes into
account the enormous polymorphism identiﬁed by serologic and
molecular methods. Thus, based on modern molecular typing,
individual alleles may be called HLA-A∗0201, referring to the 01
subtype of HLA-A2, or HLA-DRB1∗0401, referring to the 01 subtype
of the DR4B1 gene, and so on.
The mouse MHC, located on chromosome 17, occupies about
2000 kb of DNA, and the genes are organized in an order slightly
diﬀerent from those in the human MHC. One of the mouse class I
genes (H-2K) is centromeric to the class II region, but the other
class I genes are telomeric to the class II region. There are three
mouse class I MHC genes called H-2K, H-2D, and H-2L, encoding
three diﬀerent class I MHC proteins, K, D, and L. These genes are
homologous to the human HLA-A, -B, and -C genes. The MHC
alleles of particular inbred strains of mice are designated by
lowercase leĴers (e.g., a, b), named for the whole set of MHC genes
of the mouse strain in which they were ﬁrst identiﬁed. In the
parlance of mouse geneticists, the allele of the H-2K gene in a strain
with the k-type MHC is called K k (pronounced K of k), whereas the
allele of the H-2K gene in a strain with d-type MHC is called K d  (K
of d). Similar terminology is used for H-2D and H-2L alleles. Mice
have two class II MHC loci called I-A and I-E, which encode the I-A
and I-E molecules, respectively. These loci are the Ir genes
discussed earlier. The mouse class II genes are homologous to
human HLA-DP, DQ, and DR genes. The I-A allele found in the
inbred mouse strain with the K k and D k alleles is called I-A k
(pronounced I-A of k). Similar terminology is used for the I-E allele.
As in humans, there are actually two diﬀerent genes, designated A
and B, in the I-A and I-E loci that encode the α and β chains of each
class II MHC molecule.
The set of MHC alleles present on each chromosome is called an
MHC haplotype. For instance, an HLA haplotype of an individual
could be HLA-A24, B35, C3, DRB12, DPB1 DQB3, and so on (using
the simpler nomenclature for HLA alleles). All heterozygous
individuals, of course, have two HLA haplotypes. Inbred mice,
being homozygous, have a single haplotype. Thus, the haplotype of
an H-2d mouse is H-2Kd I-Ad I-Ed Dd Ld. The MHC genes are tightly
linked, so that haplotypes are inherited en bloc, and individuals
will usually express all of the MHC alleles in the two haplotypes
inherited from their parents.
FIGURE 6.7  Map of the human major
histocompatibility complex.The genes located
within the human MHC locus are illustrated. In
addition to the class I and class II MHC genes,
HLA-E, HLA-F, and HLA-G and the MIC genes
encode class I–like molecules, many of which are
recognized by NK cells. C4, C2, and factor B are
complement proteins; tapasin, DM, DO, TAP, and
proteasome subunits are proteins involved in
antigen processing, discussed later in the chapter;
LTα, LTβ, and TNF are cytokines. Many
pseudogenes and genes whose roles in immune
responses are not established are located in the
HLA complex but are not shown to simplify the
map. HLA, Human leukocyte antigen; LT,
lymphotoxin; TAP, transporter associated with
antigen processing; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
Expression of MHC Molecules
Because MHC molecules are required to present antigens to T
lymphocytes, the expression of these proteins in a cell determines
whether foreign (e.g., microbial) antigens in that cell will be
recognized by T cells. There are several important features of the
expression of MHC molecules that contribute to their role in
protecting individuals from diﬀerent microbial infections.
Class I MHC molecules are expressed on virtually all nucleated
cells, whereas class II MHC molecules are expressed only on DCs, B
lymphocytes, macrophages, thymic epithelial cells, and a few other
cell types. This paĴern of MHC expression is linked to the functions
of class I–restricted CD8+ and class II–restricted CD4+ T cells. As
discussed earlier, CD8+ CTLs kill cells infected with intracellular
microbes, such as viruses, as well as tumors that express tumor
antigens, and any nucleated cell can harbor a virus or develop into
cancer. Thus, the expression of class I MHC molecules on nucleated
cells provides a display system for viral and tumor antigens, so
these antigens can be recognized by CTLs and the antigen-
producing cells can be killed. In contrast, class II–restricted CD4+
helper T lymphocytes have a set of functions that require
recognizing antigen presented by a more limited number of cell
types, and class II MHC molecules are expressed mainly on these
cell types. Diﬀerentiated CD4+ helper T lymphocytes function
mainly to activate (or help) macrophages to eliminate extracellular
microbes that have been phagocytosed and to help B lymphocytes
make antibodies that also eliminate extracellular microbes. In order
to initiate an immune response, naive CD4+ and CD8+ T cells need
to recognize antigens that are captured and presented by DCs in
lymphoid organs, which express both class I and class II MHC
molecules. Thymic epithelial cells also express both class I and
class II molecules, and antigen display by these cells is important
in the process of selection of maturing T lymphocytes (see Chapter
8).
The expression of MHC molecules is increased by cytokines
produced during both innate and adaptive immune responses.
Although class I MHC molecules are constitutively expressed on
nucleated cells, their expression is increased by the type I IFNs
IFN-α and IFN-β, which are produced during the early innate
immune response to many viruses (see Chapter 4). Thus, innate
immune responses to viruses increase the expression of the MHC
molecules that display viral antigens to virus-speciﬁc T cells. This is
one of the mechanisms by which innate immunity stimulates
adaptive immune responses. The expression of class I molecules is
also increased by IFN-γ.
FIGURE 6.8  Enhancement of class II major
histocompatibility complex molecule expression by
interferon-γ. IFN-γ, produced by NK cells and
other cell types during innate immune reactions to
microbes or by T cells during adaptive immune
reactions, stimulates class II MHC expression on
APCs and thus enhances the activation of CD4+ T
cells. IFN-γ and type I IFNs have a similar effect
on the expression of class I MHC molecules and
the activation of CD8+ T cells. APC, Antigen-
presenting cell; IFN, interferon; NK, natural killer.
The expression of class II MHC molecules is regulated by
cytokines and other signals in diﬀerent cells. IFN-γ is the principal
cytokine involved in stimulating expression of class II molecules in
APCs such as DCs and macrophages (Fig. 6.8). IFN-γ may be
produced by natural killer (NK) cells during early innate immune
reactions and by antigen-activated T cells during later adaptive
immune reactions. Thus, the ability of IFN-γ to increase class II
MHC expression provides a mechanism by which innate immunity
promotes adaptive immunity and also an ampliﬁcation mechanism
in adaptive immunity. B lymphocytes constitutively express class II
molecules and can increase expression in response to antigen
recognition and cytokines produced by helper T cells, thus
enhancing antigen presentation to helper cells (see Chapter 12).
IFN-γ can also increase the expression of MHC molecules on
vascular endothelial cells and other nonimmune cell types; the role
of these cells in antigen presentation to T lymphocytes is unclear,
as mentioned earlier. Some cells, such as neurons, never appear to
express class II MHC molecules. After activation, human but not
mouse T cells express class II MHC molecules; however, no
cytokine has been identiﬁed in this response and its functional
signiﬁcance is unknown.
The amount of transcription is the major determinant of the level
of MHC molecule synthesis and expression on the cell surface.
Cytokines 
enhance 
MHC 
expression 
by 
stimulating 
the
transcription of class I and class II genes in a wide variety of cell
types. These eﬀects are mediated by the binding of cytokine-
activated transcription factors to DNA sequences in the promoter
regions of MHC genes. Several transcription factors may be
assembled and bind a protein called the class II transcription
activator (CIITA), and the entire complex binds to the class II
promoter and promotes eﬃcient transcription of the gene. By
keeping the complex of transcription factors together, CIITA
functions as a master regulator of class II gene expression.
Mutations in CIITA or the associated transcription factors have
been identiﬁed as the cause of human immunodeﬁciency diseases
associated with defective expression of MHC molecules. The best
studied of these disorders is bare lymphocyte syndrome (see
Chapter 21). Knockout mice lacking CIITA also show reduced or
absent class II expression on DCs and B lymphocytes and an
inability of IFN-γ to induce class II on all cell types.
The expression of many of the proteins involved in antigen
processing and presentation is coordinately regulated. For instance,
IFN-γ increases the transcription not only of class I and class II
genes but also of several genes whose products are required for
class I MHC assembly and peptide display, such as genes encoding
the transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP) and some
of the subunits of proteasomes, discussed later in this chapter.
In addition to transcriptional regulation, the level of class II
MHC expression is controlled by the level of ubiquitination-
dependent degradation, discussed later in the context of antigen
processing.
Structure of MHC Molecules
Biochemical studies of MHC molecules culminated in the solution
of the crystal structures for the extracellular portions of human
class I and class II MHC molecules. Subsequently, many MHC
molecules with bound peptides have been crystallized and
analyzed in detail. Because of these advances, we now understand
how MHC molecules bind and display peptides. In this section, we
ﬁrst summarize the functionally important biochemical features
that are common to class I and class II MHC molecules. We then
describe the structures of class I and class II proteins, pointing out
their main similarities and diﬀerences (Table 6.3).
General Properties of MHC Molecules
All MHC molecules share certain structural characteristics that are
critical for their role in peptide display and antigen recognition by
T lymphocytes.
• Each MHC molecule consists of an extracellular peptide-
binding cleft, followed by an immunoglobulin (Ig)-like
domain and transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains. Class
I MHC molecules are composed of one polypeptide chain
encoded in the MHC and a second, non-MHC–encoded
chain, whereas class II MHC molecules are made up of two
MHC-encoded polypeptide chains. Despite this diﬀerence,
the overall three-dimensional structures of class I and class
II molecules are similar.
TABLE 6.3
HLA, Human leukocyte antigens.
• The polymorphic amino acid residues of MHC molecules are
located in and adjacent to the peptide-binding cleft. This
cleft (also called a groove) is formed by the folding of the
amino termini of the MHC-encoded proteins and is
composed of paired α helices forming the two walls of the
cleft, resting on a ﬂoor made up of an eight-stranded β-
pleated sheet. The polymorphic residues, which are the
amino acids that vary among diﬀerent MHC alleles, are
located in the ﬂoor and walls of this cleft. This portion of
the MHC molecule binds peptides for display to T cells, and
the antigen receptors of T cells interact with the displayed
peptide and also with the α helices of the MHC molecules
(see Fig. 6.1). Because of amino acid variability in this
region, diﬀerent MHC molecules bind and display diﬀerent
peptides and are recognized by the antigen receptors of
diﬀerent T cells.
• The nonpolymorphic Ig-like domains of class II and class I
MHC molecules contain binding sites for the T cell molecules
CD4 and CD8, respectively. CD4 and CD8 are expressed on
distinct subpopulations of mature T lymphocytes and
participate, together with antigen receptors, in responses to
peptide-MHC complexes. For this reason, CD4 and CD8 are
called T cell coreceptors (see Chapter 7). CD4 binds
selectively to class II MHC molecules, and CD8 binds to
class I MHC molecules. CD4 +  helper T cells recognize class
II MHC molecules displaying peptides, whereas CD8 + T
cells recognize class I MHC molecules with bound peptides.
Stated diﬀerently, CD4+ T cells are class II MHC restricted
and CD8+ T cells are class I MHC restricted.
Class I MHC Molecules
Class I MHC molecules consist of two noncovalently linked
polypeptide chains, an MHC-encoded 44- to 47-kD α chain (or heavy
chain) and a non–MHC-encoded 12-kD subunit called β2-
microglobulin (Fig. 6.9). About three-quarters of the α chain
polypeptide is extracellular; a short hydrophobic segment spans the
plasma membrane, and the carboxy-terminal residues are located in
the cytoplasm. The amino-terminal α1 and α2 segments of the α
chain, each approximately 90 residues long, interact to form a
platform of an eight-stranded, antiparallel β-pleated sheet
supporting two parallel strands of α helix. This forms the peptide-
binding cleft of class I MHC molecules. Its size is large enough
(∼25 Å × 10 Å × 11 Å) to bind peptides of 8 to 11 amino acids in a
ﬂexible, extended conformation. The ends of the class I peptide–
binding cleft are closed so that larger peptides cannot be
accommodated. Therefore, native globular proteins have to be
converted into fragments that are small enough and in an extended
linear shape so they can bind to MHC molecules and be recognized
by T cells (described later). The polymorphic residues of class I
MHC molecules are conﬁned to the α1 and α2 domains, where they
contribute to variations among diﬀerent class I alleles in peptide
binding and T cell recognition (Fig. 6.10). The α3 segment of the α
chain folds into an Ig domain whose amino acid sequence is
conserved among all class I MHC molecules. This segment contains
most of the binding site for CD8, but β2-microglobulin and a small
part of the nonpolymorphic C-terminal portion of the α2 domain
also contribute. At the carboxy-terminal end of the α3 segment is a
stretch of approximately 25 hydrophobic amino acids that traverses
the lipid bilayer of the plasma membrane. Immediately after this
are approximately 30 residues located in the cytoplasm, which
include a cluster of basic amino acids that interact with
phospholipid head groups of the inner leaﬂet of the lipid bilayer
and anchor the MHC molecule in the plasma membrane.
β2-Microglobulin, the light chain of class I MHC molecules, is
encoded by a gene outside the MHC and is named for its
electrophoretic mobility (β2), small size (micro), and solubility
(globulin). It interacts noncovalently with the α3 domain of the α
chain. Like the α3 segment, β2-microglobulin is structurally
homologous to an Ig domain and is invariant among all class I
MHC molecules.
FIGURE 6.9  Structure of a class I major
histocompatibility complex molecule.The
schematic diagram (left) illustrates the different
regions of the MHC molecule (not drawn to
scale). Class I MHC molecules are composed of
a polymorphic α chain noncovalently attached to
the nonpolymorphic β2-microglobulin (β2m). The α
chain is glycosylated; carbohydrate residues are
not shown. The ribbon diagram (right) shows the
structure of the extracellular portion of the HLA-
B27 molecule with a bound peptide, resolved by
x-ray crystallography. HLA, Human leukocyte
antigen; Ig, immunoglobulin. 
Courtesy Dr. P. Bjorkman, California Institute of Technology,
Pasadena, CA.
The fully assembled class I MHC molecule is a trimeric complex
consisting of an  α  chain,  β 2-microglobulin, and bound peptide, and
stable expression of class I MHC molecules on cell surfaces requires
the presence of all three components of the complex. The reason for
this is that the interaction of the α chain with β2-microglobulin is
stabilized by binding of peptide antigens to the cleft formed by the
α1 and α2 segments, and, conversely, the binding of peptide is
strengthened by the interaction of β2-microglobulin with the α
chain. Because peptides are needed to stabilize the MHC molecules
and unstable complexes are degraded, only potentially useful
peptide-loaded MHC molecules are expressed on cell surfaces.
Most individuals are heterozygous for MHC genes and therefore
express six diﬀerent class I MHC molecules on every cell,
containing α chains encoded by the two inherited alleles of HLA-A,
B, and C genes.
Class II MHC Molecules
Class II MHC molecules are composed of two noncovalently
associated polypeptide chains, a 32- to 34-kD α chain, and a 29- to
32-kD β chain (Fig. 6.11). Unlike class I MHC molecules, the genes
encoding both chains of class II MHC molecules are polymorphic
and located in the MHC locus.
The amino-terminal α1 and β1 segments of the class II chains
interact to form the peptide-binding cleft, which is structurally
similar to the cleft of class I MHC molecules. Four strands of the
ﬂoor of the cleft and one of the α-helical walls are formed by the α1
segment, and the other four strands of the ﬂoor and the second wall
are formed by the β1 segment. The polymorphic residues are
located in the α1 and β1 segments, in and around the peptide-
binding cleft, as in class I MHC molecules (see Fig. 6.10). In human
class II MHC molecules, most of the polymorphism is in the β
chain. The ends of the peptide-binding cleft of class II MHC
molecules are open, so peptides of 10 to over 30 residues can bind.
The α2 and β2 segments of class II MHC molecules, like class I
α3 and β2-microglobulin, are folded into Ig domains and are
nonpolymorphic—that is, they do not vary among alleles of a
particular class II gene. Both the α2 and β2 domains of class II
MHC molecules contribute to a concavity that accommodates a
protrusion of the CD4 protein, thus allowing binding to occur. The
carboxy-terminal ends of the α2 and β2 segments continue into
short connecting regions followed by approximately 25 amino acid
stretches of hydrophobic transmembrane residues. In both chains,
the transmembrane regions end with clusters of basic amino acid
residues, followed by short hydrophilic cytoplasmic tails.
The fully assembled class II MHC molecule is a trimer consisting
of one α chain, one β chain, and a bound antigenic peptide, and
stable expression of class II MHC molecules on cell surfaces requires
the presence of all three components of the complex. As in class I
MHC molecules, this ensures that the MHC molecules that end up
on the cell surface are the molecules that are carrying out their
normal function of peptide display.
Humans inherit, from each parent, one DPA and one DPB gene
encoding, respectively, the α and β chains of an HLA-DP molecule;
one functional DQA and one DQB gene; one DRA and one or two
functional DRB genes. Thus, each heterozygous individual
expresses six to eight pairs of class II MHC α and β chain
molecules, one set each of DP and DQ, and one or two of DR.
Typically, there is not much pairing of MHC proteins from diﬀerent
loci (i.e., DRα with DQβ, and so on), and each haplotype tends to be
inherited as a single unit. However, because some haplotypes
contain extra DRB loci that produce β chains that assemble with
DRα, and some DQα molecules encoded on one chromosome can
associate with DQβ molecules produced from the other
chromosome, the total number of expressed class II MHC
molecules on the cells of some individuals may be more than eight.
Binding of Peptides to MHC Molecules
After the demonstration that the immunogenicity of proteins
depends on the ability of their peptides to be displayed by MHC
molecules, considerable eﬀort has been devoted to elucidating the
molecular 
basis 
of 
peptide-MHC 
interactions 
and 
the
characteristics of peptides that allow them to bind to MHC
molecules. These studies initially relied on functional assays of
helper T cells and CTLs responding to APCs that were incubated
with diﬀerent peptides. Direct binding of MHC molecules and
peptides has been studied with puriﬁed MHC molecules and
radioactively or ﬂuorescently labeled peptides in solution, using
methods such as equilibrium dialysis and gel ﬁltration. X-ray
crystallographic analysis of peptide-MHC complexes has provided
deﬁnitive information about how peptides sit in the clefts of MHC
molecules and about the residues of each that participate in this
binding. This information has been used to generate computer
algorithms that can predict peptides of any given protein that are
most likely to bind to MHC molecules. This information can
theoretically be used to develop vaccines speciﬁc for microbial
proteins or mutated tumor proteins (see Chapter 18). In the section
that follows, we summarize the key features of the interactions
between peptides and class I or class II MHC molecules.
FIGURE 6.10  Polymorphic residues of major
histocompatibility complex molecules.The
polymorphic residues of class I and class II MHC
molecules are located in the peptide-binding clefts
and the α helices around the clefts. The regions of
greatest variability among different human
leukocyte antigens (HLA) alleles are indicated in
red, of intermediate variability in green, and of the
lowest variability in blue. 
Reproduced with permission from Margulies DH, Natarajan K,
Rossjohn J, McCluskey J. Major histocompatibility complex [MHC]
molecules: structure, function, and genetics. In Paul WE, ed.
Fundamental Immunology. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2008.
FIGURE 6.11  Structure of a class II major
histocompatibility complex molecule.The
schematic diagram (left) illustrates the different
regions of the MHC molecule (not drawn to
scale). Class II MHC molecules are composed of
a polymorphic α chain noncovalently attached to a
polymorphic β chain. Both chains are
glycosylated; carbohydrate residues are not
shown. The ribbon diagram (right) shows the
structure of the extracellular portion of the HLA-
DR1 molecule with a bound peptide, resolved by
x-ray crystallography. HLA, Human leukocyte
antigen; Ig, immunoglobulin. 
Courtesy Dr. P. Bjorkman, California Institute of Technology,
Pasadena, CA.
Characteristics of Peptide-MHC Molecule Interactions
MHC molecules show a broad speciﬁcity for peptide binding, in
contrast to the ﬁne speciﬁcity of antigen recognition by the antigen
receptors of lymphocytes. In other words, a single MHC allele (e.g.,
HLA-A2) can present any one of many diﬀerent peptides to T cells,
but a single T cell will recognize only one of these many possible
HLA-A2–peptide complexes. There are several important features
of the interactions of MHC molecules and antigenic peptides.
• Each class I and class II MHC molecule has a single peptide-
binding cleft that binds one peptide at a time, but each MHC
molecule can bind many diﬀerent peptides. One of the
earliest lines of evidence supporting this conclusion was the
experimental result that diﬀerent peptides that bind to the
same MHC molecule can competitively inhibit one
another’s presentation, implying that there is only a single
peptide-binding cleft in every MHC molecule. The solution
of the crystal structures of class I and class II MHC
molecules conﬁrmed the presence of a single peptide-
binding cleft in these molecules (see Figs. 6.9 and 6.11). It is
not surprising that a single MHC molecule can bind
multiple peptides, because each individual contains only a
few diﬀerent MHC molecules (six class I and eight or a few
more class II molecules in a heterozygous individual), and
these must be able to present peptides from the enormous
number of protein antigens that one is likely to encounter.
• The peptides that bind to MHC molecules share structural
features that promote this interaction. One of these features
is the size of the peptide—class I MHC molecules can
accommodate peptides that are 8 to 11 residues long, and
class II MHC molecules bind peptides that may be 10 to 30
residues long or even longer, the optimal length for ﬁĴing
into the class II MHC cleft being 12 to 16 residues. In
addition, peptides that bind to a particular MHC molecule
contain amino acid residues that allow complementary
interactions between the peptide and that MHC molecule.
Some of the amino acid residues that promote binding to
MHC molecules are described later, when we discuss the
structural basis of peptide-MHC interactions. The residues
of a peptide that bind to MHC molecules are distinct from
those that are recognized by T cells.
• MHC molecules acquire their peptide cargo during their
biosynthesis and assembly inside cells. Therefore, MHC
molecules display peptides derived from microbial antigens
that are inside host cells, and this is why MHC-restricted T
cells are able to recognize microbes that infect or are
ingested into cells. The mechanisms and signiﬁcance of
these processes are discussed later in this chapter.
• The association of peptides and MHC molecules is a
saturable interaction with a very slow oﬀ-rate. In a cell,
several chaperones and enzymes facilitate the binding of
peptides to MHC molecules (described later). Once formed,
most peptide-MHC complexes are stable, and kinetic
dissociation constants are indicative of long half-lives that
range from hours to many days. This extraordinarily slow
oﬀ-rate of peptide dissociation from MHC molecules
ensures that after an MHC molecule has acquired a peptide,
it will display the peptide long enough to maximize the
chance that a particular T cell will ﬁnd the peptide it can
recognize and initiate a response.
• Very small numbers of peptide-MHC complexes are capable
of activating speciﬁc T lymphocytes. Because APCs
continuously present peptides derived from all the proteins
they encounter, only a very small fraction of cell surface
peptide–MHC complexes will contain the same peptide. It
has been estimated that as few as 100 complexes of a
particular peptide with a class II MHC molecule on the
surface of an APC can initiate a speciﬁc T cell response.
p
p
This represents less than 0.1% of the total number of class
II molecules likely to be present on the surface of the APC.
• The MHC molecules of an individual can bind and display
foreign peptides (e.g., those derived from microbial proteins)
and peptides derived from the proteins of that individual
(self antigens). In fact, most of the peptides being displayed
normally by APCs are derived from self proteins. The
inability of MHC molecules to discriminate between self
and foreign peptides raises the question of why we
normally do not develop immune responses against self
proteins. The answer is that self peptide–MHC complexes
do not induce autoimmunity because T cells speciﬁc for
such complexes are killed or inactivated. In fact, T cells with
receptors for self antigens must recognize self peptides
displayed by self MHC molecules in order to be eliminated
or made unresponsive. These processes ensure that T cells
are normally tolerant to self antigens (see Chapter 15).
Structural Basis of Peptide Binding to MHC Molecules
The binding of peptides to MHC molecules is a noncovalent
interaction mediated by residues both in the peptides and in the
clefts of the MHC molecules. As we will discuss later, protein
antigens are proteolytically cleaved in APCs to generate the
peptides that will be bound and displayed by MHC molecules.
These peptides bind to the clefts of MHC molecules in an extended
conformation. Once bound, the peptides and their associated water
molecules ﬁll the clefts, making extensive contacts with the amino
acid residues that form the β strands of the ﬂoor and the α helices
of the walls of the cleft (Fig. 6.12).
In most MHC molecules, the β strands in the ﬂoor of the cleft
contain pockets where side chains of amino acid residues of
peptides bind. Many class I MHC molecules have a hydrophobic
pocket that recognizes one of the following hydrophobic amino
acids—valine, isoleucine, leucine, or methionine—at the C-terminal
end of the peptide. Some class I molecules have a predilection for
peptides with a basic residue (lysine or arginine) at the C terminus.
In addition, other amino acid residues of a peptide may contain
side chains that ﬁt into speciﬁc pockets and bind to complementary
amino acids in the MHC molecule through electrostatic interactions
(salt bridges), hydrogen bonding, or van der Waals interactions.
The residues of the peptide that ﬁt into the MHC pockets are called
anchor residues because they contribute most to the binding—or
anchoring—of the peptide in the cleft of the MHC molecule. Each
MHC-binding peptide usually contains only one or two anchor
residues, and this presumably allows greater variability in the other
residues of the peptide, which are the residues that are recognized
by speciﬁc T cells. In the case of some peptides binding to MHC
molecules, especially class II MHC molecules, speciﬁc interactions
of peptides with the α-helical sides of the MHC cleft also contribute
to peptide binding by forming hydrogen bonds or charge
interactions. Class II MHC molecules accommodate larger peptides
than class I MHC molecules. These longer peptides extend at either
end beyond the ﬂoor of the cleft.
Because many of the residues in and around the peptide-binding
cleft of MHC molecules are polymorphic (i.e., they diﬀer among
various MHC alleles), diﬀerent alleles favor the binding of diﬀerent
peptides. This is the structural basis for the function of MHC genes
as immune response genes; only individuals whose MHC molecules
can bind a particular peptide and display it to T cells can respond to
that peptide.
The antigen receptors of T cells recognize both the antigenic
peptides and the MHC molecules, with the peptide being responsible
for the ﬁne speciﬁcity of antigen recognition and the MHC residues
accounting for the MHC restriction of the T cells. A portion of the
bound peptide is exposed from the open top of the cleft of the MHC
molecule, and the amino acid side chains of this portion of the
peptide are recognized by the antigen receptors of speciﬁc T cells.
The same T cell receptor also interacts with polymorphic residues
of the α helices of the MHC molecule itself (see Fig. 6.1).
Predictably, variations in either the peptide antigen or the peptide-
binding cleft of the MHC molecule will alter presentation of that
peptide or its recognition by T cells.
FIGURE 6.12  Peptide binding to major
histocompatibility complex molecules. A, These
top views of the crystal structures of MHC
molecules show how peptides lie in the peptide-
binding clefts. The class I MHC molecule shown is
HLA-A2, and the class II MHC molecule is HLA-
DR1. The cleft of the class I MHC molecule is
closed, whereas that of the class II MHC
molecule is open. As a result, class II MHC
molecules accommodate longer peptides than
class I MHC molecules. B, The side view of a
cutout of a peptide bound to a class II MHC
molecule shows how anchor residues of the
peptide hold it in the pockets in the cleft of the
MHC molecule. HLA, Human leukocyte antigen. 
A, Courtesy Dr. P. Bjorkman, California Institute of Technology,
Pasadena. B, From Scott CA, Peterson PA, Teyton L, Wilson IA:
Crystal structures of two I-Ad–peptide complexes reveal that high
affinity can be achieved without large anchor residues. Immunity.
1998;8:319–329. Copyright © 1998, with permission from Elsevier
Science.
Because MHC molecules can bind only linear peptides but
microbial and other protein antigens are large molecules in various
folded conformations, there must a mechanism by which these
proteins are converted into peptides that can bind to MHC
molecules. The mechanism is called antigen processing and is the
focus of the remainder of the chapter.
Processing of Protein Antigens
The pathways of antigen processing convert protein antigens
present in the cytosol or internalized from the extracellular
environment into peptides and load these peptides onto MHC
molecules for display to T lymphocytes (Fig. 6.13) . The mechanisms
of antigen processing have evolved to generate peptides that have
the structural characteristics required for associating with MHC
molecules, and to place these peptides in the same cellular location
as newly synthesized MHC proteins with available peptide-binding
clefts. Peptide binding to MHC molecules occurs before cell surface
expression and is an integral component of the biosynthesis and
assembly of MHC molecules. In fact, as mentioned earlier, peptide
association is required for the assembly and surface expression of
stable class I and class II MHC molecules.
Proteins that are present in the cytosol are degraded by
proteasomes to yield peptides that are displayed on class I MHC
molecules, whereas proteins that are ingested from the extracellular
environment and sequestered in vesicles are degraded in lysosomes
(or late endosomes) to generate peptides that are presented on class
II MHC molecules (see Fig. 6.13 and Table 6.4) . In the process of
cross-presentation, described later, antigens are ingested into
vesicles and then transported into the cytosol, where they are
processed for display by class I MHC molecules. Thus, the site of
proteolysis is the key determinant of the MHC molecules, class I or
class II, to which the generated peptides will bind. As we have
discussed previously, the function of CD8+ CTLs is to kill cells
producing foreign antigens in the cytosol and the function of CD4+
T cells is to activate macrophages and B cells, which may have
ingested microbes and protein antigens. The pathways of antigen
processing play a key role in determining the types of microbes and
protein antigens that these classes of T cells recognize and to which
they respond. We ﬁrst describe these two pathways of antigen
processing and then their functional signiﬁcance.
The Class I MHC Pathway for Processing and
Presentation of Cytosolic Proteins
The sequence of events in antigen presentation on class I MHC
molecules is illustrated in Fig. 6.14, and the individual steps are
described next.
Sources of Protein Antigens Degraded in Proteasomes
Microbial proteins present in the cytosol that undergo proteasomal
degradation are derived from microbes that either produce antigens
in the cytosol of cells or whose antigens are transferred to the
cytosol. The same principles apply to tumor antigens. These
cytosolic antigens come from a number of sources.
FIGURE 6.13  Pathways of antigen processing and
presentation.In the class I MHC pathway (top
panel), protein antigens in the cytosol are
processed by proteasomes, and peptides are
transported into the ER, where they bind to class
I MHC molecules. In the class II MHC pathway
(bottom panel), protein antigens that are
degraded in lysosomes bind to class II MHC
molecules. Details of these processing pathways
are shown in Figs. 6.14 and 6.15. CTL, Cytotoxic
T lymphocytes; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; TAP,
transporter associated with antigen processing.
TABLE 6.4
Comparative Features of Class I and Class II Major
Histocompatibility Complex Pathways of Antigen Processing and
Presentation
Feature
Class I MHC
Pathway
Class II MHC Pathway
Composition of
stable
peptide-
MHC
complex
Polymorphic α
chain, β2-
microglobulin,
peptide
Polymorphic α and β
chains, peptide
Types of APCs
All nucleated cells
Dendritic cells,
mononuclear
phagocytes, B
lymphocytes,
endothelial cells,
thymic epithelium
Responsive T
cells
CD8+ T cells
CD4+ T cells
Site of antigen
degradation
Proteasome
Late endosomes and
lysosomes
Feature
Class I MHC
Pathway
Class II MHC Pathway
Source of
protein
antigens
Mainly cytosolic
proteins
(usually
synthesized in
the cell; may
enter cytosol
from
phagosomes);
also nuclear and
membrane
proteins
Endosomal and
lysosomal proteins
(mostly internalized
from extracellular
environment)
Enzymes
responsible
for protein
degradation
β1, β2, and β5
subunits of
proteasomes
Endosomal and
lysosomal proteases
(e.g., cathepsins)
Site of peptide
loading of
MHC
Endoplasmic
reticulum
Late
endosomes/lysosomes
Molecules
involved in
transport of
peptides and
loading of
MHC
molecules
TAP, tapasin
Invariant chain, DM
APCs, Antigen-presenting cells; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; MHC, major histocompatibility
complex; TAP, transporter associated with antigen processing.
• All viruses replicate and survive in infected cells and thus
synthesize proteins in the infected cell cytoplasm. These are
the most common type of microbial proteins that are
processed by the proteasome and presented on class I MHC
molecules. The MHC-peptide complexes are then
recognized by diﬀerentiated, functional CTLs and the
infected cells are killed.
• Some bacteria are internalized into phagosomes but are
able to damage phagosome membranes and create pores
through which the microbes and their antigens enter the
cytosol. For instance, pathogenic strains of Listeria
monocytogenes produce a protein called listeriolysin that
enables bacteria to escape from vesicles into the cytosol.
(This escape is a mechanism that the bacteria may have
developed to resist killing by the microbicidal mechanisms
of phagocytes, most of which are concentrated in
phagolysosomes.) Once the antigens of the phagocytosed
microbes are in the cytosol, they are processed in
proteasomes like other cytosolic antigens.
• Some bacteria have type III secretion systems that inject
bacterial proteins into the cytosol. Numerous pathogens,
including Yersinia pestis, Salmonella typhi, Shigella
dysenteriae, Vibrio cholerae, and Chlamydia species, inject
signaling proteins into the host cytosol to manipulate host
function and immunity to the pathogen’s advantage. This is
a major mechanism of bacterial virulence.
• The products of mutated genes in tumors produce antigens
in the cytosol of the tumor cells. As in virus-infected cells,
display of these tumor antigens on class I MHC molecules
enables diﬀerentiated CTLs to kill the tumor cells.
• Initiating immune responses against viruses and tumors
requires antigen capture by DCs and transport of the
antigen-bearing DCs to secondary lymphoid organs, where
the antigens can be presented to naive CD8+ T cells. But
most viruses infect cells other than DCs, and tumor
antigens are produced in the tumor cells, not in DCs. The
process by which antigens of other cells (virus-infected or
tumor cells) are presented by DCs is called cross-
presentation (or cross-priming), to indicate that one cell
type (the DC) can present antigens from another cell (the
virus-infected or tumor cell) and prime, or activate, T cells
speciﬁc for these antigens. In this process, specialized type
1 conventional DCs (cDC1) and other APCs capture
infected or tumor cells or their antigens into vesicles. The
vesicles fuse with the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and by
mechanisms that remain poorly deﬁned, proteins from the
vesicles are transported into the cytosol.
FIGURE 6.14  The class I major
histocompatibility complex pathway of antigen
presentation.The steps in the processing of
cytosolic proteins are described in the text.
The proteins may be produced in the cytosol
of an infected cell (or a tumor cell, not
shown). Other proteins that are ingested into
vesicles may be translocated into the cytosol
and processed like cytosolic proteins, known
as cross-presentation. β2m, β2-
Microglobulin; ERAP, endoplasmic reticulum–
associated peptidase; ER, endoplasmic
reticulum; TAP, transporter associated with
antigen processing; Ub, ubiquitin.
In addition to these microbial antigens, proteins produced in the
ER that either do not fold properly or fail to assemble correctly in
this compartment are translocated out of the ER and are degraded
in proteasomes. Some nuclear proteins also are degraded in
proteasomes. These types of proteins are often found in damaged
cells and tumors and may be involved in T cell–mediated
elimination of these cells.
Digestion of Proteins in Proteasomes
Cytosolic proteins are degraded in proteasomes to generates
peptides that are able to bind to class I MHC molecules.
Proteasomes are large multiprotein enzyme complexes with a broad
range of proteolytic activity that are found in the cytoplasm and
nuclei of most cells. A proteasome appears as a cylinder composed
of a stacked array of two inner β rings and two outer α rings, each
ring being composed of seven subunits, with a caplike structure at
each end of the cylinder. The proteins in the outer α rings are
structural and lack proteolytic activity; in the inner β rings, three of
the seven subunits (β1, β2, and β5) are the catalytic sites for
proteolysis.
Proteasomes perform a basic housekeeping function in cells by
degrading many damaged or improperly folded proteins. Protein
synthesis normally occurs at a rapid rate, with about six to eight
amino 
acid 
residues 
being 
incorporated 
into 
elongating
polypeptide chains every second. This process is error prone, and it
is estimated that approximately 20% of newly synthesized proteins
are misfolded. These newly translated but defective polypeptides,
as well as proteins that are damaged by cellular stresses, are
targeted for proteasomal degradation by covalent linkage of several
copies of a small polypeptide called ubiquitin. Proteins with chains
of four or more ubiquitins are recognized by the proteasomal cap
and then are unfolded, the ubiquitin is removed, and the proteins
are threaded through proteasomes, where they are degraded into
peptides. The proteasome has broad substrate speciﬁcity and can
generate a wide variety of peptides from cytosolic proteins (but
usually does not degrade them completely into single amino acids).
The composition of proteasomes inﬂuences the peptides that are
produced. Proteasomes are organelles whose basic cellular function
has been adapted for a role in antigen presentation. There are two
types of proteasomes with specialized functions in the immune
system. Immunoproteasomes are present in immune cells, such as
DCs and other APCs. They contain three unique catalytic subunits
known as β1i, β2i, and β5i in the β ring. The expression of these
three subunits is also increased in response to IFNs produced in
innate and adaptive immune responses. The production of these
subunits results in a change in the substrate speciﬁcity of the
proteasome such that the peptides produced usually contain
carboxy-terminal hydrophobic amino acids such as leucine, valine,
isoleucine, and methionine or basic residues such as lysine or
arginine. These kinds of C termini are typical of peptides that bind
with high aﬃnity to class I molecules. Thus, immunoproteasomes
play an important role in generating peptides from foreign proteins
that stimulate CD8+ T cells. The second type of proteasome is called
the thymoproteasome because it is present in thymic epithelial
cells. It contains a unique subunit called β5t, which confers upon it
the ability to produce peptides that bind weakly to class I MHC
molecules. As we will see in Chapter 8, in the thymus these
peptides are derived from self proteins, and their low-aﬃnity
recognition is important for the process of positive selection, which
preserves maturing T cells that strongly recognize foreign antigens.
In the absence of the β5t unit (e.g., in mice in which the gene is
deleted), CD8+ T cells fail to mature. Predictably, CD4+ T cells are
not aﬀected, because, as we discuss later, the peptides that are
recognized by CD4+ cells are not generated in the proteasome.
Transport of Peptides From the Cytosol to the Endoplasmic
Reticulum
Peptides generated by proteasomes in the cytosol are translocated
by a specialized transporter into the ER, where newly synthesized
class I MHC molecules are available to bind the peptides. This
delivery is mediated by a dimeric protein located in the ER
membrane called transporter associated with antigen processing
(TAP), which is a member of the ABC transporter family of
proteins, many of which mediate ATP-dependent transport of low-
molecular-weight compounds across cellular membranes. Although
the TAP heterodimer has a broad range of speciﬁcities, it optimally
transports peptides ranging from 8 to 16 amino acids in length and
containing carboxyl termini that are basic or hydrophobic. As
mentioned earlier, these are the characteristics of the peptides that
are generated in the proteasome and are able to bind to class I
MHC molecules.
Assembly of Peptide–Class I MHC Complexes in the
Endoplasmic Reticulum
Peptides translocated into the ER bind to newly synthesized class I
MHC molecules that are associated with the TAP dimer through
tapasin. On the luminal side of the ER membrane, the TAP protein
associates with a protein called tapasin, which also has an aﬃnity
for newly synthesized empty class I MHC molecules. Tapasin is part
of a peptide-loading complex, the other proteins in this complex
being a thiol oxidoreductase called ERp57 that can break and
remake disulﬁde bonds in proteins and an ER luminal chaperone
called calreticulin. Within this complex tapasin forms a stable
disulﬁde-bonded heterodimer with ERp57 and brings the TAP
transporter adjacent to the class I MHC molecules that are awaiting
the arrival of peptides.
The synthesis and assembly of class I MHC molecules involve a
multistep process in which peptide binding plays a key role. Class I
α chains and β2-microglobulin are synthesized in the ER.
Appropriate folding of the nascent α chains is assisted by
chaperone proteins, such as the membrane chaperone calnexin.
Within the ER, the newly formed empty class I MHC dimers remain
linked to the peptide-loading complex. Peptides that enter the ER
through TAP and peptides produced in the ER, such as signal
peptides from membrane or secreted proteins, are often trimmed
to the appropriate size for MHC binding by the ER-associated
aminopeptidase (ERAP). The peptide is then able to bind to the
cleft of the adjacent class I MHC molecule. The peptide-loading
complex not only delivers peptides to newly synthesized class I
MHC molecules but also selects peptides that bind with the highest
aﬃnity to class I MHC molecules preferentially over low-aﬃnity-
binding peptides. This is a quality control mechanism in antigen
processing. Once class I MHC molecules are loaded with peptide,
they no longer have an aﬃnity for tapasin, so the peptide-loaded
class I MHC molecules are released and are able to exit the ER and
be transported to the cell surface. In the absence of bound peptide,
many of the newly formed α chain–β2-microglobulin dimers are
unstable and cannot be transported eﬃciently from the ER to the
Golgi complex. These misfolded empty class I MHC complexes are
transported into the cytosol and eliminated by proteasomal
digestion. This process is called ER-associated degradation, but the
actual degradation occurs in proteasomes in the cytosol.
Peptides transported into the ER preferentially bind to class I but
not class II MHC molecules for two reasons. First, newly
synthesized class I MHC molecules are aĴached to the luminal
aspect of the peptide-loading complex, and they capture peptides
rapidly as the peptides are transported into the ER by TAP. Second,
as discussed later, the peptide-binding clefts of newly synthesized
class II molecules in the ER are blocked by a protein called the
invariant chain.
Surface Expression of Peptide–Class I MHC Complexes
Class I MHC molecules with bound peptides are structurally stable
and are expressed on the cell surface. Stable peptide–class I MHC
complexes that were produced in the ER are guided by chaperones
to move through the Golgi complex and are transported to the cell
surface in exocytic vesicles. Once expressed on the cell surface, the
peptide–class I complexes may be recognized by peptide antigen–
speciﬁc CD8+ T cells, with the CD8 coreceptor playing an essential
role by binding to nonpolymorphic regions of the class I MHC
molecule. Several viruses and tumors have evolved mechanisms
that interfere with class I assembly and peptide loading,
emphasizing the importance of this pathway for antiviral and
antitumor immunity (see Chapters 16 and 18).
The Class II MHC Pathway for Presentation of
Proteins Degraded in Acidic Vesicles
The generation of class II MHC–associated peptides from
endocytosed antigens involves the proteolytic degradation of
internalized proteins in late endosomes and lysosomes and the
binding of peptides to class II MHC molecules in this acidic
vesicular compartment. This sequence of events is illustrated in Fig.
6.15, and the individual steps are described next.
Ingestion of Protein Antigens Into Vesicles
Most class II MHC–associated peptides are derived from protein
antigens that are ingested into and digested in endosomes and
lysosomes in APCs. Proteins that are ingested into vesicles are most
commonly 
extracellular 
proteins 
captured 
by 
endocytosis,
pinocytosis, or phagocytosis, but also include cell surface proteins
that are being endocytosed and degraded and intracellular proteins
that may be membrane-bound, vesicular, or cytosolic that are
included in autophagosomes during the process of autophagy.
FIGURE 6.15  The class II major histocompatibility
complex pathway of antigen presentation.The
stages in the processing of extracellular antigens
are described in the text. CLIP, Class II–
associated invariant chain peptide; ER,
endoplasmic reticulum; HLA, human leukocyte
antigen; I i , invariant chain.
Diﬀerent APCs can bind native protein antigens in several ways
and with varying eﬃciencies and speciﬁcities.
• DCs and macrophages express a variety of surface receptors,
such as lectins, that recognize structures shared by many
microbes (see Chapter 4). These APCs use the receptors to
bind and internalize microbes eﬃciently.
• Macrophages also express receptors for the Fc portions of
antibodies and receptors for the complement protein C3b,
which bind antigens that are opsonized by antibodies or
complement proteins and enhance antigen internalization.
• Another example of speciﬁc receptors on APCs is the
surface Ig on B cells, which, because of its high aﬃnity for
antigens, can eﬀectively mediate the internalization of
proteins present at very low concentrations in the
extracellular ﬂuid (see Chapter 12).
After the bound protein antigens are internalized, they become
localized 
in 
intracellular 
membrane-bound 
vesicles 
called
endosomes. The endosomal pathway of intracellular protein traﬃc
communicates with lysosomes, which are denser membrane-bound
enzyme-containing vesicles. Particulate microbes are internalized
into vesicles called phagosomes, which may fuse with lysosomes,
producing vesicles called phagolysosomes. Some microbes, such as
mycobacteria and Leishmania, may survive and even replicate
within phagosomes or endosomes, providing a persistent source of
antigens in vesicular compartments.
Proteins other than those ingested from the extracellular milieu
can also enter the class II MHC pathway.
• Some protein molecules destined for secretion may end up
in the same vesicles as class II MHC molecules and may be
processed instead of being secreted.
• Cytoplasmic and membrane proteins may be processed and
displayed by class II MHC molecules. In some cases, this
may result from the enzymatic digestion of cytoplasmic
contents, the process known as autophagy. In this pathway,
cytosolic proteins are trapped within membrane-bound
vesicles called autophagosomes, which fuse with lysosomes,
and the cytoplasmic proteins are proteolytically degraded.
The peptides generated by this route may be delivered to
the same vesicular compartment as are peptides derived
from ingested antigens. Autophagy is primarily a
mechanism for degrading cellular proteins and recycling
their products as sources of nutrients during times of
stress. It also participates in the destruction of intracellular
microbes, which are enclosed in vesicles and delivered to
lysosomes.
• Some peptides that associate with class II MHC molecules
are derived from membrane proteins that may be recycled
into the same endocytic pathway as are extracellular
proteins. Thus, even viruses, which assemble in the
cytoplasm of infected cells, may produce proteins that are
degraded into peptides that enter the class II MHC pathway
of antigen presentation. This may be a mechanism for the
activation of viral antigen–speciﬁc CD4+ helper T cells.
Proteolytic Digestion of Antigens in Acidic Vesicles
Internalized proteins are degraded enzymatically in late endosomes
and lysosomes to generate peptides that are able to bind to the
peptide-binding clefts of class II MHC molecules. The degradation of
protein antigens in vesicles is mediated by proteases that have
acidic pH optima. The most abundant proteases of late endosomes
are cathepsins, which are thiol and aspartyl proteases with broad
substrate speciﬁcities. Several cathepsins contribute to the
generation of peptides for the class II pathway. Partially degraded
or cleaved proteins bind to the open-ended clefts of class II MHC
molecules and are then trimmed enzymatically to their ﬁnal size.
Biosynthesis and Transport of Class II MHC Molecules to
Endosomes
Class II MHC molecules are synthesized in the ER and transported
to endosomes with an associated protein, the invariant chain (I i ),
which occupies the peptide-binding clefts of the newly synthesized
class II MHC molecules (Fig. 6.16) . The α and β chains of class II
MHC molecules are coordinately synthesized and associate with
each other in the ER. The folding and assembly of class II MHC
molecules are aided by ER-resident chaperones, such as calnexin.
The Ii associates with class II MHC dimers in the ER and directs
newly formed class II MHC molecules from the trans-Golgi to late
endosomes and lysosomes, where internalized proteins have been
proteolytically degraded into peptides. It also prevents the class II
molecules from traveling to the cell surface. The Ii is a trimer
composed of three 30-kD subunits, each of which binds one newly
synthesized class II MHC αβ heterodimer in a way that blocks the
peptide-binding cleft and prevents it from accepting peptides. As a
result, class II MHC molecules cannot bind and present peptides
they encounter in the ER, leaving such peptides to associate with
class I MHC molecules (described earlier). The class II MHC
molecules are transported in vesicles from the ER to the Golgi.
Vesicles budding from the trans-Golgi that contain the class II
MHC-Ii complex are transported to lysosomes. Thus, class II MHC
molecules encounter antigenic peptides that have been generated
by proteolysis of endocytosed proteins in lysosomes, and the
peptide-MHC association occurs in these vesicles.
Association of Processed Peptides With Class II MHC Molecules
in Vesicles
Within the endosomal/lysosomal vesicles, the I i   dissociates from
class II MHC molecules by the combined action of proteolytic
enzymes and the HLA-DM molecule, and peptides derived from
protein antigens are then able to bind to the available peptide-
binding clefts of the class II MHC molecules (see Fig. 6.16) .
Although class II MHC molecules are relatively resistant to
lysosomal proteases, the Ii is degraded in this compartment. The
same proteolytic enzymes that generate peptides from internalized
proteins, such as cathepsins, also act on the Ii, leaving only a 24
amino acid remnant called class II–associated invariant chain
peptide (CLIP), which sits in the peptide-binding cleft. Enzymatic
degradation of the transmembrane portion and cytosolic tail of Ii
prevents tethering of class II MHC molecules to the lysosomal
membrane, and this allows class II MHC–peptide complexes (and
some residual MHC class II–CLIP complexes) to bud out of acidic
degradatory vesicles and go to the cell surface.
FIGURE 6.16  The functions of class II major
histocompatibility complex–associated invariant
chain and human leukocyte antigen DM.Class II
MHC molecules with bound invariant chain, or
CLIP, are transported into late endosomes and
lysosomes, where the Ii is degraded and the
remaining CLIP is removed by the action of DM.
Antigenic peptides generated in the vesicles are
then able to bind to the class II MHC molecules.
Another class II–like protein, called DO, may
regulate the DM-catalyzed removal of CLIP (not
shown). CIIV, Class II vesicle; ER, endoplasmic
reticulum; I i , invariant chain.
The HLA-DM molecule edits the repertoire of peptides being
presented, favoring the display of peptides that bind with high
aﬃnity to class II MHC molecules. The displacement of CLIP and
its replacement by a higher aﬃnity antigenic peptide in lysosomes
are accomplished by the action of a molecule called HLA-DM (also
called DM, or H-2M in the mouse), which is encoded within the
MHC, has a structure similar to that of class II MHC molecules, and
colocalizes with class II MHC molecules in certain endosomes.
Unlike class II MHC molecules, DM molecules are not
polymorphic, and they are not expressed on the cell surface. DM
binds to the β chain of class II MHC molecules in the region where
this chain forms the peptide-binding cleft and dislodges loosely
bound peptides from the cleft. It thus acts as a peptide exchanger,
facilitating the removal of CLIP and the addition of higher aﬃnity
peptides derived from protein antigens to class II MHC molecules.
Peptides that bind to the MHC molecules with high aﬃnity cannot
be displaced by DM. Thus, the presence of DM is important for
selecting peptides that bind strongly to MHC molecules in each
individual and displaying these peptides to T cells.
Another dimeric class II MHC-like molecule, called HLA-DO,
binds to HLA-DM in lysosomes and negatively regulates the
function of DM. DM can only mediate peptide exchange after being
released from DO. In response to cytokines and other stimuli
produced during infections, DM levels rise but DO levels do not,
resulting in more eﬃcient peptide exchange and antigen
presentation. HLA-DO functions like a chaperone for HLA-DM.
Because the ends of the class II MHC peptide-binding cleft are
open, large peptides may bind and are then trimmed by proteolytic
enzymes to the appropriate size for T cell recognition. As a result,
the peptides that are actually presented aĴached to cell surface
class II MHC molecules are usually 10 to 30 amino acids long and
typically have been generated by this trimming step.
Expression of Peptide–Class II MHC Complexes on the Cell
Surface
Class II MHC molecules are stabilized by the bound peptides, and
the stable peptide–class II complexes are delivered to the surface of
the APC, where they are displayed for recognition by CD4 +   T cells.
The transport of class II MHC–peptide complexes to the cell surface
is thought to occur by fusion of vesiculotubular extensions from the
lysosome to the plasma membrane, resulting in delivery of the
loaded class II MHC complexes to the cell surface. Once expressed
on the APC surface, the peptide–class II complexes are recognized
by peptide antigen–speciﬁc CD4+ T cells, with the CD4 coreceptor
playing an essential role by binding to nonpolymorphic regions of
the class II MHC molecule.
Surface class II MHC–peptide levels are regulated by modulation
of class II MHC degradation. Class II MHC molecules are normally
recycled and degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome system. A
ubiquitin E3 ligase called MARCH-1 recognizes the tail of the class
II MHC molecules and targets them for degradation. In response to
microbes and cytokines produced during infections, APCs shut oﬀ
the expression of MARCH-1 and thus increase the amount of the
relevant class II–peptide complexes on the cell surface.
Physiologic Significance of MHC–Associated
Antigen Presentation
So far, we have discussed the speciﬁcity of CD4+ and CD8+ T
lymphocytes for MHC-associated foreign protein antigens and the
mechanisms by which complexes of peptides and MHC molecules
are produced. In this section, we will consider how the central role
of the MHC in antigen presentation inﬂuences the nature of T cell
responses to diﬀerent antigens and the types of antigens that T
cells recognize.
Nature of Effector T Cell Responses
The presentation of cytosolic versus vesicular proteins by the class I
or class II MHC pathway, respectively, determines which subset of T
cells will recognize antigens found in these two pools of proteins and
is intimately linked to the functions of the T cells (Fig. 6.17) .
Endogenously synthesized antigens, such as viral and tumor
proteins, are located in the cytosol and are recognized by class I
MHC–restricted CD8+ CTLs, which kill the cells producing the
intracellular antigens. Conversely, extracellular antigens usually
end up in endosomal vesicles and activate class II MHC–restricted
CD4+ T cells because vesicular proteins are processed into class II–
binding peptides. CD4+ T cells function as helpers to stimulate B
cells to produce antibodies and activate macrophages to enhance
their phagocytic functions, both mechanisms that serve to
eliminate extracellular antigens. Thus, antigens from microbes that
reside in diﬀerent cellular locations selectively elicit the T cell
responses that are most eﬀective at eliminating that type of
microbe. This is especially important because the antigen receptors
of CTLs and helper T cells cannot distinguish between extracellular
and intracellular microbes. By segregating peptides derived from
these types of microbes, the MHC molecules guide CD4+ and CD8+
subsets of T cells to respond to the microbes that each subset can
best combat.
Immunogenicity of Protein Antigens
MHC molecules determine the immunogenicity of protein antigens
in two related ways.
• The epitopes of complex proteins that elicit the strongest T
cell responses are the peptides that are generated by
proteolysis in APCs and bind most avidly to MHC
molecules. If an individual is immunized with a protein
antigen, in many instances the majority of the responding T
cells are speciﬁc for only one or a few linear amino acid
sequences of the antigen. These are called the
immunodominant epitopes or determinants. The proteases
involved in antigen processing produce a variety of peptides
from natural proteins, and only some of these peptides
possess the characteristics that enable them to bind to the
MHC molecules present in each individual (Fig. 6.18). It is
important to deﬁne the structural basis of
immunodominance because this may permit the eﬃcient
manipulation of the immune system with synthetic
peptides. An application of such knowledge is the design of
vaccines. For example, a viral protein could be analyzed for
the presence of amino acid sequences that would form
typical immunodominant epitopes capable of binding to
MHC molecules with high aﬃnity. Such analyses can be
done experimentally or in silico. Synthetic peptides
containing these epitopes may be eﬀective vaccines for
eliciting T cell responses against the viral peptides
expressed in an infected cell. Similarly, peptides produced
by mutated genes in cancers are analyzed for their ability to
bind to the class I MHC molecules in each patient with
cancer. The ones that bind are most likely to stimulate
antitumor immunity in that patient (see Chapter 18).
FIGURE 6.17  Presentation of extracellular and
cytosolic antigens to different subsets of
effector T cells. A, Cytosolic antigens are
presented by nucleated cells to CD8+
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), which kill
(lyse) the antigen-expressing cells. B,
Extracellular antigens are presented by
macrophages or B lymphocytes to CD4+
helper T lymphocytes, which activate the
macrophages or B cells and eliminate the
extracellular antigens.
• The expression of particular class II MHC alleles in an
individual determines the ability of that individual to
respond to particular antigens. As discussed earlier, the Ir
genes that control antibody responses are class II MHC
genes. They inﬂuence immune responsiveness because
various class II MHC molecules produced by diﬀerent
alleles diﬀer in their ability to bind diﬀerent antigenic
peptides and therefore to stimulate speciﬁc helper T cells.
The consequences of inheriting a given MHC allele depend
on the nature of the peptide antigens that can bind the
MHC molecule encoded by that allele. For example, if the
antigen is a peptide from ragweed pollen, the individual
who expresses class II MHC molecules capable of binding
the peptide would be genetically prone to allergic reactions
against pollen. Conversely, some individuals do not
respond to vaccines (such as hepatitis B virus surface
antigen vaccine), presumably because their HLA molecules
cannot bind and display the major peptides of the vaccine
antigen.
Presentation of Nonprotein Antigens to T
Cells
T cells also recognize and react against small molecules and even
metal ions in an MHC-restricted manner. In fact, exposure to some
small molecules that are used as therapeutic drugs and to metals
such as nickel and beryllium often leads to pathologic T cell
reactions (so-called hypersensitivity reactions; see Chapter 19).
There are several ways in which these nonpeptide antigens may be
recognized by MHC-restricted CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. Some of the
chemicals are thought to covalently modify self peptides or the
MHC molecules themselves, creating altered molecules that are
recognized as foreign. Other chemicals bind noncovalently to MHC
molecules and alter the structure of the peptide-binding cleft such
that the MHC molecule can display peptides that are not normally
presented, and these peptide-MHC complexes are seen as being
foreign.
Several small populations of T cells other than CD4+ and CD8+
cells are able to recognize nonprotein antigens without the
involvement of class I or class II MHC molecules. Thus, these
populations are exceptions to the rule that T cells can see only
MHC-associated peptides. The best deﬁned of these populations
are natural killer T (NKT) cells and γδ T cells.
NKT cells express markers that are characteristic of both NK cells
and T lymphocytes and express αβ T cell receptors with very
limited diversity (see Chapter 10). NKT cells recognize lipids and
glycolipids displayed by the class I MHC–like molecule called CD1.
There are several CD1 proteins expressed in humans and mice.
Although their intracellular traﬃc pathways diﬀer in subtle ways,
all CD1 molecules bind and display lipids by a unique mechanism.
Newly synthesized CD1 molecules pick up cellular lipids and carry
these to the cell surface. From here, the CD1-lipid complexes are
internalized into endosomes or lysosomes, where lipids that have
been ingested from the external environment are captured and new
CD1-lipid complexes are then formed, which are returned to the
cell surface. Thus, CD1 molecules acquire endocytosed lipid
antigens during recycling and present these antigens without
apparent processing. The NKT cells that recognize the lipid
antigens may play a role in defense against microbes, especially
mycobacteria (which are rich in lipid components).
FIGURE 6.18  Immunodominance of peptides.Protein
antigens are processed to generate multiple
peptides; immunodominant peptides are the ones
that bind best to the available class I and class II
MHC molecules. The illustration shows an
extracellular antigen generating a class II–binding
peptide, but this also applies to peptides of
cytosolic antigens that are presented by class I
MHC molecules. APC, Antigen-presenting cell;
MHC, major histocompatibility complex.
γδ T cells are a small population of T cells that express antigen
receptor proteins that are similar but not identical to those of CD4+
and CD8+ T cells (see Chapter 10). γδ T cells recognize many
diﬀerent types of antigens, including some proteins and lipids, as
well as small phosphorylated molecules and alkyl amines. These
antigens are not displayed by MHC molecules, and γδ cells are not
MHC restricted. It is not known if a particular cell type or antigen
display system is required for presenting antigens to these cells.
Summary
• The antigen receptors of most T cells recognize only
peptides displayed by major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) molecules on the surface of antigen-presenting cells
(APCs). CD4+ helper T lymphocytes recognize antigens in
association with class II MHC molecules, and CD8+ CTLs
recognize antigens in association with class I MHC
molecules.
• APCs capture protein antigens, process them, and display
MHC-associated peptides to T cells. Dendritic cells (DCs)
are the most eﬃcient APCs for initiating primary responses
by activating naive T cells, and macrophages and B
lymphocytes present antigens to helper T cells in the
eﬀector phase of cell-mediated immunity and in humoral
immune responses, respectively. All nucleated cells can
present class I–associated peptides, derived from cytosolic
proteins, such as viral and tumor antigens, to CD8+ T cells.
• DCs capture antigens from their sites of entry (usually
through epithelia) or production (in tissues) and transport
these antigens to secondary (peripheral) lymphoid organs.
Naive T cells that recirculate through these organs
recognize the antigens, and primary immune responses are
induced in these organs.
• The MHC is a large genetic region coding for highly
polymorphic, codominantly expressed class I and class II
MHC molecules.
• Class I MHC molecules are composed of an α (or heavy)
chain in a noncovalent complex with a nonpolymorphic
polypeptide called β2-microglobulin. Class II MHC
molecules contain two MHC-encoded polymorphic chains,
an α chain and a β chain. Both classes of MHC molecules
consist of an extracellular peptide-binding cleft, a
nonpolymorphic immunoglobulin (Ig)-like region, a
transmembrane region, and a cytoplasmic region. The
peptide-binding cleft of MHC molecules has α-helical sides
and an eight-stranded antiparallel β-pleated sheet ﬂoor. The
polymorphic residues of MHC molecules are localized to
the peptide-binding domain.
• The Ig-like domains of class I and class II MHC molecules
contain the binding sites for the T cell coreceptors CD8 and
CD4, respectively.
• The function of class I and class II MHC molecules is to
bind peptide antigens and display them for recognition by
antigen-speciﬁc T lymphocytes. Peptide antigens associated
with class I MHC molecules are recognized by CD8+ T cells,
whereas class II MHC–associated peptide antigens are
recognized by CD4+ T cells. MHC molecules bind only one
peptide at a time. Every MHC molecule has a broad
speciﬁcity for peptides and can bind multiple peptides that
have common structural features, such as anchor residues.
• The peptide-binding cleft of class I MHC molecules can
accommodate peptides that are 6 to 16 amino acid residues
in length, whereas the cleft of class II MHC molecules
allows larger peptides (up to 30 amino acid residues in
length or more) to bind. Some polymorphic MHC residues
determine the binding speciﬁcities for peptides by forming
structures called pockets that interact with complementary
residues of the bound peptide, called anchor residues.
Other polymorphic MHC residues and some residues of the
peptide are not involved in peptide binding to MHC
molecules but instead form the structure recognized by T
cells.
• Class I MHC molecules are expressed on all nucleated cells,
whereas class II MHC molecules are expressed mainly on
specialized APCs, such as DCs, macrophages, and B
lymphocytes, and a few other cell types, including
endothelial cells and thymic epithelial cells. The expression
of MHC gene products is enhanced by inﬂammatory and
immune stimuli, particularly cytokines such as IFN-γ,
which stimulate the transcription of MHC genes.
• Antigen processing is the conversion of native proteins into
MHC-associated peptides. This process consists of the
introduction of exogenous protein antigens into vesicles of
APCs or the synthesis of antigens in the cytosol, the
proteolytic degradation of these proteins into peptides, the
binding of peptides to MHC molecules, and the display of
the peptide-MHC complexes on the APC surface for
recognition by T cells. Thus, both extracellular and
intracellular proteins are sampled by these antigen-
processing pathways, and peptides derived from both
normal self proteins and foreign proteins are displayed by
MHC molecules for surveillance by T lymphocytes.
• For the class I MHC pathway, protein antigens are degraded
in the proteasome, generating peptides that bind to class I
MHC molecules. Most of these antigens are synthesized in
the cytosol or introduced into the cytosol from microbes or
vesicles. These peptides are delivered from the cytosol to
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) by an ATP-dependent
transporter called transporter associated with antigen
processing (TAP). Newly synthesized class I MHC–β2-
microglobulin dimers in the ER are associated with the
TAP-containing peptide-loading complex and receive
peptides transported into the ER. Stable complexes of class
I MHC molecules with bound peptides move out of the ER,
through the Golgi complex, to the cell surface.
• Specialized APCs, mainly DCs, can ingest virus-infected or
tumor cells and transport their antigens into the cytosol for
presentation by class I MHC molecules. This process, called
cross-presentation, enables DCs to initiate CD8+ T cell
responses to the antigens of ingested cells.
• For the class II MHC pathway, protein antigens are
internalized into endosomes, and these proteins are
proteolytically cleaved by enzymes in lysosomes and late
endosomes. Newly synthesized class II MHC molecules
associated with the invariant chain (Ii) are transported from
the ER to the endosomal vesicles. Here the Ii is
proteolytically cleaved, and a small peptide remnant of the
Ii, called CLIP, is removed from the peptide-binding cleft of
the MHC molecule by the DM molecules. The peptides that
were generated from extracellular proteins then bind to the
available cleft of the class II MHC molecule, and the
trimeric complex (class II MHC α and β chains and peptide)
moves to and is displayed on the surface of the cell.
• These pathways of MHC-restricted antigen presentation
ensure that most of the body’s cells are screened for the
possible presence of foreign antigens. The pathways also
ensure that proteins from extracellular microbes
preferentially generate peptides bound to class II MHC
molecules for recognition by CD4+ helper T cells, which
activate eﬀector mechanisms that eliminate extracellular
antigens. Conversely, proteins synthesized by intracellular
(cytosolic) microbes generate peptides bound to class I
MHC molecules for recognition by CD8+ CTLs, which
function to eliminate cells harboring intracellular
infections. The immunogenicity of foreign protein antigens
depends on the ability of antigen-processing pathways to
generate peptides from the proteins that bind to self MHC
molecules.
Selected Readings
∗Indicates publications of historical interest, generally reporting
the discovery of a phenomenon or process that was later shown to
be of fundamental importance in the immune system. Many (but
not all) of these discoveries led to Nobel Prizes for the
discoverer(s). The nature of the discovery is summarized brieﬂy in
each reference.
The Role of Dendritic Cells in Antigen Capture and Presentation
Anderson D.A, Murphy K.M, Briseno C.G. Development, diversity, and function of
dendritic cells in mouse and human.  Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol . 2018;10:a028613.
Eisenbarth S.C. Dendritic cell subsets in T cell programming: location dictates function. 
Nat Rev Immunol . 2019;19:89–103.
∗Steinman R.M, Cohn Z.A. Identiﬁcation of a novel cell type in peripheral lymphoid organs
of mice. I. Morphology, quantitation, tissue distribution.  J Exp Med . 1973;137:1142–
1162 (The discovery of dendritic cells as a unique cell type in lymphoid organs, laying the
foundation for much of our current understanding of the biology of these cells and their
critical roles in immune responses. Steinman received the Nobel prize for his work.
See. hĴps://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/2011/steinman/lecture ).
Teijeira A, Russo E, Halin C. Taking the lymphatic route: dendritic cell migration to draining
lymph nodes.  Semin Immunopathol . 2014;36:261–274.
Worbs T, Hammerschmidt S.I, Forster R. Dendritic cell migration in health and disease. 
Nat Rev Immunol . 2017;17:30–48.
Discovery of the Major Histocompatibility Complex and Its
Function
∗Dausset J, Brecy H. Identical nature of the leucocyte antigens detectable in monozygotic
twins by means of immune iso-leuco-agglutinins.  Nature . 1957;180:1430 (Demonstration
that production of leukocyte-reactive antibodies, now known to be anti-HLA antibodies, is
under genetic control, later shown to be because diﬀerent individuals inherit and express
diﬀerent HLA alleles. Dausset received the Nobel prize for this work.
See. hĴps://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/1980/dausset/lecture ).
∗Levine B.B, Ojeda A, Benacerraf B. Basis for the antigenicity of hapten-poly-d-lysine
conjugates in random-bred guinea pigs.  Nature . 1963;200:544–546 (The discovery of the
genetic control of antibody responses, later shown to be related to the inheritance of particular
MHC alleles. Benacerraf received the Nobel Prize for this work.
See. hĴps://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/1980/benacerraf/lecture ).
∗McDeviĴ H.O, Tyan M.L. Genetic control of the antibody response in inbred mice: transfer
of response by spleen cells and linkage to the major histocompatibility (H-2) locus.  J Exp
Med . 1968;128:1–11 (The demonstration that the genes that control antibody responses are
MHC genes.).
∗Snell G.D. Methods for the study of histocompatibility genes.  J Genet . 1948;49:87–
108 (The creation of inbred mouse strains that enabled the discovery of MHC genes, for which
Snell received the Nobel prize.
See. hĴps://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/1980/snell/lecture ).
∗Van Rood J.J, Eernisse J.G, Van Leeuwen A. Leucocyte antibodies in sera from pregnant
women.  Nature . 1958;181:1735–1736 (Discovery of anti-leukocyte antibodies in the sera of
multiparous women and recipients of multiple blood transfusions, now known to be anti-HLA
antibodies.).
∗Zinkernagel R.M, Doherty P.C. Immunological surveillance against altered self
components by sensitised T lymphocytes in lymphocytic choriomeningitis.  Nature
. 1974;251:547–548 (The discovery that T cell reactions against viral antigens are MHC-
restricted. These scientists received the Nobel Prize for their work.
See hĴps://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/1996/zinkernagel/lecture and
hĴps://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/1996/doherty/lecture .).
Structure of Major Histocompatibility Complex Genes, Major
Histocompatibility Complex Molecules, and Peptide-MHC
Complexes
∗BabbiĴ B.P, Allen P.M, Matsueda G, et al. Binding of immunogenic peptides to Ia
histocompatibility molecules.  Nature . 1985;317:359–361 (The ﬁrst demonstration of the
direct binding of antigenic peptides to MHC molecules.).
∗Bjorkman P.J, Saper M.A, Samraoui B, et al. Structure of the human class I
histocompatibility antigen, HLA-A2.  Nature . 1987;329:506–512 (The ﬁrst crystal
structure of an MHC molecule with bound peptide.).
Horton R, Wilming L, Rand V, et al. Gene map of the extended human MHC.  Nat Rev
Genet . 2004;5:889–899.
Kim A, Sadegh-Nasseri S. Determinants of immunodominance for CD4 T cells.  Curr Opin
Immunol . 2015;34:9–15.
La Gruta N.L, Gras S, Daley S.R, et al. Understanding the drivers of MHC restriction of T
cell receptors.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2018;18:467–478.
Petersdorf E.W, O’hUigin C. The MHC in the era of next-generation sequencing:
implications for bridging structure with function.  Hum Immunol . 2019;80:67–78.
Reith W, LeibundGut-Landmann S, Waldburger J.M. Regulation of MHC class II gene
expression by the class II transactivator.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2005;5:793–806.
Rene C, Lozano C, Eliaou J.F. Expression of classical HLA class I molecules: regulation and
clinical impacts—Julia Bodmer Award Review 2015.  HLA . 2016;87 338–349.
Rossjohn J, Gras S, Miles J.J, et al. T cell antigen receptor recognition of antigen-presenting
molecules.  Annu Rev Immunol . 2015;33:169–200.
Shiina T, Hosomichi K, Inoko H, Kulski J.K. The HLA genomic loci map: expression,
interaction, diversity and disease.  J Hum Genet . 2009;54:15–39.
Stern L.J, Santambrogio L. The melting pot of the MHC II peptidome.  Curr Opin Immunol
. 2016;40:70–77.
Protein Antigen Processing and Major Histocompatibility
Complex–Associated Presentation of Peptide Antigens
Admon A. ERAP1 shapes just part of the immunopeptidome.  Hum Immunol . 2019;80:296–
301.
Basler M, Kirk C.J, GroeĴrup M. The immunoproteasome in antigen processing and other
immunological functions.  Curr Opin Immunol . 2013;25:74–80.
Blum J.S, Wearsch P.A, Cresswell P. Pathways of antigen processing.  Ann Rev Immunol
. 2013;31:443–473.
Eggensperger S, Tampe R. The transporter associated with antigen processing: a key player
in adaptive immunity.  Biol Chem . 2015;396:1059–1072.
Jurewicz M.M, Stern L.J. Class II MHC antigen processing in immune tolerance and
inﬂammation.  Immunogenetics . 2019;71:171–187.
Kasahara M, Flajnik M.F. Origin and evolution of the specialized forms of proteasomes
involved in antigen presentation.  Immunogenetics . 2019;71:251–261.
Kelly A, Trowsdale J. Genetics of antigen processing and presentation.  Immunogenetics
. 2019;71:161–170.
Mintern J.D, Macri C, Villadangos J.A. Modulation of antigen presentation by intracellular
traﬃcking.  Curr Opin Immunol . 2015;34:16–21.
Murata S, Takahama Y, Kasahara M, Tanaka K. The immunoproteasome and
thymoproteasome: functions, evolution and human disease.  Nat Immunol . 2018;19:923–
931.
Natarajan K, Jiang J, Margulies D.H. Structural aspects of chaperone-mediated peptide
loading in the MHC-I antigen presentation pathway.  Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol
. 2019;54:164–173.
NeeĦes J, Jongsma M.L, Paul P, Bakke O. Towards a systems understanding of MHC class I
and MHC class II antigen presentation.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2011;11:823–836.
Perrin P, Jongsma M.L, NeeĦes J, Berlin I. The labyrinth unfolds: architectural
rearrangements of the endolysosomal system in antigen-presenting cells.  Curr Opin
Immunol . 2019;58:1–8.
Roche P.A, Furuta K. The ins and outs of MHC class II-mediated antigen processing and
presentation.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2015;15:203–216.
Schulze M.S, Wucherpfennig K.W. The mechanism of HLA-DM induced peptide exchange
in the MHC class II antigen presentation pathway.  Curr Opin Immunol . 2012;24:105–
111.
Thomas C, Tampe R. MHC I chaperone complexes shaping immunity.  Curr Opin Immunol
. 2019;58:9–15.
Unanue E.R, Turk V, NeeĦes J. Variations in MHC class II antigen processing and
presentation in health and disease.  Annu Rev Immunol . 2016;34:265–297.
van de Weijer M.L, Luteijn R.D, Wierĵ E.J. Viral immune evasion: lessons in MHC class I
antigen presentation.  Semin Immunol . 2015;27:125–137.
van Kasteren S.I, Overkleeft H, Ovaa H, NeeĦes J. Chemical biology of antigen presentation
by MHC molecules.  Curr Opin Immunol . 2014;26:21–31.
WaĴs C. The endosome-lysosome pathway and information generation in the immune
system.  BBA-Bioenergetics . 2012;1824:14–21.
Wieczorek M, Abualrous E.T, Sticht J, et al. Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I
and MHC class II proteins: conformational plasticity in antigen presentation.  Front
Immunol . 2017;8:292.
Cross-Presentation
Blander J.M. Regulation of the cell biology of antigen cross-presentation.  Annu Rev Immunol
. 2018;36:717–753.
Cruz F.M, Colbert J.D, Merino E, et al. The biology and underlying mechanisms of cross-
presentation of exogenous antigens on MHC-I molecules.  Annu Rev Immunol
. 2017;35:149–176.
Norbury C.C. Deﬁning cross presentation for a wider audience.  Curr Opin Immunol
. 2016;40:110–116.
SchueĴe V, Burgdorf S. The ins-and-outs of endosomal antigens for cross-presentation. 
Curr Opin Immunol . 2014;26:63–68.
Segura E, Amigorena S. Cross-presentation in mouse and human dendritic cells.  Adv
Immunol . 2015;127:1–31.
“Nonclassical” Antigen Presentation
Adams E.J, Luoma A.M. The adaptable major histocompatibility complex (MHC) fold:
structure and function of nonclassical and MHC class I-like molecules.  Annu Rev
Immunol . 2013;31:529–561.
Awad W, Le Nours J, Kjer-Nielsen L, et al. Mucosal-associated invariant T cell receptor
recognition of small molecules presented by MR1.  Immunol Cell Biol . 2018;96:588–597.
Ogg G, Cerundolo V, McMichael A.J. Capturing the antigen landscape: HLA-E, CD1 and
MR1.  Curr Opin Immunol . 2019;59:121–129.
Chapter 7: Immune Receptors
and Signal Transduction 
Overview of Signal Transduction,
Modular Signaling Proteins and Adaptors,
Phase Separation of Signaling Proteins,
The Immune Receptor Family,
General Features of Antigen Receptor
Signaling,
The T Cell Receptor Complex and T Cell Signaling,
The T Cell Receptor for Antigen,
The Role of the CD4 and CD8 Coreceptors in
T Cell Activation,
Activation of Tyrosine Kinases and a Lipid
Kinase During T Cell Activation,
Recruitment and Modification of Adaptor
Proteins,
Formation of the Immune Synapse,
MAP Kinase Signaling Pathways in T
Lymphocytes,
Calcium- and Protein Kinase C–Mediated
Signaling Pathways in T Lymphocytes,
Activation of Transcription Factors That
Regulate T Cell Gene Expression,
Modulation of T Cell Signaling by Protein
Tyrosine Phosphatases,
Costimulatory Receptor Signaling in T Cells,
Metabolic Changes During T Cell Activation,
The B Lymphocyte Antigen Receptor Complex,
Structure of the B Cell Receptor for Antigen,
Signal Initiation by the B Cell Receptor,
Role of the CR2/CD21 Complement Receptor
as a Coreceptor for B Cells,
Signaling Pathways Downstream of the B Cell
Receptor,
The Attenuation of Immune Receptor Signaling,
Inhibitory Receptors of Natural Killer Cells, B
Cells, and T Cells,
Ubiquitin-Dependent Degradation of Signaling
Proteins,
Cytokine Receptors and Signaling,
Classes of Cytokine Receptors,
Signaling by JAKs and STATs,
Pathways of NF-κB Activation,
TGF-β Signaling,
Summary,
The idea that cells have speciﬁc surface receptors that can be
triggered by external ligands came from one of the founders of
modern immunology. Paul Ehrlich, in his “side chain theory”
published in 1897, conceived of antibodies on the surface of
immune cells that recognize antigens and instruct the cells to
release more of the same antibody. Cell surface receptors for
hormones were discovered many decades later, in the second half
of the 20th century, but well before the identiﬁcation of antigen
receptors on lymphocytes in the early 1980s.
Cell surface receptors serve several major functions, including the
induction of intracellular signaling leading to cell activation, the
adhesion of one cell to another or to the extracellular matrix, and the
internalization 
of 
extracellular 
molecules 
and 
cells. Signal
transduction broadly refers to the intracellular biochemical
pathways that are activated in cells after the binding of ligands to
speciﬁc receptors. Most but not all signaling receptors are located
in the plasma membrane. Signaling initiated by these receptors
typically involves an initial cytosolic phase when the cytoplasmic
portion of the receptor or of proteins that interact with the receptor
may be enzymatically modiﬁed (Fig. 7.1). This often leads to the
activation and/or nuclear translocation of transcription factors that
are inactive in resting cells. It is followed by a nuclear phase when
the transcription factors bind to target DNA and orchestrate
changes in gene expression. Some signal transduction pathways
stimulate cell motility or activate granule exocytosis from the
cytoplasm without a change in gene expression. Signal transduction
can result in a number of diﬀerent consequences for cells of the
immune system, including commitment to a speciﬁc lineage,
induction of diﬀerentiation, protection from cell death, initiation of
proliferative responses, performance of eﬀector functions, and
induction of cell cycle arrest or of death by apoptosis.
Antigen receptors on B and T lymphocytes are among the most
sophisticated cell signaling machines known, and they are
discussed in depth in this chapter. We will ﬁrst provide a broad
overview of signal transduction, followed by a discussion of
signaling mediated by clonally distributed antigen receptors in
lymphocytes. When discussing antigen receptors in T and B cells,
we will examine the role of other receptors, including some called
coreceptors and others referred to as costimulatory receptors,
p
y
p
which enhance lymphocyte activation by the antigen receptor. We
will also discuss the role of inhibitory receptors in T, B, and natural
killer (NK) cells and consider diﬀerent categories of cytokine
receptors and signal transduction mechanisms initiated by these
receptors. Finally, to illustrate the steps in the activation of a
prototypic transcription factor, we will examine the pathways that
lead to the activation of nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB), a
transcription factor of relevance to both innate and adaptive
immunity.
FIGURE 7.1  Signaling from the cell surface involves
cytosolic and nuclear phases.A generic receptor
that activates a non-receptor tyrosine kinase after
it binds ligand is shown. In the cytosolic signaling
phase, the non-receptor kinase phosphorylates a
key tyrosine residue on the cytoplasmic tail of the
receptor, as a result of which the
phosphotyrosine-containing receptor tail is able to
recruit a downstream enzyme that is activated
once it is recruited. In the cytosolic phase, this
activated downstream enzyme post-translationally
modifies a specific transcription factor that is
located in the cytoplasm. In this simplified
example, the cytosolic phase has only a single
enzymatic event, but many actual signal
transduction pathways involve multiple steps. In
the nuclear phase, this modified transcription
factor enters the nucleus and binds to a specfic
site in the promoter or in some other regulatory
region of target genes and thus facilitates their
expression.
Overview of Signal Transduction
Receptors that initiate signaling responses are generally integral
membrane proteins present on the plasma membrane, where their
extracellular domains recognize soluble secreted ligands or
structures that are aĴached to the plasma membrane of a
neighboring cell or to the extracellular matrix. Another category of
receptors, nuclear receptors, are intracellular (both cytosolic and
nuclear family members exist) transcription factors that are
activated by lipid-soluble ligands that can cross the plasma
membrane.
The initiation of signaling from a cell surface receptor may require
ligand-induced clustering of receptor proteins, called cross-linking,
or may involve a conformational alteration of the receptor induced
by its association with ligand. Both mechanisms of signal initiation
typically result in the creation of a structural change in the cytosolic
portion of the receptor that promotes the recruitment of and/or
interactions with other signaling molecules.
A common early event in signal transduction is the enzymatic
addition of a phosphate residue on the side chain of an amino acid in
the cytosolic portion of a receptor or in other proteins that are
involved in signaling; sometimes a phosphate residue is added to a
lipid on the inner leaﬂet of the plasma membrane. The enzymes that
add phosphate groups onto amino acid side chains are called
protein kinases. Many of the initiating events in lymphocyte
signaling depend on protein kinases that phosphorylate speciﬁc
tyrosine residues, and these enzymes are therefore called protein
tyrosine kinases. Other protein kinases that are involved in distinct
signaling 
pathways 
are 
serine/threonine 
kinases, 
which
phosphorylate serine or threonine residues. The enzymes activated
downstream of signaling receptors that phosphorylate lipid
substrates are known as lipid kinases. For most known
phosphorylation events, there are also speciﬁc phosphatases—
enzymes that can remove phosphate residues and thus modulate
signaling. These phosphatases play important, usually inhibitory,
roles in signal transduction.
Phosphorylation of proteins is not the only post-translational
modiﬁcation 
that 
drives 
signal 
transduction. 
Many 
other
modiﬁcations can facilitate signaling events. A type of modiﬁcation
that we will describe later in this chapter is the covalent addition of
ubiquitin molecules that either target proteins for degradation or
drive signal transduction in many cells, including lymphocytes.
Many important signaling proteins are modiﬁed by the addition of
lipids that may help localize these proteins to a specialized region
of the plasma membrane in order for them to eﬃciently interact
with other signaling molecules that are also targeted to this
membrane 
microdomain. 
Some 
transcription 
factors 
are
functionally modiﬁed by acetylation, and the N-terminal tails of
histones can be acetylated and methylated in order to modulate
gene expression, DNA replication, and DNA recombination events.
FIGURE 7.2  Major categories of signaling receptors
in the immune system.Depicted here are a
receptor that uses a non-receptor tyrosine kinase,
a receptor tyrosine kinase, a nuclear receptor that
binds its ligand and can then influence
transcription, a seven-transmembrane G protein–
coupled receptor (GPCR), and Notch, which
recognizes a ligand on a distinct cell and is
cleaved, yielding an intracellular fragment (IC
Notch) that can enter the nucleus and influence
transcription of specific target genes. ATP,
Adenosine triphosphate; cAMP, cyclic AMP.
Cellular receptors are grouped into several categories based on the
signaling mechanisms they use and the intracellular biochemical
pathways they activate (Fig. 7.2) :
• Some receptors use non-receptor tyrosine kinases. The
cytoplasmic tails of the ligand-binding polypeptides of
these receptors have no intrinsic catalytic activity, but a
separate intracellular tyrosine kinase, known as a non-
receptor tyrosine kinase, participates in receptor activation
by phosphorylating speciﬁc motifs on the receptor or on
other proteins associated with the receptor. Immune
receptors constitute a speciﬁc family of receptors whose
members recognize either antigens or the Fc portions of
antibodies; all members of this family use non-receptor
tyrosine kinases to initiate signaling. In addition to the
immune receptor family, some cytokine receptors,
discussed later in this chapter, use non-receptor tyrosine
kinases. Integrins, key adhesion receptors in the immune
system, may also signal by activating non-receptor tyrosine
kinases.
• Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) are integral membrane
proteins that activate an intrinsic tyrosine kinase domain
(or domains) located in the cytoplasmic tails of the
receptors when they are cross-linked by multivalent
extracellular ligands. This category of receptors is important
in hematopoiesis but does not play a central role in
lymphocyte activation. An example of an RTK relevant to
blood cell formation is the c-KIT protein. Other examples of
RTKs include the insulin receptor, the epidermal growth
factor receptor, and the platelet-derived growth factor
receptor. In vertebrates, a smaller number of receptors have
cytosolic catalytic domains that phosphorylate target
proteins on serine or threonine residues (and not on
tyrosine residues). Two examples will be discussed later in
this chapter when we consider transforming growth factor β
(TGF-β) signaling.
• Nuclear receptors are typically located in or migrate into the
nucleus, where they function as transcription factors. The
binding of a lipid-soluble ligand to its nuclear receptor
enables the receptor to stimulate or repress gene
transcription. Nuclear hormone receptors, such as the
vitamin D receptor and the glucocorticoid receptor, can
inﬂuence maturation and activation of immune cells and
modulate cytokine gene expression.
• G protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs) function by activating
associated guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-binding proteins
(G proteins). These receptors are polypeptides that traverse
the plasma membrane seven times, because of which they
are sometimes called serpentine receptors or seven-
transmembrane receptors. A conformational change
induced by the binding of ligand to this type of receptor
permits the activation of an associated heterotrimeric G
protein by the exchange of bound GDP with GTP. The
activated G protein initiates downstream signaling events.
Examples of this category of receptors that are relevant to
immunity and inﬂammation include receptors for
leukotrienes, prostaglandins, histamine, complement
fragments C3a and C5a, bacterial formyl peptides,
sphingosine-1-phosphate, and all chemokines (see Chapter
3). Diﬀerent types of G proteins linked to distinct GPCRs
may activate or inhibit diﬀerent downstream eﬀectors. Two
major enzymes that GPCRs activate are adenylate cyclase,
which converts adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to the
eﬀector molecule cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP),
capable of activating numerous cellular responses, and
phospholipase C, which also triggers multiple signaling
events as discussed later.
• Other classes of receptors have long been known to be
important in embryonic development and in certain mature
tissues, and their functions in the immune system have
begun to emerge more recently. Receptor proteins of the
Notch family are involved in development in a wide range
of species. The association of speciﬁc ligands with receptors
of this family leads to proteolytic cleavage of the receptor
and the nuclear translocation of the cleaved cytoplasmic
domain (intracellular Notch), which functions as a
component of a transcription complex. Notch proteins
contribute to cell fate determination during lymphocyte
g y
p
y
development (see Chapter 8) and may also inﬂuence the
activation of mature lymphocytes. A group of ligands called
WNT proteins can inﬂuence lymphopoiesis. (The names of
many proteins involved in signaling are often based on how
they were discovered and do not reﬂect their functions, so
we will use generally accepted abbreviations and not list the
full names.) Signaling through transmembrane receptors
for these proteins can increase the levels of β-catenin, which
can enter the nucleus and activate transcription factors that
contribute to B and T cell development, as discussed in
Chapter 8. Numerous other signaling receptors and
pathways ﬁrst discovered in non-immune cell populations
are now being studied in the context of lymphocyte biology.
We will not aĴempt to comprehensively consider all of
these pathways in this chapter.
FIGURE 7.3  The modular structure of tyrosine
kinases that influence lymphocyte
activation.Modules include SH2 domains that bind
specific phosphotyrosine-containing polypeptides,
SH3 domains that recognize proline-rich stretches
in polypeptides, PH domains that recognize PIP3
or other phosphatidylinositol-derived lipids, and
TEC homology domains found in tyrosine kinases
of the TEC family. Tyrosine kinase families
depicted are the SRC family kinases, which
include c-SRC, LYN, FYN, and LCK; the SYK
family kinases, which include SYK and ZAP70;
and the TEC family kinases, which include TEK,
BTK, and ITK. PH, Pleckstrin homology; SH, SRC
homology.
Modular Signaling Proteins and Adaptors
Signaling molecules are often composed of distinct modules, each
with a speciﬁc binding or catalytic function. The concept of modular
signaling molecules has been best illustrated from the study of
non-receptor tyrosine kinases. The modular structures of several
families of tyrosine kinases that are important in the immune
system are depicted in Fig. 7.3. The cellular homolog of the
transforming protein of the Rous sarcoma virus, called c-SRC, is the
prototype for an immunologically important family of non-receptor
tyrosine kinases known as SRC family kinases. c-SRC contains
several distinct domains, two of which, called SRC homology 2
(SH2) and SRC homology 3 (SH3) domains, mediate binding to
other signaling proteins. c-SRC also contains a catalytic tyrosine
kinase domain and an N-terminal lipid addition domain that
facilitates the covalent addition of a myristic acid molecule to the
protein. The myristate helps target SRC family kinases to the
plasma membrane.
FIGURE 7.4  Selected adaptors that participate in
lymphocyte activation.On the left, LAT, an integral
membrane protein that functions as an adaptor,
and two cytosolic adaptors, GADS and SLP76,
are shown in a nonactivated T cell. On the right,
after T cell activation, LAT is tyrosine
phosphorylated and is shown to have recruited
PLCγ (which simultaneously binds to the
membrane phospholipid, phosphatidylinositol
trisphosphate, or PIP3) and the GADS adaptor,
both of which contain SH2 domains. A proline-rich
amino acid stretch in SLP76 associates with an
SH3 domain of GADS, and tyrosine-
phosphorylated SLP76 recruits VAV. LAT, Linker
for activation of T cells; PH, pleckstrin homology;
PLCγ, phospholipase Cγ; SH, SRC homology.
SH2 domains are composed of about 100 amino acids folded into
a particular conformation, and they bind to phosphotyrosine-
containing peptides in various proteins. In antigen receptor
signaling, SRC family kinases phosphorylate tyrosine residues
present in certain motifs in the cytoplasmic tails of proteins that are
part 
of 
the 
receptor 
complex 
(described 
later). 
These
phosphotyrosine motifs in the antigen receptor complex then serve
as binding sites for SH2 domains present in tyrosine kinases of the
SYK family, namely SYK and ZAP70 (see Fig. 7.3). The recruitment
of SYK or ZAP70 to an antigen receptor by means of a speciﬁc SH2
domain–phosphotyrosine interaction is a key step in antigen-
induced lymphocyte activation. SH3 domains are also about 100
amino acids in length, and they help mediate protein-protein
interactions by binding to proline-rich, but not phosphorylated,
stretches in certain proteins. Another type of modular domain,
called the pleckstrin homology (PH) domain, can recognize speciﬁc
phospholipids. The PH domains in a number of signaling
molecules, including the TEC family tyrosine kinase BTK, recognize
phosphatidylinositol trisphosphate (PIP3), a lipid moiety on the
inner leaﬂet of the plasma membrane.
Adaptor proteins function as molecular hubs that physically link
diﬀerent enzymes and promote the assembly of complexes of
signaling molecules. Adaptors may be integral membrane proteins
such as LAT (Fig. 7.4), or they may be cytosolic proteins such as
BLNK, SLP76, and GADS. A typical adaptor may contain a few
speciﬁc domains that mediate protein-protein interactions, such as
those involving SH2 and SH3 domains (there are many more types
of modular domains not mentioned here). Adaptors often contain
some proline-rich stretches that can bind other proteins that
contain SH3 domains, and they also often contain tyrosine residues
that may be phosphorylated by tyrosine kinases and serve as
docking sites for other signaling molecules. The amino acid
residues that are close to a phosphorylated tyrosine moiety
determine which speciﬁc SH2 domain–containing proteins may
bind at that site. For example, a tyrosine kinase may phosphorylate
a YxxM motif (where Y represents tyrosine, M represents
p
y
p
methionine, and x refers to any amino acid) in an adaptor protein,
and this will permit binding of an SH2 domain in the lipid kinase,
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-kinase), but will not recruit
other proteins that contain slightly diﬀerent SH2 domains that are
not speciﬁc for the phosphorylated YxxM motif. A proline-rich
stretch in the same adaptor protein may bind an SH3 domain in a
distinct tyrosine kinase. Thus, tyrosine phosphorylation of the
adaptor can result in a tyrosine kinase and PI3-kinase being
perched next to each other, resulting in the phosphorylation and
activation of PI3-kinase. Signal transduction can therefore be
visualized as a kind of social networking phenomenon. An initial
signal (tyrosine phosphorylation, for instance) results in proteins
being brought close to one another at designated hubs (adaptors),
resulting in the activation of speciﬁc enzymes that eventually
inﬂuence the nuclear localization or activity of speciﬁc downstream
transcription factors or induce other cellular events, such as actin
polymerization.
Phase Separation of Signaling Proteins
An underlying principle of signal transduction is the formation of
complexes of activated signaling molecules reorganized into tiny
droplets in a diﬀerent phase of maĴer, much like the formation of a
droplet of oil in water. The phase-separated proteins initiate,
amplify, and propagate signals eﬃciently, primarily because they
have been brought into close proximity and at high density. Phase
separation is now recognized as a fundamental biologic mechanism
wherein distinct activated molecules assemble into a diﬀerent
phase from the neighboring constituents of a cell. This process is
important in many reactions, including, but not limited to,
signaling and transcription. These include the assembly of adaptors
after T cell receptor (TCR) signaling, the activation of cytosolic
receptors for nucleic acids and the formation of the inﬂammasome.
The Immune Receptor Family
Immune receptors are a unique family of receptor complexes
typically made up of integral membrane proteins of the
immunoglobulin (Ig) superfamily that are involved in ligand
recognition, associated with other transmembrane signaling proteins
that have unique tyrosine-containing motifs in their cytoplasmic
tails (Fig. 7.5). Whereas the signaling components are generally
distinct from the proteins involved in ligand recognition, in a few
members of the family, the receptor consists of a single chain in
which the extracellular domain is involved in ligand recognition
and the cytoplasmic tail contains tyrosine residues that contribute
to signaling. The signaling proteins of the immune receptor family
are often positioned close to non-receptor tyrosine kinases of the
SRC family, which possess N-terminal lipid anchors that tether
them to the inner leaﬂet of the plasma membrane.
The cytoplasmic tyrosine-containing motifs on the signaling
proteins of the immune receptor family are generally one of three
diﬀerent types, one being an activating motif, the other inhibitory,
and the third that can either activate or inhibit depending on the
cell type and the particular immune receptor (see Fig. 7.5).
Immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs) are
found in receptors and associated proteins involved in cell
activation and have the sequence YxxL/I(x)6-8YxxL/I, where Y
represents a tyrosine residue, L represents leucine, I represents
isoleucine, and x refers to any amino acid. Both tyrosine residues in
ITAMs can be phosphorylated by SRC family kinases when
immune receptors are activated by their ligands. Tyrosine-
phosphorylated ITAMs recruit either SYK or ZAP70, which contain
tandem SH2 domains that each bind to one of the two
phosphorylated YxxL/I motifs of the ITAM. Binding of the SYK or
ZAP70 kinase to a phosphorylated ITAM causes a conformational
change that activates the kinase, leading to additional signaling
events that drive immune cell activation. Some immune receptors
inhibit cellular responses, and signaling chains in these receptors
may contain a slightly diﬀerent tyrosine-containing motif that is
called an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motif (ITIM),
which has the consensus sequence V/L/IxYxxL, where V refers to
valine. Phosphorylated ITIMs recruit tyrosine phosphatases or
inositol lipid phosphatases, enzymes that remove phosphate
residues from phosphotyrosine moieties or from certain lipid
phosphates and thus counteract ITAM-based immune receptor
activation. Certain receptors contain a cytosolic motif called an
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based switch motif (ITSM) that has the
consensus sequence TxYxxV/I. This motif can sometimes function
in an inhibitory fashion and recruit an SH2 domain containing
tyrosine phosphatase, as is the case with the ITSM in the cytosolic
tail of programmed cell death protein-1 (PD-1). It is called a switch
motif because in some receptors (of the SLAM family, for instance)
this motif can orchestrate a switch from the binding of a tyrosine
phosphatase SHP2 to binding a tyrosine kinase, such as FYN,
depending on the absence or presence, respectively, of an adaptor
called SAP (SLAM-associated protein). Thus, the ITSM can mediate
a change from an inhibitory to an activating function.
Members of the immune receptor family include antigen receptors
on B cells and T cells, Fc receptors on B cells, myeloid cells and mast
cells, and activating and inhibitory receptors on NK cells, T cells,
and B cells (see Fig. 7.5) . The recognition proteins of several
activating receptors in the immune system do not have signaling
motifs in their cytoplasmic tails, but signal by forming complexes
with 
ITAM-containing 
proteins 
that 
contribute 
to 
signal
transduction from the receptor complex. These signaling proteins
include the ζ chain and CD3 proteins of the TCR complex, Igα and
Igβ proteins associated with the antigen receptor of B cells, and
components of several Fc receptors and of the NKG2D activating
receptor on NK cells (see Chapter 4). Many inhibitory receptors,
including CD22 on B cells, FcγRIIB on B cells and other cells, and
several inhibitory NK cell receptors, contain ITIMs in their
cytoplasmic domains. The T cell inhibitory receptor PD-1 contains
an ITSM motif as well as an ITIM in its tail.
FIGURE 7.5  Selected members of the immune
receptor family.Five selected members of the
immune receptor family are depicted. Typically,
immune receptors that activate immune cells have
separate polypeptide chains for recognition and
associated polypeptide chains that contain
cytosolic ITAMs. Examples shown here include
the B cell receptor (BCR), the T cell receptor
(TCR), and the high-affinity receptor for IgE
(FcεRI). Inhibitory receptors in the immune system
typically have ITIMs on the cytosolic portion of the
same chain that uses its extracellular domain for
ligand recognition. FcγRIIB is an inhibitory
receptor found on B cells and myeloid cells. PD-1,
an inhibitory receptor found on T cells, also has an
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based switch motif
(ITSM) in its cytoplasmic tail. Ig, Immunoglobulin;
ITAM, immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation
motif; ITIM, immunoreceptor tyrosine-based
inhibition motif.
General Features of Antigen Receptor
Signaling
Signaling downstream of T and B cell antigen receptors is
characterized by a similar sequence of events, consisting of the
following:
• Receptor ligation typically involves the clustering of
receptors by multivalent ligands and results in activation of
an associated SRC family kinase. In some cases, a SRC
kinase is brought into proximity with the receptor and
associated proteins. Receptor ligation may also induce the
unfolding of the cytoplasmic tail of a polypeptide chain that
is part of the receptor. This conformational change may
allow previously hidden tyrosine residues of a cytosolic
ITAM to become available for phosphorylation by the SRC
family kinase.
• The activated SRC family kinase phosphorylates available
tyrosines in the ITAMs of signaling proteins that are part of
the receptor complex.
• Two phosphorylated tyrosines in a single ITAM are
recognized by SYK or ZAP70 kinases, which contain
tandem SH2 domains that each bind to an ITAM
phosphotyrosine.
• Recruitment of SYK or ZAP70 to the phosphorylated ITAM
results in the activation of the kinase and the subsequent
tyrosine phosphorylation of multiple adaptor proteins and
enzymes that activate distinct signaling pathways
downstream of the immune receptor.
This sequence of events is described in more detail in the context
of TCR and B cell receptor (BCR) signaling later in the chapter.
Alterations in the strength of TCR and BCR signaling inﬂuence the
responses of lymphocytes during their development and activation.
In other words, the presence of diﬀerent numbers of activated
signaling molecules induced by antigen-ligated receptors is
interpreted diﬀerently by lymphocytes. For example, during
lymphocyte development, weak antigen receptor signaling is
required for survival of clones expressing functional receptors
(positive selection), and strong signaling is required to induce
apoptosis of clones with self-reactive antigen receptors (negative
selection). In mature lymphocytes, strong signaling usually results
in clonal expansion and diﬀerentiation of naive lymphocytes, and
the acquisition of host defense–related functions by eﬀector
lymphocytes.
Antigen receptor signaling is modulated by mechanisms that are
unique to this class of receptors. Several such mechanisms have
been described.
• Progressive ITAM use. One of the ways in which the quantity
of signal output from antigen receptors might be altered is
the phosphorylation of diﬀerent numbers of ITAM
tyrosines after receptor engagement. The TCR complex has
6 signaling chains and 10 ITAMs, and increasing numbers
of ITAMs may be phosphorylated with stronger or
prolonged binding of antigen to the TCR. The number of
ITAMs phosphorylated may therefore provide a cytosolic
interpretation of the strength of antigen binding to the
TCR, and this can inﬂuence the nature of the cellular
response. The BCR has only two ITAMs, but because this
number increases when multiple BCRs are cross-linked by
multivalent antigens, the degree of cross-linking by
antigens may determine the number of ITAMs that might
be used and thus generate diﬀerent responses to antigens
of diﬀering aﬃnity and valency.
• Increased cellular activation by coreceptors. A co-receptor is
a transmembrane signaling protein on a lymphocyte that
can facilitate antigen receptor activation by simultaneously
binding to the same antigen complex that is recognized by
the antigen receptor. The coreceptor brings with it signaling
enzymes linked to its cytoplasmic tail and can thereby
facilitate ITAM phosphorylation and activation of the
antigen receptor when antigen draws it into the vicinity of
the antigen receptor. Coreceptors on T cells are the CD4
and CD8 proteins that demarcate two functionally distinct
subsets. Complement receptor type 2 (CR2/CD21) is the
coreceptor on B cells (see Chapter 12).
• Modulation of signaling by inhibitory receptors. Key
inhibitory receptors in T cells include CTLA-4 and PD-1,
and important inhibitory receptors in B cells are CD22 and
FcγRIIB, among others. The roles of these inhibitors are
discussed later in this chapter.
In addition, antigen receptor signals may, in some circumstances,
cooperate with signals from proteins called costimulatory receptors
that add yet another level of control to the process of lymphocyte
activation. This process is best documented for T cell activation.
Costimulatory receptors provide so-called second signals for
lymphocytes (antigen recognition provides the ﬁrst signal) and
ensure that immune responses are optimally triggered by
infectious pathogens and substances that mimic microbes, which
are the agents that induce or activate costimulators (see Figs. 4.19
and 9.3). Unlike coreceptors, costimulatory receptors do not bind to
the antigens that are recognized by the antigen receptor, but rather
to entirely distinct ligands on an antigen-presenting cell (APC) that
are induced by pathogens and other potentially dangerous insults.
Signal outputs downstream of costimulatory receptors cooperate
with the signals derived from the antigen receptor to fully activate
lymphocytes. The prototypic costimulatory receptor is CD28 on T
cells, which is activated when bound by the costimulatory
molecules B7-1 (CD80) and B7-2 (CD86) expressed on APCs (see
Chapter 9).
This discussion of the general principles of signaling in the
immune system provides the basis for considering in more detail
the speciﬁc pathways activated in T and B cells by receptors for
antigen and other stimulators.
The T Cell Receptor Complex and T Cell
Signaling
The TCR was discovered in the early 1980s, at around the same time
that the structure of major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
molecules with bound peptides, the ligands for T cells, was being
deﬁned (see Chapter 6). This was years after the B cell antigen
receptor and Ig genes were characterized. The methods used to
search for the proteins of the TCR and the genes encoding them
relied on the assumption that they would be similar to Ig proteins
and genes. We now know that TCRs are similar to antibodies, but
there are also important diﬀerences between these two types of
antigen receptors (Table 7.1).
TABLE 7.1
CDRs, Complementarity-determining regions.
The T Cell Receptor for Antigen
The antigen receptor of MHC-restricted CD4 +   helper T cells and
CD8 +   cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) is a heterodimer consisting
of two transmembrane polypeptide chains, designated TCR α and β,
covalently linked to each other by a disulﬁde bridge between
extracellular cysteine residues (Fig. 7.6) . T cells expressing this form
of TCR are called αβ T cells. A less common type of TCR is
composed of TCR γ and δ chains, and the cells on which it is
expressed are called γδ T cells. Each TCR α and β chain consists of
one Ig-like N-terminal variable (V) domain, one Ig-like constant (C)
domain, a hydrophobic transmembrane region, and a short
cytoplasmic region. Thus, the extracellular portion of the TCR αβ
heterodimer is structurally similar to the antigen-binding fragment
(Fab) of an Ig molecule, which is made up of the V and C regions of
a light chain and the V region and the ﬁrst C region of a heavy
chain (see Chapter 5).
FIGURE 7.6  Structure of the T cell receptor.The
schematic diagram of the αβ T cell receptor
(TCR) (left) shows the domains of a typical TCR
specific for a peptide–major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) complex. The antigen-binding
portion of the TCR is formed by the Vβ and Vα
domains. The ribbon diagram (right) shows the
structure of the extracellular portion of a TCR as
revealed by x-ray crystallography. The
hypervariable segment loops that form the
peptide-MHC binding site are at the top. Ig,
Immunoglobulin. 
Modified from Bjorkman PJ. MHC restriction in three dimensions: a
view of T cell receptor/ligand interactions. Cell. 1997;89:167–170.
Copyright Cell Press.
FIGURE 7.7  Binding of a T cell receptor to a
peptide–major histocompatibility complex.The V
domains of a TCR are shown interacting with a
human class I MHC molecule, HLA-A2, presenting
a viral peptide (in yellow). The figure represents a
front view of the x-ray crystal structure of the
trimolecular MHC-peptide–TCR complex. β2m,
Beta-2 microglobulin; HLA, human leukocyte
antigen; MHC, major histocompatibility complex;
TCR, T cell receptor. 
From Bjorkman PJ. MHC restriction in three dimensions: a view of T
cell receptor/ligand interactions. Cell. 1997;89:167–170. Copyright
Cell Press.
The V regions of the TCR α and β chains contain short stretches
of amino acids where the variability between diﬀerent TCRs is
concentrated, 
and 
these 
form 
the 
hypervariable 
or
complementarity-determining regions (CDRs). Three CDRs in the α
chain and three similar regions in the β chain together form the
part of the TCR that speciﬁcally recognizes peptide-MHC
complexes (Fig. 7.7). Each TCR chain, like Ig heavy and light chains,
is encoded by multiple gene segments that are joined together
during the maturation of T lymphocytes (see Chapter 8).
The C regions of both α and β chains continue into short hinge
regions, which contain cysteine residues that contribute to a
disulﬁde bond linking the two chains. Each hinge is followed by a
hydrophobic 
transmembrane 
portion 
and 
carboxy-terminal
cytoplasmic tails that are 5 to 12 amino acids long. Like membrane
IgM on B cells (discussed later), the cytoplasmic regions are too
short to transduce signals, and other proteins with ITAM motifs
that are physically associated with the TCR serve the signal-
transducing functions of this antigen receptor complex.
The CD3 and ζ proteins are noncovalently associated with the
TCR αβ heterodimer to form the TCR complex, and when the TCR
recognizes antigen, these associated proteins transduce the signals
that lead to T cell activation. The components of the TCR complex
are illustrated in Fig. 7.8. The CD3 proteins and the ζ chain are
identical in all T cells regardless of speciﬁcity, which is consistent
with their role in signaling and not in antigen recognition. The CD3
and ζ proteins are also required for surface expression of the
complete receptor complex on T cells.
The CD3 γ, δ, and ε proteins are homologous to one another. The
N-terminal extracellular regions of the γ, δ, and ε chains of CD3
each contains a single Ig-like domain, and therefore these three
proteins are members of the Ig superfamily. The transmembrane
segments of all three CD3 chains and the ζ chain contain a
negatively charged aspartic acid residue that binds to positively
charged lysine and arginine residues in the transmembrane
domains of the TCR α and β chains, thus keeping the TCR, CD3,
and ζ associated as a complex. Each TCR complex contains one TCR
αβ heterodimer associated with one CD3 γε heterodimer, one CD3
δε heterodimer, and one disulﬁde-linked ζζ homodimer.
The cytoplasmic domains of the CD3 γ, δ, and ε proteins range
from 44 to 81 amino acid residues in length, and each of these
domains contains one ITAM. The ζ chain has a short extracellular
region of nine amino acids, a transmembrane region containing a
negatively charged aspartic acid residue (similar to the CD3
chains), and a long cytoplasmic region (113 amino acids) that
contains three ITAMs. The ζ chain is normally expressed as a
homodimer, and it is also associated with signaling receptors on
lymphocytes other than T cells, such as the Fcγ receptor (FcγRIII)
of NK cells.
Ligation of the TCR by MHC-peptide ligands results in the
clustering 
of 
coreceptors 
with 
the 
antigen 
receptor 
and
phosphorylation of ITAM tyrosine residues in CD3 and ζ proteins. In
addition, recognition of peptide-MHC complexes by the TCR may
induce a conformational change in the TCR, making the ITAMs
associated with the linked CD3 or ζ chains available for tyrosine
phosphorylation by coreceptor-associated SRC family kinases.
In addition to the TCR complex, T cells express several other
proteins that recognize ligands on APCs and play important roles
in T cell responses (Fig. 7.9).
p
g
The Role of the CD4 and CD8 Coreceptors in
T Cell Activation
CD4 and CD8 are T cell coreceptors that bind to nonpolymorphic
regions of MHC molecules and facilitate signaling by the TCR
complex during T cell activation (see Fig 7.9). Mature αβ T cells
express either CD4 or CD8 but not both. CD8 and CD4 interact with
class I and class II MHC molecules, respectively, and are
responsible for the class I or class II MHC restriction of these
classes of T cells (see Chapter 6).
.
FIGURE 7.8  Components of the T cell receptor
complex.The T cell receptor (TCR) complex of
major histocompatibility complex–restricted T cells
consists of the αβ TCR noncovalently linked to the
CD3 and ζ proteins. The association of these
proteins with one another is mediated by charged
residues in their transmembrane regions (not
shown).
CD4 and CD8 are transmembrane glycoprotein members of the
Ig superfamily (Fig. 7.10). CD4 is expressed as a monomer on the
surface of peripheral T cells and thymocytes and is also present at
lower levels on mononuclear phagocytes and some dendritic cells
(DCs). CD4 has four extracellular Ig-like domains, a hydrophobic
transmembrane region, and a highly basic cytoplasmic tail 38
amino acids long. The two N-terminal Ig-like domains of the CD4
protein bind to the nonpolymorphic α2 and β2 domains of the class
II MHC molecule. The human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) uses
CD4 as a receptor to gain entry into T lymphocytes and other
immune cells that express the molecule (see Chapter 21).
Most CD8 molecules exist as disulﬁde-linked heterodimers
composed of two related chains called CD8α and CD8β (see Fig.
7.10). Both the α and β chains have a single extracellular Ig domain,
a hydrophobic transmembrane region, and a highly basic
cytoplasmic tail that is about 25 amino acids long. Activated T cells
as well as γδ T cells can express CD8αα homodimers. The Ig
domains of CD8 bind mainly to the nonpolymorphic α3 domain of
class I MHC molecules, and also interact with portions of the α2
domain and with β2 microglobulin.
The SRC family kinase LCK is noncovalently bound to the
cytoplasmic tails of the coreceptors CD4 and CD8. The ability of the
extracellular domains of these coreceptors to bind to MHC
molecules on an APC draws these proteins adjacent to the TCR that
contacts the same MHC molecule that is displaying a peptide on
the APC. As a result, on the cytosolic face of the plasma membrane,
LCK is brought in close proximity to the ITAMs in CD3 and ζ
proteins. LCK then phosphorylates the tyrosine residues in these
ITAMs, thus facilitating the subsequent recruitment and activation
of the ZAP70 tyrosine kinase. Note that LCK is already aĴached to
both the CD4 and CD8 coreceptors and is active even before
antigen exposure; the other proteins in the TCR complex, CD3 and
ζ, contain ITAMs that ﬁrst need to be phosphorylated before they
can recruit a kinase. Thus, the coreceptor provides the earliest
enzymatic activity for initiating signals after T cell recognition of
peptide-MHC complexes.
FIGURE 7.9  Ligand-receptor pairs involved in T cell
activation. A, The major surface molecules of
CD4+ T cells involved in the responses of these
cells (the receptors) and the molecules on APCs
(the ligands) recognized by the receptors are
shown. CD8+ T cells use most of the same
molecules, except that the TCR recognizes
peptide–class I MHC complexes, and the
coreceptor is CD8, which recognizes class I MHC.
Immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs
(ITAMs) are the regions of signaling proteins that
are phosphorylated on tyrosine residues and
become docking sites for other signaling
molecules. CD3 is composed of three polypeptide
chains, named γ, δ, and ε, arranged in two pairs
(γε and δε) as shown in Fig. 7.8. Some inhibitory
receptors such as PD-1 contain cytoplasmic
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs
(ITIMs) and “switch” motifs (immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based switch motifs [ITSMs]). B,
Important molecules of T cells that participate in
activating or inhibiting responses to antigens, but
are not the receptors for antigen, are
summarized. APCs, Antigen-presenting cells;
CTLA-4, cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen-4; ICAM-
1, intercellular adhesion molecule 1; LFA-1,
leukocyte function–associated antigen 1; MHC,
major histocompatibility complex; PD-1,
programmed cell death protein-1; PDL-1/2,
programmed death ligands 1 and 2; TCR, T-cell
receptor.
FIGURE 7.10  A Schematic view of the structure of
the CD4 and CD8 coreceptors. A, The CD4
protein is an integral membrane monomer
consisting of four extracellular immunoglobulin (Ig)
domains, a transmembrane domain, and a
cytoplasmic tail. The CD8 protein is either a
disulfide-linked αβ integral membrane heterodimer
or a disulfide-linked αα homodimer (not shown).
Each chain has a single extracellular Ig domain. B,
CD4 on T cells associates with an invariant
portion of the major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) class II heterodimer on an antigen-
presenting cell (APC) that is interacting with the T
cell receptor (TCR) on the same T cell. Note that
the cytoplasmic portions of both CD4 and CD8
can associate with LCK and that the ζ chain is
depicted schematically. ITAM, Immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based activation motif. 
Modified from Garcia KC, Adams E. How the T cell receptor sees
antigen: a structural view. Cell. 2005;122:333–336, 2005; with
permission.
Activation of Tyrosine Kinases and a Lipid
Kinase During T Cell Activation
Phosphorylation of proteins and lipids plays a central role in the
transduction of signals from the TCR complex and coreceptors.
Within seconds of TCR ligation, LCK phosphorylates the ITAMs of
the CD3 and ζ chains (Fig. 7.11). The tyrosine-phosphorylated
ITAMs in the ζ chain are docking sites for the SYK family tyrosine
kinase called ZAP70 (ζ-associated protein of 70 kD). ZAP70
contains 
two 
SH2 
domains 
that 
can 
bind 
to 
ITAM
phosphotyrosines. As discussed earlier, each ITAM has two
tyrosine residues, and both of these must be phosphorylated to
provide a docking site for one ZAP70 molecule. The bound ZAP70
becomes a substrate for the adjacent LCK after TCR recognition of
antigen, and LCK phosphorylates speciﬁc tyrosine residues of
ZAP70. As a result, ZAP70 acquires its own tyrosine kinase activity
and is then able to phosphorylate a number of other cytoplasmic
signaling molecules. A critical threshold of ZAP70 activity may be
needed before downstream signaling events will proceed, and this
threshold is achieved by the recruitment of multiple ZAP70
molecules to the phosphorylated ITAMs on the ζ chains and on
CD3 tails.
Another signaling pathway in T cells involves the activation of
PI3-kinase (Fig. 7.12). This enzyme is recruited to adaptor proteins
associated 
with 
the 
TCR 
complex 
and 
phosphorylates
phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate (PIP2), located in the inner
leaﬂet of the plasma membrane, to generate PIP3. Certain signaling
proteins in the cytosol have specialized PH domains that have an
aﬃnity for PIP3, and as a result, PH domain–containing proteins
can bind to the inside of the cell membrane only when PIP3 is
generated. Examples of PH domain–containing proteins include
TEC-family tyrosine kinases such as ITK in T cells and BTK in B
cells as well as phospholipase Cγ1 (PLCγ1), a key enzyme in the
calcium signaling pathway in T cells. Another important PIP3-
dependent kinase is PDK1, a serine/threonine kinase that is
required for the phosphorylation and activation of an important
downstream kinase called AKT. Activated AKT phosphorylates
crucial targets and contributes to both increased protein synthesis
and metabolism, leading to cell growth (enlargement) and survival.
AKT activates another serine/threonine kinase, called mechanistic
target of rapamycin (mTOR), that is a controller of protein
synthesis and cell growth. AKT also promotes cell survival in a
number of ways, including inactivation of pro-apoptotic proteins
and increased production and activation of anti-apoptotic proteins
of the BCL-2 family.
Recruitment and Modification of Adaptor
Proteins
Activated ZAP70 phosphorylates several adaptor proteins, making
them capable of binding to signaling molecules (see Fig. 7.11) . A key
early event in T cell activation is the ZAP70-mediated tyrosine
phosphorylation of adaptor proteins such as SLP76 and LAT.
Phosphorylated LAT directly binds PLCγ1 (discussed later) and
coordinates the recruitment of several other adaptor proteins,
including SLP76, GADS, and GRB2, to the cluster of TCR and TCR-
associated proteins, sometimes referred to as the TCR signalosome.
Thus, LAT serves to bring downstream components of TCR
signaling pathways close to their upstream activators. Because the
function of many of these adaptors depends on their tyrosine
phosphorylation by active ZAP70, only antigen recognition (the
physiologic stimulus for ZAP70 activation) triggers the signal
transduction pathways that lead to functional T cell responses.
FIGURE 7.11  Early tyrosine phosphorylation events
in T cell activation.On antigen recognition, there is
clustering of T cell receptor (TCR) complexes with
coreceptors (CD4, in this case). CD4-associated
LCK becomes active and phosphorylates
tyrosines in the ITAMs of CD3 and ζ chains (A).
ZAP70 binds to the phosphotyrosines of the ζ
chains and is itself phosphorylated and activated.
(The illustration shows one ZAP70 molecule
binding to two phosphotyrosines of one ITAM in
the ζ chain, but it is likely that initiation of a T cell
response requires the assembly of multiple
ZAP70 molecules on ITAMs of the two ζ chain as
well as on CD3 chains.) Active ZAP70 then
phosphorylates tyrosines on various adaptor
molecules, such as LAT (B). The adaptors
become docking sites for cellular enzymes such
as PLCγ1 and GDP-GTP exchange factors that
activate RAS and other small G proteins upstream
of MAPKs (C), and these enzymes activate
various cellular responses. GDP, Guanosine
diphosphate; GTP, guanosine triphosphate; ITAM,
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif;
PLCγ1, phospholipase C γ1; MAPK, mitogen-
activated protein kinase.
FIGURE 7.12  Role of PI3-kinase in T cell
responses.Membrane PIP3, generated by PI3K,
activates PDK1, which phosphorylates and
activates the AKT kinase, which in turn
phosphorylates downstream targets that are
involved in cell survival and cell growth. mTOR,
Mechanistic target of rapamycin; PDK1, 3-
phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1; PI3K,
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase;
PIP2, phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate; PIP3,
phosphatidylinositol trisphosphate.
Formation of the Immune Synapse
When the TCR complex recognizes MHC-associated peptides on an
APC, several T cell surface proteins and intracellular signaling
molecules are rapidly mobilized to the site of T cell–APC contact
(Fig. 7.13) . This region of physical contact between the T cell and
the APC forms a bull’s eye–like structure that is called an immune
synapse or a supramolecular activation cluster (SMAC). The T cell
molecules that move to the center of the synapse include the TCR
complex (the TCR, CD3, and ζ chains), CD4 or CD8 coreceptors,
receptors for costimulators (such as CD28), enzymes such as PKCθ,
and adaptor proteins that associate with the cytoplasmic tails of the
transmembrane receptors. At this region of the synapse, called the
c-SMAC (for central SMAC), the distance between plasma
membranes of the T cell and the APC is about 15 nm. Integrins
remain at the periphery of the synapse, where they function to
stabilize the binding of the T cell to the APC, forming the
peripheral portion of the SMAC, called the p-SMAC. In this outer
part of the synapse, the two membranes are about 40 nm apart.
Many signaling molecules found in synapses are initially localized
to regions of the plasma membrane that have a lipid content
diﬀerent from that of the rest of the cell membrane and are called
lipid rafts or 
glycolipid-enriched microdomains. TCR and
costimulatory receptor signaling is initiated in these rafts, and
signaling initiates cytoskeletal rearrangements that allow rafts to
coalesce and form the immune synapse.
Immune synapses serve a number of functions during and after T
cell activation.
• The synapse forms a stable contact between an antigen-
speciﬁc T cell and an APC displaying that antigen and
becomes the site for assembly of the signaling machinery of
the T cell, including the TCR complex, coreceptors,
costimulatory receptors, and adaptors. Although some TCR
signal transduction is initiated before the formation of the
synapse and is, in fact, required for synapse formation, the
immune synapse itself provides a unique interface for TCR
triggering. T cell activation needs to overcome the problems
of a generally low aﬃnity of TCRs for peptide-MHC ligands
and the presence of few MHC molecules displaying any one
peptide on an APC. The synapse represents a site at which
repeated engagement of TCRs can be sustained by this
small number of peptide-MHC complexes on the APC, thus
facilitating prolonged and eﬀective T cell signaling.
• The synapse ensures the speciﬁc delivery of secretory
granule contents and cytokines from a T cell to APCs or to
targets that are in contact with the T cell. Vectorial delivery
of secretory granules containing perforin and granzymes
from CTLs to target cells occurs at the synapse (see Chapter
11). Similarly, CD40L-CD40 interactions are facilitated by
the accumulation of these molecules on the T cell and APC
interfaces of the immune synapse. Some cytokines are also
secreted in a directed manner into the synaptic cleft, from
where they are preferentially delivered to the cell that is
displaying antigen to the T lymphocyte. This ensures that
cytokines act on cells bearing foreign (e.g., microbial)
antigens, which are the cells that need to be activated or
killed to eliminate these antigens.
• The synapse, especially the c-SMAC region, also may be an
important site for the turnover of signaling molecules,
primarily by ubiquitination and delivery to late endosomes
and lysosomes. This degradation of signaling proteins
contributes to the termination of T cell activation and is
discussed later.
MAP Kinase Signaling Pathways in T
Lymphocytes
Small guanine nucleotide–binding proteins (G proteins) activated by
antigen recognition stimulate at least three diﬀerent mitogen-
activated protein (MAP) kinases, which in turn activate distinct
transcription factors. G proteins are involved in diverse activation
responses in diﬀerent cell types. Two major members of this family
activated downstream of the TCR are RAS and RAC. Each activates
a diﬀerent transcription factor, and together they mediate many
cellular responses of T cells.
FIGURE 7.13  The immune synapse. A, This figure
shows two views of the immunologic synapse in a
T cell–APC conjugate (shown as a Nomarski
image in panel c). Talin, a protein that associates
with the cytoplasmic tail of the LFA-1 integrin, was
revealed by an antibody labeled with a green
fluorescent dye, and PKCθ, which associates with
the TCR complex, was visualized by antibodies
conjugated to a red fluorescent dye. In panels a
and b, a two-dimensional optical section of the
cell contact site along the x-y axis is shown,
revealing the central location of PKCθ and the
peripheral location of talin, both in the T cell. In
panels d to f, a three-dimensional view of the
entire region of cell-cell contact along the x–z axis
is provided. Note, again, the central location of
PKCθ and the peripheral accumulation of talin. B,
A schematic view of the synapse, showing talin
and LFA-1 in the p-SMAC (green) and PKCθ and
the TCR in the c-SMAC (red). APC, Antigen-
presenting cell; ICAM-1, intercellular adhesion
molecule 1; MHC, major histocompatibility
complex; TCR, T cell receptor. 
A, Reprinted with permission of Macmillan Publishers Ltd. from
Monks CRF, Freiburg BA, Kupfer H, Sciaky N, Kupfer A. Three-
dimensional segregation of supramolecular activation clusters in T
cells. Nature. 1998;395:82–86. Copyright 1998.
FIGURE 7.14  The RAS-MAP kinase pathway in T
cell activation.ZAP70, activated by antigen
recognition, phosphorylates membrane-
associated adaptor proteins (such as LAT) that
then bind another adaptor, GRB2, which provides
a docking site for the GTP-GDP exchange factor
SOS. SOS converts RAS⋅GDP to RAS⋅GTP.
RAS⋅GTP activates a cascade of enzymes, which
culminates in the activation of the MAP kinase
ERK. A parallel RAC-dependent pathway
generates another active MAP kinase, JNK (not
shown). AP1, Activator protein 1; GDP, guanosine
diphosphate; GTP, guanosine triphosphate; MAP,
mitogen-activated protein.
• The RAS pathway is triggered in T cells after TCR ligation,
leading to the activation of extracellular receptor–activated
kinase (ERK), a prominent member of the MAP kinase
family, and eventually to the activation of downstream
transcription factors (Fig. 7.14). RAS is loosely aĴached to
the plasma membrane through covalently bound lipids. In
its inactive form, the guanine nucleotide–binding site of
RAS is occupied by guanosine diphosphate (GDP). Upon
activation of the cell, the bound GDP is replaced by
guanosine triphosphate (GTP), and RAS undergoes a
conformational change and can then recruit or activate
various cellular enzymes, the most important of which is
RAF. Activation of RAS by GDP/GTP exchange is seen in
response to the engagement of many types of receptors in
many cell populations, including the TCR complex in T
cells. Nonmutated RAS proteins are active GTPases that
convert the GTP bound to RAS into GDP, thus returning
RAS to its normal, inactive state. Mutated RAS proteins that
are constitutively active (i.e., they constantly assume the
GTP-bound conformation, often because of loss of GTPase
activity) contribute to the neoplastic transformation of
many cell types.
The mechanism of RAS activation in T cells involves the adaptor
proteins LAT and GRB2. When LAT is phosphorylated by ZAP70 at
the site of TCR clustering, it serves as the docking site for the SH2
domain of GRB2. Once aĴached to LAT, GRB2 recruits the RAS
GTP/GDP exchange factor called SOS to the plasma membrane.
SOS catalyzes GTP for GDP exchange on RAS. This generates the
GTP-bound form of RAS (wriĴen as RAS⋅GTP), which then triggers
a cascade of kinase activation. RAS⋅GTP directly activates a kinase
called RAF, the ﬁrst kinase in this cascade. RAF then
phosphorylates and activates a dual-speciﬁcity kinase called MEK1,
which in turn phosphorylates the third kinase in the cascade, called
ERK, on closely spaced threonine and tyrosine residues. ERK is a
MAP kinase, and MEK1 is called a MAP kinase-kinase (a kinase that
activates a MAP kinase). The activated ERK translocates to the
nucleus 
and 
phosphorylates 
a 
protein 
called 
ELK, 
and
phosphorylated ELK stimulates transcription of FOS, a component
of the activation protein 1 (AP1) transcription factor.
• In parallel with the activation of RAS through recruitment
of GRB2 and SOS, the adaptors phosphorylated by TCR-
associated kinases also recruit and activate a GTP/GDP
exchange protein called VAV that acts on RAC, another
small G protein. The RAC⋅GTP that is generated initiates a
parallel MAP kinase cascade, resulting in the activation of a
distinct MAP kinase, c-JUN N-terminal kinase (JNK). JNK
is sometimes called a stress-activated protein (SAP) kinase
because in many cells it is activated by various noxious
stimuli. Activated JNK then phosphorylates JUN, the
second component of the AP1 transcription factor. A third
member of the MAP kinase family, in addition to ERK and
JNK, is p38, and it too is activated by RAC⋅GTP and in turn
activates various transcription factors. RAC⋅GTP also
induces cytoskeletal reorganization and may play a role in
the clustering of TCR complexes, coreceptors, and other
signaling molecules into the synapse.
The activities of ERK and JNK are eventually shut oﬀ by the
action of dual-speciﬁcity protein tyrosine/threonine phosphatases.
These phosphatases are induced or activated by ERK and JNK
themselves, providing a negative feedback mechanism to terminate
T cell activation.
Calcium- and Protein Kinase C–Mediated
Signaling Pathways in T Lymphocytes
TCR signaling leads to the activation of the γ1 isoform of the enzyme
phospholipase C (PLCγ1), and the products of PLCγ1-mediated
hydrolysis of membrane lipids activate additional signaling events
that induce speciﬁc transcription factors in T cells (Fig. 7.15). Soon
after 
TCR 
triggering, 
the 
LAT 
and 
SLP76 
adaptors 
are
phosphorylated on tyrosine residues by ZAP70 and form a complex
on the inside of the plasma membrane. At the same time, PI3-
kinase generates PIP3 in the inner leaﬂet of the plasma membrane
and recruits the TEC-family kinase, ITK, and also PLCγ1 (both
enzymes have PH domains and can thus bind to PIP3). These
enzymes also contain SH2 domains that allow them to bind to
speciﬁc phosphorylated tyrosine residues on the LAT/SLP76
complex, and it is here that ITK phosphorylates and activates
PLCγ1. Activated PLCγ1 catalyzes the hydrolysis of the plasma
membrane phospholipid phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate
(PIP2), generating two breakdown products: the soluble sugar
triphosphate, inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3), and membrane-
bound diacylglycerol (DAG). IP3 and DAG then activate two
distinct downstream signaling pathways in T cells.
IP3 produces a rapid increase in cytosolic free calcium after T cell
activation. IP3 diﬀuses through the cytosol to the smooth
endoplasmic reticulum (ER), where it binds to its receptor, a ligand-
gated calcium channel, and stimulates release of membrane-
sequestered calcium stores. As a result, the cytosolic free calcium
ion concentration increases from a resting level of about 100 nM to
a peak of 600 to 1000 nM within a few minutes. The depletion of ER
calcium is sensed by STIM1, an ER membrane protein, which then
activates a plasma membrane ion channel called a calcium release–
activated calcium (CRAC) channel. Portions of the ER membrane in
the cell are often very close to the plasma membrane and this
proximity facilitates the interaction between STIM1 and the CRAC
channel. The activation of the CRAC channel results in an inﬂux of
extracellular calcium that sustains cytosolic levels at about 300 to
400 nM for more than 1 hour. A key component of the CRAC
channel is the ORAI protein; mutations in the gene encoding this
protein are the cause of a rare human immunodeﬁciency disease.
Cytosolic free calcium acts as a signaling molecule by binding to
calmodulin, a ubiquitous calcium-dependent regulatory protein.
Calcium-calmodulin complexes activate several enzymes, including
calcineurin, a protein serine/threonine phosphatase that is
important for transcription factor activation, as discussed later.
p
p
DAG, the second breakdown product of PIP2, is a membrane-
bound lipid that activates the enzyme protein kinase C (PKC). There
are several isoforms of PKC that participate in the generation of
active transcription factors, discussed later. The combination of
elevated free cytosolic calcium and DAG induces a conformational
change in certain isoforms of PKC that makes the catalytic site
accessible to its substrates. Numerous downstream proteins are
phosphorylated by PKC. The PKCθ isoform localizes to the immune
synapse and is involved in the activation and nuclear translocation
of the nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) transcription factor. Pathways of
NF-κB activation are discussed later in this chapter.
So far, we have described several signal transduction pathways
initiated by ligand binding to the TCR that result in the activation
of diﬀerent types of enzymes: G protein–MAP kinase pathways
leading to activation of kinases such as ERK and JNK, a PLCγ1-
calcium–dependent 
pathway 
leading 
to 
activation 
of 
the
phosphatase calcineurin, and a DAG-dependent pathway leading to
activation of PKC. Each of these pathways contributes to the
expression of genes encoding proteins needed for T cell clonal
expansion, diﬀerentiation, and eﬀector functions. In the following
section, we will describe the mechanisms by which these diﬀerent
signaling pathways stimulate the transcription of various genes in T
cells.
Activation of Transcription Factors That
Regulate T Cell Gene Expression
The enzymes generated by TCR signaling activate transcription
factors that bind to regulatory regions of numerous genes in T cells
and thereby enhance transcription of these genes (Fig. 7.16) . Much of
our understanding of the transcriptional regulation of genes in T
cells is based on analyses of cytokine gene expression. The
transcriptional regulation of most cytokine genes in T cells is
controlled by the binding of transcription factors to nucleotide
sequences in the promoter and enhancer regions of these genes.
For instance, the promoter located 5′ of the coding exons of the
interleukin-2 (IL2) gene contains a segment of approximately 300
base pairs that contains binding sites for several diﬀerent
transcription factors. All of these sites must be occupied by
transcription factors for maximal expression of the IL2 gene.
Diﬀerent transcription factors are activated by diﬀerent cytoplasmic
signal transduction pathways, and the requirement for multiple
transcription factors accounts for the need to activate many
signaling pathways after antigen recognition. The same principles
are true for the induced expression of many other genes in T cells,
including 
those 
encoding 
cytokine 
receptors 
and 
eﬀector
molecules, although diﬀerent genes may be responsive to diﬀerent
combinations of transcription factors.
Three transcription factors that are activated in T cells by antigen
recognition and appear to be critical for most T cell responses are
nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT), AP1, and NF-κB.
• NFAT is a transcription factor required for the expression of
genes encoding IL-2, IL-4, TNF, and other cytokines. NFAT
is present in an inactive, serine-phosphorylated form in the
cytoplasm of resting T lymphocytes. It is activated by the
calcium-calmodulin–dependent phosphatase calcineurin.
Calcineurin dephosphorylates cytoplasmic NFAT, thereby
uncovering a nuclear localization signal that permits NFAT
to translocate into the nucleus. Once it is in the nucleus,
NFAT binds to the regulatory regions of the IL2 and other
genes, usually in association with other transcription
factors, such as AP1. The mechanism of activation of NFAT
was discovered indirectly by studies of the mechanism of
action of the immunosuppressive drug cyclosporine. This
drug and the functionally similar compound tacrolimus
(FK506) are natural products of fungi that are used as
therapeutic agents to treat transplant rejection (see Chapter
17). They function largely by blocking T cell cytokine gene
transcription. Cyclosporine binds to a cytosolic protein
called cyclophilin, and tacrolimus binds to a protein called
FK506-binding protein (FKBP). Cyclosporine-cyclophilin
complexes and tacrolimus-FKBP complexes bind to and
inhibit calcineurin (hence these drugs are called calcineurin
inhibitors) and thereby block translocation of NFAT into
the nucleus.
• AP1 is a transcription factor found in many cell types; it is
speciﬁcally activated in T lymphocytes by TCR-mediated
signals. AP1 is actually the name for a family of DNA-
binding factors composed of dimers of two proteins that
bind to one another through a shared structural motif
called a leucine zipper. The best characterized AP1 factor is
composed of the proteins FOS and JUN. As discussed
previously, the formation of active AP1 typically involves
synthesis of the FOS protein and phosphorylation of
preexisting JUN protein, both stimulated by MAP kinases
that are activated by TCR-induced signals. AP1 physically
associates with other transcription factors in the nucleus,
and it works best in combination with NFAT. Thus, AP1
activation represents a convergence point of several TCR-
initiated signaling pathways.
• NF-κB refers to a group of closely related transcription
factors that are activated in response to TCR signals and are
essential for cytokine synthesis. NF-κB proteins are
homodimers or heterodimers of proteins that are
homologous to c-REL and are important in the transcription
of many genes in diverse cell types. The NF-κB pathway is
important not only for antigen receptor–mediated
lymphocyte activation but also for responses to signaling by
innate paĴern recognition receptors such as Toll-like
receptors (TLRs) and cytokine receptors and is discussed in
depth at the end of this chapter.
FIGURE 7.15  T cell signaling downstream of
PLCγ1. A, The LAT adaptor protein that is
phosphorylated on T cell activation binds the
cytosolic enzyme PLCγ1, which is phosphorylated
by ITK and activated. Active PLCγ1 hydrolyzes
membrane PIP2 to generate IP3, which stimulates
an increase in cytosolic calcium, and DAG, which
activates the enzyme PKC. B, IP3 causes
depletion of endoplasmic reticulum calcium, which
is sensed by STIM1. PKC induces numerous
cellular responses. C, STIM1 induces the opening
of the CRAC channel that facilitates entry of
extracellular calcium into the cytosol. ORAI is a
component of the CRAC channel. Increased
cytosolic calcium together with PKC activate
various transcription factors, leading to cellular
responses. CRAC, Calcium release–activated
calcium; DAG, diacylglycerol; IP3, inositol 1,4,5-
trisphosphate; PIP2, phosphatidylinositol
bisphosphate; PKC, protein kinase C; PLCγ1,
phospholipase C γ1.
FIGURE 7.16  Activation of transcription factors in T
cells.Multiple signaling pathways converge in
antigen-stimulated T cells to generate
transcription factors that stimulate expression of
various genes (in this case, the IL2 gene). The
calcium-calmodulin pathway activates NFAT, and
the RAS and RAC pathways generate the two
components of AP1. Less is known about the link
between TCR signals and NF-κB activation. (NF-
κB is shown as a complex of two subunits, which
in T cells are typically the p50 and p65 proteins,
named for their molecular sizes in kilodaltons.)
PKC is important in T cell activation, and the
PKCθ isoform is particularly important in activating
NF-κB. These transcription factors function
coordinately to regulate gene expression. Note
also that the various signaling pathways are
shown as activating unique transcription factors,
but there may be considerable overlap, and each
pathway may play a role in the activation of
multiple transcription factors. AP1, Activator
protein 1; GDP, guanosine diphosphate; GTP,
guanosine triphosphate; IL-2, interleukin-2; NFAT,
nuclear factor of activated T cells; PKC, protein
kinase C; TCR, T cell receptor.
The links between diﬀerent signaling proteins, activation of
transcription factors, and functional responses of T cells are often
diﬃcult to establish because there are complex and incompletely
understood interactions between signaling pathways. In addition,
for the sake of simplicity, we often discuss signaling as a set of
linear pathways, but we know this does not reﬂect the more
complex and interconnected reality. Finally, we have focused on
selected pathways to illustrate how antigen recognition may lead to
biochemical alterations, but it is clear that many other signaling
molecules are also involved in antigen-induced lymphocyte
activation.
An additional mechanism by which T cell activation is regulated
involves microRNAs (miRNAs), which are responsible for
posĴranscriptional inhibition of gene expression. miRNAs are
small noncoding RNAs that are transcribed from DNA but are not
translated into proteins. They are initially generated in the nucleus
as longer primary transcripts that are processed by an
endoribonuclease called Drosha into shorter pre-miRNAs that have
a stem loop structure and can be exported into the cytosol. In the
cytosol, pre-miRNAs are processed by another endoribonuclease
called Dicer into short double-stranded miRNAs, 21 to 22 base
pairs in length, which associate with several proteins, including
Argonaute, to form complexes known as RNA-induced silencing
complexes (RISC). One strand of the miRNA can pair with a
complementary sequence in a number of cellular messenger RNAs
(mRNAs). If the 6– to 8–base pair miRNA sequence that recognizes
mRNAs is perfectly complementary to the mRNA, the mRNA may
be targeted for degradation, but if the complementarity is
imperfect, translation of the mRNA is inhibited. In either case, the
result is a reduction in the abundance of proteins encoded by genes
targeted by miRNAs. In T cells the expression of the majority of
miRNAs is globally reduced upon activation. In addition, the
Argonaute protein is ubiquitinated and degraded, further
compromising miRNA function and enhancing the expression of a
large number of proteins required for cell cycle progression
downstream of T cell activation.
Modulation of T Cell Signaling by Protein
Tyrosine Phosphatases
Tyrosine phosphatases remove phosphate moieties from tyrosine
residues on proteins and generally inhibit TCR signaling. Two
tyrosine phosphatases that serve an important inhibitory role in
lymphocytes and other hematopoietic cells are called SHP1 and
SHP2 (for SH2 domain–containing phosphatases 1 and 2).
Inhibitory phosphatases are typically recruited to ITIMs in the
cytoplasmic tails of inhibitory receptors that are themselves
phosphorylated by tyrosine kinases induced during lymphocyte
activation. These phosphatases inhibit signal transduction by
removing phosphate moieties from tyrosine residues in key
signaling molecules and thus functionally antagonize tyrosine
kinases. Another inhibitory phosphatase called SHIP (SH2 domain–
containing inositol phosphatase) does not act on phosphoproteins
but rather is speciﬁc for an inositol phospholipid. Like SHP1 and
SHP2, SHIP binds to phosphorylated ITIM sequences on speciﬁc
inhibitory receptors. SHIP removes a phosphate group from PIP3 in
the inner leaﬂet of the plasma membrane and thus antagonizes PI3-
kinase signaling.
Although most phosphatases aĴenuate lymphocyte signaling,
one tyrosine phosphatase, CD45, facilitates lymphocyte activation.
The CD45 protein is a receptor tyrosine phosphatase expressed in
all hematopoietic cells. It is an integral membrane protein whose
cytoplasmic tail contains tandem protein tyrosine phosphatase
domains. CD45 dephosphorylates inhibitory tyrosine residues in
SRC family kinases (including LCK and FYN in T cells) and thus
contributes to the generation of active kinases.
Costimulatory Receptor Signaling in T Cells
Costimulatory signals are generated by receptors that recognize
ligands on APCs and cooperate with TCR signals to promote
activation of the T cells. The two-signal hypothesis for T cell
activation was introduced in Chapters 1 and 4. In immunologic
jargon, the response by the TCR to MHC and peptide on an APC is
referred to as signal 1. T cells are fully activated only when a foreign
peptide bound to an MHC molecule is recognized in the context of
activation of the innate immune system by a pathogen or some
other cause of inﬂammation. Costimulatory ligands represent the
danger signals (or signal 2) induced on APCs by microbes. Thus,
recognition of foreign antigens must be combined with a sense of
danger for optimal T cell activation to occur.
The CD28 Family of Costimulatory Receptors
The best deﬁned costimulators for T lymphocytes are a pair of
related proteins, called B7-1 (CD80) and B7-2 (CD86), which are
expressed on activated dendritic cells (DCs) and other APCs and
bind to the CD28 receptor on T cells. The CD28 molecule is the
principal costimulatory receptor for delivery of second signals for T
cell activation. The biologic roles of the B7 and CD28 protein
families are discussed in Chapter 9. Another activating receptor of
the CD28 family is a molecule called inducible costimulator (ICOS),
which plays an important role in T follicular helper cell
development and will be discussed in Chapter 12.
The CD2/SLAM Family of Costimulatory Receptors
Proteins other than CD28 family members also contribute to T cell
activation and diﬀerentiation. The CD2 family consists of
homologous proteins that play a role in the activation of T cells and
NK cells. In human T cells, CD2 functions both as an intercellular
adhesion molecule and as a signal transducer.
A distinct subgroup of the CD2 family of proteins is known as
the SLAM (signaling lymphocytic activation molecule) family.
SLAM, like all members of the CD2 family, is an integral
membrane protein that contains two extracellular Ig domains and a
long cytoplasmic tail. The cytoplasmic tail of SLAM, but not of CD2,
contains a switch motif (ITSM) that is distinct from the ITAM and
ITIM motifs found in other activating and inhibitory receptors.
The extracellular Ig domains of SLAM are involved in homophilic
interactions. SLAM on a T cell can interact with SLAM on a DC, and
as a result the cytoplasmic tail of SLAM may deliver signals to T
cells. The ITSM motif binds to SAP (SLAM-associated protein), and
the laĴer forms a bridge between SLAM and FYN (a SRC family
kinase that is also physically linked to CD3 proteins in T cells).
SLAM and other members of the SLAM family function as
costimulatory receptors in T cells, NK cells, and some B cells. As we
will discuss in Chapter 21, mutations in the SH2D1A gene encoding
SAP are the cause of a disease called X-linked lymphoproliferative
syndrome (XLP).
An important member of the SLAM family in NK cells, CD8+ T
cells, and γδ T cells is called 2B4. Like SLAM, the cytoplasmic tail of
2B4 contains ITSMs, binds to the SAP adaptor protein, and induces
activating signals by recruiting FYN. Defective 2B4 signaling
contributes to the immune deﬁcit in patients with X-linked
lymphoproliferative syndrome (see Chapter 21).
Metabolic Changes During T Cell Activation
When cells are activated, they need to increase their metabolic
activity to cope with the increased demands of the cellular
response. In the immune system this phenomenon has been best
studied in T cells. Upon activation by antigen and costimulators, T
cells increase the transport of glucose and change their energy
production from mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation to
glycolysis, even in the presence of abundant oxygen, a phenomenon
known as aerobic glycolysis, or the Warburg eﬀect (Fig. 7.17). This
was ﬁrst described in tumor cells but is now recognized as an
important mechanism used by many proliferating cells. Although
glycolysis generates less ATP, the molecule cells use to store and
release energy, than oxidative phosphorylation, glycolysis does not
use substrates other than glucose, such as amino acids and lipids,
and thus preserves essential building blocks needed for the
synthesis of new macromolecules and for cell division. Aerobic
glycolysis in lymphocytes may be important not just for cellular
proliferation but also for the diﬀerentiation of T cells into eﬀector
cells and for the production of eﬀector cytokines.
FIGURE 7.17  Metabolic changes during T cell
activation.In resting T cells, the major pathway of
energy generation is mitochondrial oxidative
phosphorylation. Upon activation, there is a switch
to aerobic glycolysis, which generates less energy
but preserves and produces the building blocks
for cellular organelle biosynthesis, which is
required for cell proliferation and functional
responses. ATP, Adenosine triphosphate.
FIGURE 7.18  B cell antigen receptor complex.As
seen in the left panel, membrane immunoglobulin
(IgM) (and IgD) on the surface of mature B cells is
associated with the invariant Igβ and Igα
molecules, which contain ITAMs in their
cytoplasmic tails that mediate signaling functions.
In the right panel the cytoplasmic tail of
membrane IgG (and the same is true for
membrane IgE) contains a tyrosine containing
motif called the Ig tail tyrosine (ITT) motif that
helps amplify B cell receptor signaling in memory
B cells.
The B Lymphocyte Antigen Receptor
Complex
The B lymphocyte antigen receptor is a transmembrane form of an
antibody molecule associated with two signaling chains. We
described the structure of antibodies in detail in Chapter 5. Here
we will focus on some salient features of the membrane forms of Ig
and their associated proteins and discuss how they deliver signals
to B cells. Because the signaling pathways are much like those in T
cells, we will summarize these without great detail. As noted
earlier, there are both similarities and signiﬁcant diﬀerences
between B and T cell antigen receptors (see Table 7.1).
Structure of the B Cell Receptor for Antigen
Membrane IgM and IgD, the antigen receptors of naive B cells, have
short cytoplasmic tails consisting of only three amino acids (lysine,
valine, and lysine). These tails are too small to transduce signals
generated after the recognition of antigen. Ig-mediated signals are
delivered by two other molecules called Igα and Igβ that are
disulﬁde linked to one another and are expressed in B cells
noncovalently associated with membrane Ig (Fig. 7.18). These
proteins have functions in B cells that are similar to the functions of
CD3 and ζ proteins in TCR signaling. They contain ITAMs in their
cytoplasmic tails, are required for the transport of membrane Ig
molecules to the cell surface, and together with membrane Ig form
the BCR complex. The tails of Igα and Igβ are physically associated
with SRC family tyrosine kinases, including LYN, FYN, and BLK.
BCR complexes in class-switched B cells, including memory B cells,
contain membrane Igs that may be of the IgG, IgA, or IgE class (see
Chapter 12). Membrane IgG and IgE molecules have longer
cytoplasmic tails that contain a conserved aspartate (or glutamate)-
tyrosine-arginine-asparagine-methionine sequence called an Ig tail
tyrosine (ITT) motif that is similar in sequence (and function) to a
signaling motif in the cytoplasmic tail of the CD28 costimulatory
receptor in T cells.
Signal Initiation by the B Cell Receptor
Signal initiation by antigens occurs by cross-linking of the BCR.
Cross-linking of membrane IgM and IgD by multivalent antigens
brings molecules of Igα- and Igβ-associated SRC family kinases
such as LYN close to one another. The subsequent physical
interaction of the kinase molecules activates these enzymes,
enabling them to phosphorylate the tyrosine residues on the
ITAMs of Igα and Igβ. The phosphorylation of ITAM tyrosine
residues triggers all subsequent signaling events downstream of
the BCR (Fig. 7.19). Cross-linked Ig receptors enter lipid rafts,
where many adaptor proteins and signaling molecules are
concentrated, along with SRC family tyrosine kinases such as LYN,
FYN, and BLK. The phosphorylated tyrosine residues in the ITAMs
of Igα and Igβ provide docking sites for the tandem SH2 domains
of the SYK tyrosine kinase. SYK is homologous to ZAP70 and has
similar functions in B cells as ZAP70 does in T cells. SYK is
activated when it associates with phosphorylated tyrosines of
ITAMs and may itself be phosphorylated on speciﬁc tyrosine
residues by BCR-associated SRC family kinases, leading to further
activation. Both SRC-family kinases and SYK contribute to the
activation of BTK, an important tyrosine kinase in B cells. If the
antigen is monovalent and incapable of cross-linking multiple Ig
molecules, some signaling may nevertheless occur, but additional
activation by helper T cells may be necessary to fully activate B cells,
as discussed in Chapter 12.
FIGURE 7.19  Signal transduction by the B cell
receptor complex.Antigen-induced cross-linking of
membrane immunoglobulin (Ig) on B cells leads to
clustering and activation of SRC family tyrosine
kinases and tyrosine phosphorylation of the
ITAMs in the cytoplasmic tails of the Igα and Igβ
molecules. This leads to docking of SYK and
subsequent tyrosine phosphorylation events as
depicted. Several signaling cascades follow these
events, as shown, leading to the activation of
several transcription factors. These signal
transduction pathways are similar to those
described in T cells. AP1, Activator protein 1;
GDP, guanosine diphosphate; GTP, guanosine
triphosphate; ITAM, immunoreceptor tyrosine-
based activation motif; NFAT, nuclear factor of
activated T cell; NF-κB, nuclear factor κB; PLCγ1,
phospholipase C γ1; PIP3, phosphatidylinositol
trisphosphate; PKC, protein kinase C.
Role of the CR2/CD21 Complement Receptor
as a Coreceptor for B Cells
The activation of B cells is enhanced by signals that are provided by
complement proteins and the CD21 coreceptor complex, which link
innate immunity to the adaptive humoral immune response (Fig.
7.20) . Microbial surfaces and released polysaccharides can activate
the complement system by the alternative and lectin pathways
during innate immune responses, in the absence of antibodies (see
Chapters 4 and 13). Proteins and other antigens that do not activate
complement directly may be bound by preexisting antibodies or by
antibodies produced early in the response, and these antigen-
antibody complexes can activate complement by the classical
pathway. Recall that complement activation results in the
proteolytic cleavage of complement proteins. The key component of
the system is a protein called C3, and its cleavage results in the
production of a molecule called C3b that binds covalently to the
microbe or antigen-antibody complex. C3b may be further
degraded into a fragment called C3d, which remains bound to the
microbial surface or the antigen-antibody complex. B lymphocytes
express a receptor for C3d called the type 2 complement receptor
(CR2, or CD21). The complex of C3d and antigen or C3d and
antigen-antibody complex binds to B cells, with the membrane Ig
recognizing antigen and CR2 recognizing the bound C3d (see Fig.
7.20).
FIGURE 7.20  Role of complement in B cell
activation.B cells express a complex of the CR2
complement receptor, CD19, and CD81. Microbial
antigens that have bound the complement
fragment C3d can simultaneously engage both the
CR2 molecule and the membrane immunoglobulin
(Ig) on the surface of a B cell. This leads to the
initiation of signaling cascades from both the B
cell receptor complex and the CR2 complex,
because of which the response to C3d-antigen
complexes is greatly enhanced compared with the
response to antigen alone.
CR2 is expressed on mature B cells as a complex with two other
membrane proteins, CD19 and CD81 (also called TAPA1). The CR2-
CD19-CD81 complex is often called the B cell coreceptor complex
because CR2 binds to antigens through aĴached C3d at the same
time that membrane Ig binds directly to the antigen. Binding of
C3d to the B cell complement receptor brings CD19 in proximity to
BCR-associated kinases, and the cytoplasmic tail of CD19 rapidly
becomes tyrosine phosphorylated. This leads to the activation of
PI3-kinase, which generates PIP3, which in turn binds and activates
BTK and PLCγ2, in a manner analogous to PDK1 activation (see Fig.
7.12) and PLCγ1 activation (see Fig. 7.15) in T cells. The net result of
coreceptor activation is that the response of the antigen-stimulated
B cell is greatly enhanced.
Complement proteins are not the only innate immune triggers of
B cells. Other innate immune ligands, including ﬂagellin and
microbial nucleic acids, can also activate B cells via TLRs. TLR
signaling has been discussed in Chapter 4, and its role in the
activation of B cells will be considered in Chapter 12.
Signaling Pathways Downstream of the B
Cell Receptor
After antigen binding to the BCR, SYK and other tyrosine kinases
activate numerous downstream signaling pathways that are
regulated by adaptor proteins (see Fig. 7.19) . Activated SYK
phosphorylates critical tyrosine residues on adaptor proteins such
as SLP65 (also called BLNK). This facilitates the recruitment to
these adaptor proteins of other SH2 domain– and phosphotyrosine-
binding (PTB) domain–containing enzymes, including guanine
nucleotide exchange proteins that can separately activate RAS and
RAC, PLCγ2, and the BTK tyrosine kinase, among others.
Recruitment facilitates the activation of these downstream eﬀectors,
each generally contributing to the activation of a distinct signaling
pathway.
• The RAS-MAP kinase pathway is activated in antigen-
stimulated B cells. The GTP/GDP exchange factor SOS is
recruited to the adaptor protein SLP65 through the binding
of GRB2; RAS is then converted by SOS from an inactive
GDP-bound form to an active GTP-bound form. Activated
RAS contributes to the activation of the ERK MAP kinase
pathway, as discussed earlier for T cell signaling. In a
parallel fashion, the activation of the small G protein RAC
may contribute to the activation of the JNK MAP kinase
pathway.
• A phosphatidylinositol-speciﬁc phospholipase C (PLC) is
activated in response to BCR signaling, and this in turn
facilitates the activation of downstream signaling pathways.
In B cells, the dominant isoform of PLC is the γ2 isoform,
whereas T cells express the related γ1 isoform of the
enzyme. PLCγ2 becomes active when it binds to the
adaptor protein BLNK and is phosphorylated by BTK. As
described in the context of TCR signaling, active PLC breaks
down membrane PIP2 to yield soluble IP3 and leaves DAG
in the plasma membrane. IP3 mobilizes calcium from
intracellular stores, leading to a rapid elevation of the
concentration of cytoplasmic calcium ions, which is
subsequently augmented by an inﬂux of calcium from the
extracellular milieu. Calcium signaling contributes to NFAT
activation in B cells as well, analogous to events described
in T cells. In the presence of elevated calcium, DAG
activates some isoforms of PKC (mainly PKCβ in B cells),
which phosphorylate downstream proteins on
serine/threonine residues.
• PKCβ activation downstream of the BCR contributes to the
activation of NF-κB in antigen-stimulated B cells. This
process is similar to that in T cells triggered by PKCθ, the
PKC isoform present in T cells.
• As described for T cell activation (see Fig. 7.12), the
phosphorylation of speciﬁc tyrosine-containing motifs on a
number of adaptors in B cells allows the recruitment and
p
activation of PI3-kinase. This enzyme facilitates critical
cellular events, including cell survival, in activated B cells.
These signaling cascades ultimately lead to the activation of
transcription factors that induce the expression of genes whose
products are required for functional responses of B cells. Some of the
transcription factors that are activated by antigen receptor–
mediated signal transduction in B cells are FOS (downstream of
RAS and ERK activation), JUN (downstream of RAC and JNK
activation), and NF-κB (downstream of BTK, PLCγ2, and PKCβ
activation). We described these earlier in the context of T cell
signaling pathways. These and other transcription factors not
mentioned here are involved in stimulating proliferation and
diﬀerentiation of B cells (see Chapter 12).
The same signaling pathways are used by membrane IgM and
IgD on naive B cells and by IgG, IgA, and IgE on B cells that have
undergone isotype switching because all of these membrane Ig
isotypes associate with Igα and Igβ. However, in memory B cells
expressing membrane IgG or IgE, the tyrosine residue in the ITT
motif is phosphorylated, recruits the GRB2 adaptor and enhances
both ERK activation and Ca++ signaling.
The Attenuation of Immune Receptor
Signaling
Activation of lymphocytes has to be tightly controlled to avoid
collateral damage to host tissues during immune responses against
foreign antigens. In addition, the immune system needs
mechanisms that will prevent reactions against self antigens. We
will describe the biology of these control mechanisms in later
chapters, mainly Chapter 15. Here we discuss some of the
biochemical mechanisms that limit and terminate lymphocyte
activation.
Inhibitory signaling in lymphocytes is mediated primarily by
inhibitory receptors and also by enzymes known as E3 ubiquitin
ligases that mark certain signaling molecules for degradation. The
functional responses of all cells are regulated by a balance between
stimulatory and inhibitory signals. Many inhibitory receptors
recruit and activate phosphatases that counter kinase-dependent
signaling 
events 
induced 
by 
receptors 
for 
antigens 
and
costimulators (Fig. 7.21). We will describe how inhibitory receptors
may function in NK cells, T cells, and B cells, and then how
ubiquitin E3 ligases may aĴenuate signaling in lymphocytes. The
biologic relevance of signal aĴenuation through inhibitory
receptors in NK cells, T cells, and B cells is addressed in Chapters 4,
15, and 12, respectively.
FIGURE 7.21  Inhibitory signaling in lymphocytes.A
schematic depiction is provided of an inhibitory
receptor with an extracellular ligand-binding
domain and a cytosolic immunoreceptor tyrosine-
based inhibition motif (ITIM). Ligand binding
results in phosphorylation of the ITIM tyrosine by
a SRC family kinase, followed by recruitment of
an SH2 domain–containing tyrosine phosphatase
that can remove phosphates from signaling
intermediates and thus attenuate immune receptor
signaling.
Inhibitory Receptors of Natural Killer Cells, B
Cells, and T Cells
Inhibitory receptors play key roles in NK cells, T cells, and B cells
and in other cells of innate immunity. Most but not all inhibitory
receptors in the immune system contain ITIMs in their cytoplasmic
tails that can recruit SH2 domain–containing phosphatases and
thus aĴenuate signaling in a broadly similar manner (see Fig. 7.21).
Tyrosine residues in the ITIMs of these receptors can be
phosphorylated by SRC family kinases linked to lymphocyte
activation and, as described earlier, recruit SH2 domain–containing
tyrosine phosphatases such as SHP1 and SHP2 and SH2 domain–
containing inositol phosphatase SHIP. SHP1 and SHP2 aĴenuate
tyrosine kinase–initiated signaling from activating receptors in NK
cells and from the BCR and TCR in B and T cells, respectively. SHIP
removes phosphate moieties from PIP3, as described earlier, and
thus inhibits PI3-kinase activity in lymphocytes, NK cells, and
innate immune cells.
In 
NK 
cells, 
inhibitory 
receptors 
called 
killer 
cell
immunoglobulin receptors (KIRs) (see Chapter 4) contain
extracellular Ig domains that can recognize class I human leukocyte
antigen (HLA) molecules, and a subset of these receptors contains
cytosolic ITIMs. The CD94/NKG2A inhibitory receptor binds to an
atypical class I MHC molecule called HLA-E, and the NKG2A chain
of this dimer contains cytosolic ITIMs.
The major inhibitory receptors of T cells are proteins of the CD28
family. They are also called coinhibitors, to contrast them with
costimulators. One of these, CTLA-4 (CD152), has a higher aﬃnity
than CD28 for B7 proteins and is a competitive inhibitor of B7-CD28
interactions. It inhibits immune responses mainly by out-
competing an activating receptor, CD28, for its ligands, the B7
costimulators, and by removing B7 molecules from APCs. It is
involved in the maintenance of unresponsiveness (tolerance) to self
antigens and is discussed in this context in Chapter 15. Another
inhibitory receptor of the same family is PD-1, and this is also
discussed in Chapter 15. PD-1 contains cytosolic ITIMs and ITSMs
that both contribute to inhibitory signaling in T cells. The ITSM,
when phosphorylated, recruits the tyrosine phosphatase SHP2,
which blocks T cell activation mediated by the TCR complex and
CD28.
FcγRIIB is an important aĴenuator of signaling in activated B
cells, DCs, and macrophages. It can bind IgG-containing immune
complexes through extracellular Ig domains and primarily recruits
SHIP and antagonizes PI3-kinase signaling. This receptor dampens
B cell activation after antibodies are produced and will be discussed
in more detail in Chapter 12.
Ubiquitin-Dependent Degradation of
Signaling Proteins
One of the major ways of degrading cytosolic and nuclear proteins
involves the covalent aĴachment of ubiquitin residues to these
proteins. Although ubiquitination of proteins is frequently linked
to the degradation of these proteins in proteasomes, proteins can
be ubiquitinated in a number of ways, each form of ubiquitination
serving a diﬀerent function. In the context of signal transduction,
two distinct types of ubiquitination mediate signal aĴenuation on
the one hand and signal generation on the other.
Ubiquitination was brieﬂy discussed in Chapter 6 in the context
of the class I MHC pathway of antigen processing. Ubiquitin is a 76
amino acid protein that is activated in an ATP-dependent fashion
by an E1 enzyme, then transferred to an E2 enzyme, which then
covalently aĴaches the activated ubiquitin to lysine residues on
speciﬁc substrates that are recognized by speciﬁc E3 ubiquitin
ligases. In many cases, after the C terminus of a ubiquitin moiety is
covalently linked to a lysine residue on a target protein, the C-
terminal ends of subsequent ubiquitin moieties may be covalently
aĴached to lysine residues on the preceding ubiquitin to generate a
polyubiquitin chain. The shape of the polyubiquitin chain is
diﬀerent depending on which speciﬁc lysine residue on the
preceding ubiquitin molecule in the chain is the site for covalent
binding of the next ubiquitin molecule, and the shape of the
ubiquitin chain has important functional consequences. If lysine in
position 48 of the ﬁrst ubiquitin moiety forms an isopeptide bond
with the C terminus of the next ubiquitin and so on, a lysine-48 type
of ubiquitin chain will be generated that can be recognized by the
proteasomal cap and the ubiquitinated protein will be targeted for
degradation in the proteasome. Some E3 ligases generate a
diﬀerent type of polyubiquitin chain, which does not target
proteins for degradation but instead generates a structure for
latching the marked proteins onto other speciﬁc proteins; this is
important in NF-κB signaling, as discussed later. For some
functions, in particular targeting membrane proteins to lysosomes
rather than to proteasomes, only a single ubiquitin moiety may
need to be aĴached to a protein target.
Several E3 ligases are found in T cells, some of which are involved
in signal activation and others in signal aĴenuation. The prototype
of E3 ligases involved in terminating T cell responses is CBL-b, but
several others serve similar functions. Recruitment of CBL-b to the
TCR complex and associated adaptor proteins leads to the
monoubiquitination, endocytosis, and lysosomal degradation of the
TCR complex, and this may be a mechanism for the aĴenuation of
TCR signaling (Fig. 7.22). CD28 signals block the inhibitory activity
of CBL-b, and this is one mechanism by which costimulation
augments TCR signals. In knockout mice lacking Cbl-b, the T cells
respond to antigen even without CD28-mediated costimulation and
produce abnormally high amounts of IL-2. These mice develop
autoimmunity as a result of the excessive activation of their T cells.
There is some evidence that antigens that shut oﬀ immune
responses (so-called tolerogenic antigens, such as self antigens)
activate in T cells ubiquitin ligases that degrade essential signaling
proteins, 
and 
this 
is 
a 
mechanism 
of 
antigen-induced
unresponsiveness called anergy (see Chapter 15).
Cytokine Receptors and Signaling
Cytokines, the secreted messenger molecules of the immune
system, have been mentioned in previous chapters and will be
throughout the book. Here we will describe receptors for cytokines
and their mechanisms of signaling.
All cytokine receptors consist of one or more transmembrane
proteins whose extracellular portions are responsible for cytokine
binding and whose cytoplasmic portions are responsible for
initiation of intracellular signaling pathways. For most cytokine
receptors, these signaling pathways are activated by ligand-induced
receptor clustering, bringing together the cytoplasmic portions of
two or more receptor molecules and thus inducing the activity of
unique non-receptor tyrosine kinases. In the case of the TNF
receptor family of cytokine receptors, preformed receptor trimers
undergo a conformational change after contacting their cognate
trimeric ligands.
FIGURE 7.22  Role of the ubiquitin ligase CBL-b in
terminating T cell responses.CBL-b is recruited to
the T cell receptor (TCR) complex, where it
facilitates the ubiquitination of CD3, ZAP70, and
other proteins of the TCR complex. These
proteins are targeted for proteolytic degradation
in lysosomes and other organelles (not shown).
Classes of Cytokine Receptors
The most widely used classiﬁcation of cytokine receptors is based
on structural homologies of the extracellular cytokine-binding
domains and shared intracellular signaling mechanisms (Fig. 7.23).
Signaling mechanisms used by individual families are considered
in the section that follows. The TGF-β family is one widely studied
family of growth factors not included in the classiﬁcation in Fig.
7.23, and its signaling mechanism is discussed later.
Type I Cytokine Receptors (Hematopoietin Receptor Family)
Type I cytokine receptors are dimers or trimers that typically
consist of unique ligand-binding chains and one or more signal-
transducing chains, the laĴer often shared by receptors for diﬀerent
cytokines. These chains contain one or two domains with a
conserved pair of cysteine residues and a membrane proximal
peptide stretch containing a tryptophan-serine-X-tryptophan-serine
(WSXWS) motif, where X is any amino acid (see Fig. 7.23A). The
conserved sequences of the receptors form structures that bind
cytokines that have four α-helical bundles and are referred to as
type I cytokines, but the speciﬁcity for individual cytokines is
determined by amino acid residues that vary from one receptor to
another. This receptor family can be divided into subgroups based
on structural homologies or the use of shared signaling
polypeptides (see Fig. 7.23B). One group, which includes receptors
for IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, IL-15, and IL-21, contains a signaling
component called the common γ chain (γc, or CD132). Within this
subgroup, some receptors share one of two β chain subunits
(CD122 or CD131) and some lack a β chain. Another subgroup of
type I cytokine receptors, including those for IL-6, IL-11, and IL-27,
use the gp130 signaling chain. All the type I cytokine receptors
engage JAK-STAT signaling pathways, as discussed later.
Type II Cytokine Receptors (Interferon Receptor Family)
The type II receptors are similar to type I receptors by virtue of
possessing two extracellular domains with conserved cysteines, but
type II receptors do not contain the WSXWS motif. All of the type
II cytokine receptors, like the type I receptors, engage JAK-STAT
signaling pathways. This family includes receptors for interferons
(IFNs) and for IL-10, IL-20, and IL-22.
TNF Receptor Family
These receptors are part of a large family (often called the TNFR
superfamily) of preformed trimers (some of which recognize
membrane-associated ligands and are not considered cytokine
receptors) with conserved cysteine-rich extracellular domains and
shared intracellular signaling mechanisms that typically stimulate
gene expression, but in some cases induce apoptosis. The
important receptors of this family will be discussed in other
chapters in their biologic contexts; they include the TNF receptors,
TNFRI and TNFRII; the CD40 protein; FAS; the lymphotoxin
receptor; and the BAFF receptor family, among others. The ligands
for these receptors also form trimers. Some of these ligands are
membrane bound and others are secreted, soluble proteins.
FIGURE 7.23  Structure of cytokine receptors. A,
Receptors for different cytokines are classified
into families on the basis of conserved
extracellular domain structures and signaling
mechanisms. Representative cytokines or other
ligands that bind to each receptor family are listed
below the schematic drawings. B, Groups of
cytokine receptors share identical or highly
homologous subunit chains. Selected examples of
cytokine receptors in each group are shown. In
the common γ chain family, the IL-2 and IL-15
receptors share a β chain, CD122. In the common
β chain family, the shared β chain is CD131. G-
CSF, Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor; GM-
CSF, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
factor; IL, interleukin; TNF, tumor necrosis factor;
WSXWS, tryptophan-serine-X-tryptophan-serine.
Binding of the ligands to the preformed trimeric receptors
typically induces a conformational change and recruits adaptor
proteins to the receptor complex. These adaptors in turn recruit
enzymes that include both E3 ubiquitin ligases, which mediate
nondegradatory polyubiquitination, and protein kinases, which
initiate downstream signaling. In the case of the TNF receptor
illustrated in Fig. 7.24, the receptor recruits the adaptor protein
TNF receptor–associated death domain (TRADD), and TRADD in
turn can recruit proteins called TRAFs (TNF receptor–associated
factors), which possess a unique type of E3 ligase activity that will
be discussed in the section on NF-κB signaling. The type I TNF
receptor (there are two diﬀerent receptors for TNF) and FAS (CD95)
can also recruit adaptors that lead to the activation of caspase-8,
and these receptors can thereby induce apoptosis in certain cells.
FIGURE 7.24  Signaling through the TNF receptor
can result in NF-κB and mitogen-activated protein
kinase activation or in the induction of apoptotic
death.Ligation of the type I TNF receptor results
in the recruitment of an adaptor protein called
TRADD, which in turn can activate TRAF
molecules (E3 ubiquitin ligases) and the RIP1
kinase. Downstream consequences include the
activation of the NF-κB pathway and the JNK
MAP kinase pathway or the induction of apoptotic
death. MAP, Mitogen-activated protein; NF-κB,
nuclear factor κB; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
TRAF, TNF receptor–associated factors; TRADD,
TNF receptor–associated death domain.
IL-1 Family
The receptors of this family share a conserved cytosolic sequence,
called the Toll/IL-1 receptor (TIR) domain, and engage similar
signal transduction pathways that induce new gene transcription.
We discussed TLR signaling in Chapter 4. Brieﬂy, engagement of
the IL-1R or of TLRs results in receptor dimerization and the
recruitment of one or more of four known TIR domain–containing
adaptors to the TIR domain of the cytoplasmic tail of the receptor.
The adaptors link TLRs to diﬀerent members of the IL-1 receptor–
associated kinase (IRAK) family. IRAKs can in turn link adaptors to
TRAF6, an E3 ubiquitin ligase required for NF-κB activation. Other
events downstream of TLR signaling include MAP kinase activation
and the phosphorylation of IRF3 and IRF7, inducers of type I IFN
gene transcription. The laĴer aspect of TLR signaling has been
considered in the context of the antiviral state in Chapter 4.
Diﬀerent adaptors link TLRs to NF-κB signaling, MAP kinase
activation, and the activation of IRF3. The mechanisms connecting
IL-1R/TLR signaling and NF-κB activation are discussed later.
IL-17 Family
The receptors of this family are preformed oligomers that include
various combinations of the IL-17R A, B, C, D, and E chains.
Receptor oligomers include at least one molecule of the IL-17RA
chain. Each receptor chain is a type I integral membrane protein
that contains two extracellular type III ﬁbronectin domains and an
intracellular SEFIR motif, which has partial homology to the TIR
motif discussed in the context of IL-1 receptor signaling. The SEFIR
motif, however, does not recruit adaptors that bind to TLRs and the
IL-1 receptor. This motif binds to an adaptor ACT1 that also
contains a SEFIR motif and contributes to the recruitment of
TRAF6 and leads to NF-κB activation. Additional cytoplasmic
motifs are required for the activation of many other pathways,
including the ERK pathway and the C/EBP family of transcription
factors.
FIGURE 7.25  JAK-STAT signaling induced by
cytokines.Ligation of receptors for type I and type
II cytokines results in the activation of an
associated JAK tyrosine kinase, the
phosphorylation of the receptor tail, and the
recruitment of an SH2 domain–containing activator
of transcription (STAT) to the receptor. The
recruited STAT is activated by JAK
phosphorylation, dimerizes, enters the nucleus,
and turns on the expression of cytokine target
genes. JAK, Janus kinases; STATs, signal
transducers and activators of transcription.
There are many diﬀerent cytokines of the IL-17 family, and in
subsequent chapters the emphasis will largely be on the cytokines
that are best characterized in the context of autoimmunity and
inﬂammation, namely IL-17A and IL-17F. IL-17 B, C, and D remain
poorly characterized, and IL-17E, also known as IL-25, drives Th2
responses. IL-17A homodimers and IL-17F homodimers engage
preformed heterodimers made up of IL-17RA and IL-17RC. IL-
17E/IL-25 engages a dimer containing IL-17RB and IL-17RA.
Signaling by JAKs and STATs
Cytokine receptors of the type I and type II receptor families engage
signal transduction pathways that involve non-receptor tyrosine
kinases called Janus kinases (JAKs) and transcription factors called
signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs). The
discovery of the JAK-STAT pathways came from biochemical and
genetic analyses of IFN signaling. There are four known JAKs
(JAKs1 to 3 and TYK2) and seven STATs (STATs 1 to 4, 5a, 5b, and
6).
The sequence of events in the JAK-STAT signaling pathways is
now well deﬁned (Fig. 7.25). Inactive JAK enzymes are
noncovalently aĴached to the cytoplasmic domains of type I and
type II cytokine receptors. When two receptor molecules are
brought together by binding of a cytokine molecule, the receptor-
associated JAKs are activated and phosphorylate tyrosine residues
in the cytoplasmic portions of the clustered receptors. Some of
these phosphotyrosine moieties of the receptors are then
recognized by and bind SH2 domains of monomeric cytosolic STAT
proteins. The STAT proteins are thus brought close to JAKs and are
phosphorylated by these receptor-associated kinases. The SH2
domain of one STAT monomer is able to bind to a phosphotyrosine
residue on an adjacent STAT protein. The STAT dimers that are
generated migrate to the nucleus, where they bind to speciﬁc DNA
sequences in the promoter regions of cytokine-responsive genes
and activate gene transcription.
An intriguing question is how the speciﬁcity of responses to
many diﬀerent cytokines is achieved, given the limited numbers of
JAKs and STATs used by the large number of cytokine receptors.
The likely answer is that unique amino acid sequences in the
diﬀerent cytokine receptors provide the scaﬀold for speciﬁcally
binding, and thereby activating, diﬀerent combinations of JAKs
and STATs. The SH2 domains of diﬀerent STAT proteins selectively
bind to phosphotyrosines and ﬂanking residues of diﬀerent
cytokine receptors. This is largely responsible for the activation of
particular STATs by various cytokine receptors and therefore for the
speciﬁcity of cytokine signaling. Several type I and type II cytokine
receptors are heterodimers of two diﬀerent polypeptide chains,
each of which binds a diﬀerent JAK. Furthermore, two diﬀerent
STATs may heterodimerize on phosphorylation. Thus, there is a
signiﬁcant amount of combinatorial diversity in the signaling that
can be generated from a limited number of JAK and STAT proteins.
The subset of type I cytokine receptors that use the common γ
chain all use the JAK3 kinase for signaling. JAK3 is the only JAK
kinase that is not expressed ubiquitously. Its expression is largely
restricted to immune cells, and it is only activated by γc-containing
receptors. Type I cytokine receptors of the IL-6 family use JAK2 to
activate STAT3. A number of other cytokines also activate STAT3.
Several JAKs and STATs are relevant to human disease and are
targets of therapeutic agents. Gain-of-function mutations in JAK2
are the cause of myelodysplastic syndrome with aplastic anemia
and polycythemia vera. Mutations aﬀecting the γc chain or, less
frequently, JAK3, cause severe combined immunodeﬁciency (see
Chapter 21). Dominant-negative mutations in STAT3 cause an
immunodeﬁciency disease due to defects in Th17 responses.
Activating mutations in STAT3 are characteristic features of large
granular lymphocytic leukemias that are malignant proliferation of
cells of the NK cell or the CD8+ T cell lineages. The elucidation of
JAK-STAT signaling has also led to the development of novel
therapeutic agents targeting these pathways. Small molecule JAK
antagonists are approved for the treatment of acute myeloid
leukemia and some other myeloid malignancies and also for certain
chronic inﬂammatory diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis and
psoriasis.
Cytokines activate signaling pathways and transcription factors in
addition to the JAKs and STATs. For instance, the IL-2 receptor β
chain activates RAS-dependent MAP kinase pathways that may be
involved in gene transcription and growth stimulation. Other
cytokine receptors may similarly activate other signaling pathways
in concert with the JAK-STAT pathways to elicit biologic responses
to the cytokines. T cell proliferation, triggered to a considerable
degree by cytokines such as IL-2, is targeted by some
immunosuppressive small molecules. An important downstream
protein kinase that regulates protein translation and cell growth in
many cell types, including dividing T cells, is mTOR. It is, as its
name 
implies, 
inhibited 
by 
rapamycin, 
a 
clinically 
used
immunosuppressive drug.
Several mechanisms of negative regulation of JAK-STAT
pathways have been identiﬁed. Proteins called suppressors of
cytokine signaling (SOCS) serve as adaptors for multisubunit E3
ligase activity. They can bind to activated STATs and JAKs, and the
tightly associated E3 ligases ubiquitinate the JAKs and STATs,
targeting them for proteasomal degradation. SOCS protein levels
can be regulated by TLR ligands, by cytokines themselves, and by
other stimuli. In this way, SOCS proteins serve as negative feedback
regulators of the cytokine-mediated activation of cells. Other
inhibitors of JAK-STAT signaling include tyrosine phosphatases,
such as SHP1 and SHP2, which can dephosphorylate and therefore
deactivate JAK molecules. Another family of inhibitory proteins,
called protein inhibitors of activated STAT (PIAS), binds
phosphorylated STATs and prevents their interaction with DNA. It
is now known that PIAS proteins also interact with and block the
function of other transcription factors associated with cytokine
signaling, including NF-κB and SMADs (transcription factors
downstream of members of the TGF-β receptor family).
Pathways of NF-κB Activation
NF-κB refers to a group of structurally related transcription factors
that play a central role in inﬂammation, lymphocyte activation, cell
survival, and the formation of secondary lymphoid organs. NF-κB
family members are important players in lymphocyte development
and in the pathogenesis of many cancers, including malignant
neoplasms 
derived 
from 
activated 
lymphocytes. 
NF-κB 
is
prominently activated by cytokines of the IL-1, TNF, and IL-17
families, and is also induced downstream of TLR stimulation and
antigen recognition. It is discussed here as the prototype of a
transcription factor with fundamental roles in innate and adaptive
immunity.
There are ﬁve NF-κB proteins. The domain that is common to all
NF-κB proteins is a DNA-binding domain called a REL homology
domain. For a transcription factor to be active, it must both bind
DNA and contain an activation domain that can facilitate
transcriptional initiation. Three NF-κB proteins have both REL
homology domains and activation domains. These are p65/REL-A,
REL-B, and c-REL. Two proteins, NF-κB1/p50 and NF-κB2/p52,
contain a DNA-binding REL homology domain but lack activation
domains. NF-κB1 typically forms active heterodimers with p65/REL-
A or with c-REL, and NF-κB2 forms heterodimers with REL-B.
There are two pathways of NF-κB activation, called the canonical
and noncanonical pathways (Fig. 7.26) . Most stimuli that activate
NF-κB do so by inducing the canonical pathway (hence its name).
This pathway is activated by a number of receptors that drive
inﬂammation, such as TLRs, IL-1R, and some members of the TNFR
family, such as TNFRI. It is also activated in the context of
lymphocyte activation by the BCR and TCR. The canonical pathway
results in the nuclear localization of transcriptionally active
heterodimers of NF-κB1 with p65/REL-A or with c-REL. NF-κB1/p50-
containing heterodimers normally reside in the cytosol bound to an
inhibitor of NF-κB called IκBα, and they cannot access the nucleus
in nonactivated cells (see Fig. 7.26). The canonical NF-κB pathway
induces the tagging and degradation of IκBα, allowing the
unfeĴered heterodimeric NF-κB1 containing transcription factor to
migrate 
into 
the 
nucleus. 
Two 
very 
diﬀerent 
types 
of
polyubiquitination events are required for canonical NF-κB
activation. There are a few common steps in the canonical pathway
that apply to all upstream signal inputs.
• Upstream signaling leads to the activation of a unique type
of ubiquitin E3 ligase that can add a lysine-63 type of
ubiquitin chain to a protein called NEMO or IKKγ that is a
noncatalytic subunit of a trimeric enzyme complex called
the IκB kinase (IKK) complex. This complex contains two
other subunits called IKKα and IKKβ, both of which have
the potential to be catalytically active serine/threonine
kinases. Ubiquitination of NEMO allows IKKβ to be
activated by an upstream kinase.
• Active IKKβ phosphorylates the inhibitory protein bound to
NF-κB, IκBα, on two speciﬁc serine residues, and thus tags
this protein for lysine-48 ubiquitination.
• Polyubiquitinated IκBα is targeted for degradation in the
proteasome, and the canonical NF-κB heterodimer is then
free to enter the nucleus (see Fig. 7.26).
FIGURE 7.26  The canonical and noncanonical NF-
κB pathways.The canonical pathway is depicted
on the left. TNF family receptors, TLRs, and
antigen receptors activate or induce an E3 ligase
that can polyubiquitinate NEMO/IKKγ, a
component of the IκB kinase (IKK) complex,
forming lysine-63–linked ubiquitin chains.
Degradation of IκBα leads to the entry of active
NF-κB into the nucleus. Antigen receptors activate
specific PKCs, which in turn activate the
CARMA1/BCL-10/MALT1 complex (not shown) in
order to activate IKK. The noncanonical pathway
is depicted on the right. In this pathway, most
prominently activated downstream of the
lymphotoxin β receptor and the BAFF receptor,
TRAFs are activated downstream of these
receptors, also in a lysine-63 ubiquitination-
dependent manner (not shown). Other details are
in the text. NF-κB, Nuclear factor κB; PKC,
protein kinase C; TLR, Toll-like receptor; TNF,
tumor necrosis factor; TRADD, TNF receptor–
associated death domain; TRAF, TNF receptor–
associated factor.
We discussed earlier how TCR and BCR signaling contributes to
the activation of PKCθ and PKCβ, respectively. These PKCs can
phosphorylate a protein called CARMA1 that forms a complex with
two proteins called BCL-10 and MALT1. The CARMA1/MALT1/BCL-
10 complex can contribute to the activation of a lysine-63 type of
ubiquitin E3 ligase called TRAF6. Active TRAF6 can activate TAK1
and also add a lysine-63 ubiquitin chain to NEMO, thus facilitating
the activation of IKKβ. TLRs, IL-17R, and the IL-1R also activate
TRAF6 to initiate IKK activation. Many members of the TNF
receptor family, including the TNF receptor and CD40, can activate
canonical NF-κB signaling through the activation of other TRAF
proteins such as TRAF2, TRAF3, and TRAF5.
FIGURE 7.27  The TGF-β signaling
pathway.Processed transforming growth factor-β
(TGF-β) dimers bind to the TGβRII receptor,
which is a dimeric receptor serine/threonine
kinase. TGFβRII is activated and then associates
with and phosphorylates the TGFβRI dimer, also
a receptor serine/threonine kinase. Catalytically
active TGFβRI then phosphorylates a receptor-
regulated SMAD transcription factor (an R-SMAD
such as SMAD2 or SMAD3) that resides in the
cytosol and which then forms a heterodimer with a
Co-SMAD, such as SMAD4. This SMAD
heterodimer enters the nucleus and induces the
transcription of target genes.
A separate NF-κB signaling pathway, called the noncanonical
pathway, processes a precursor protein called p100 into p52, thus
allowing heterodimers of NF-κB2/p52 and its partner REL-B to enter
the nucleus. In nonactivated cells, the p100 precursor is bound to
REL-B, and the p100/REL-B complex is unable to enter the nucleus
until p100 is converted to p52. This pathway is activated
downstream of a few TNFR family signaling receptors, most
notably the lymphotoxin-β receptor (LTβR) that drives lymphoid
organogenesis and the BAFF receptor (BAFFR) that facilitates B cell
survival. Receptors such as LTβR and BAFFR that induce the
noncanonical NF-κB pathway also use TRAFs to activate a kinase
called NIK that in turn activates an IKK-like complex that contains
IKKα homodimers. This leads to the phosphorylation of p100,
marking it for ubiquitination and degradation in the cytosol, and
leads to the generation of noncanonical p52/REL-B NF-κB
complexes that can migrate into the nucleus (see Fig. 7.26).
TGF-β Signaling
Transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) is a growth factor of
importance in T and B cell biology. It is one member of the widely
studied TGF-β superfamily of structurally related growth factors
that play crucial roles in numerous aspects of invertebrate and
vertebrate development as well as in cellular transformation in
cancer. During T cell diﬀerentiation, TGF-β participates in
regulatory T cell development (see Chapter 15) and the
development of Th17 cells (see Chapter 10). In humoral immunity,
TGF-β is important for class switching to IgA (see Chapter 12).
Newly synthesized TGF-β is cleaved in the Golgi into two
fragments, a C-terminal peptide that dimerizes to form the inactive
cytokine and an N-terminal pro-domain, called latency-associated
peptide, that also dimerizes and remains bound to the inactive
TGF-β dimer. After secretion, the latency-associated peptide dimer,
still bound to the inactive TGF-β dimer, associates covalently
(forming disulﬁde bonds) with a speciﬁc protein on the
extracellular matrix forming what is known as the latent complex.
αV integrins on another cell bind to the latency-associated peptide
and the activated integrin then exerts physical force, disrupting the
latent complex and leading to the release of active TGF-β dimers.
TGF-β dimers then bind to the dimeric TGFβRII receptor protein
on an adjacent cell surface.
Mammalian cells contain seven diﬀerent TGF-β family type I
receptors and ﬁve diﬀerent type II receptors. Both the TGFβRI and
the TGFβRII proteins are transmembrane protein dimers whose
extracellular domains bind TGF-β and whose cytosolic tails contain
serine/threonine kinase domains. After TGFβRII has been ligated,
it is catalytically activated and phosphorylates and activates
TGFβRI. Catalytically active TGFβRI then phosphorylates a
cytosolic receptor-regulated SMAD family transcription factor or R-
SMAD (such as SMAD2 or SMAD3), which then acquires a high
aﬃnity for a co-SMAD such as SMAD4. The R-SMAD–co-SMAD
complex then goes to the nucleus and induces transcription of TGF-
β target genes (Fig 7.27). Depending on the cell type, these target
genes diﬀer. In the induction of peripheral or induced regulatory T
cells for instance (see Chapter 15), TGF-β signaling induces the
expression of the FOXP3 transcription factor, which is essential for
the development and inhibitory function of these regulatory T cells.
Summary
• Signaling receptors, typically located on the cell surface,
generally initiate signaling in the cytosol, followed by a
nuclear phase during which gene expression is altered.
• Many diﬀerent types of signaling receptors contribute to
innate and adaptive immunity, the most prominent
category being immune receptors that belong to a receptor
family in which non-receptor tyrosine kinases
phosphorylate tyrosine-containing immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM) on the cytoplasmic
tails of proteins in the receptor complex.
• Some of the other types of receptors of interest in
immunology include those of the receptor tyrosine kinase
family, nuclear receptors, heterotrimeric G protein–coupled
serpentine receptors, and receptors of the Notch family.
• Antigen receptors on T and B cells, as well as
immunoglobulin (Ig) Fc receptors, are members of the
immune receptor family.
• Antigen receptors can produce widely varying outputs,
depending on the aﬃnity and valency of the antigen that
can recruit diﬀerent numbers of ITAMs.
• Coreceptors, such as CD4 or CD8 on T cells and CD21 (CR2)
on B cells, enhance signaling from antigen receptors.
Coreceptors bind to the same antigen complex that is being
recognized by the antigen receptor.
• Signaling from antigen receptors can be aĴenuated by
inhibitory receptors such as CD22 and PD-1, which contain
cytosolic immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibition motifs
(ITIMs) and sometimes immunoreceptor tyrosine-based
switch motifs (ITSMs).
• The T cell receptor (TCR) complex is made up of the TCR α
and β chains that contribute to antigen recognition and the
ITAM-containing signaling chains CD3 γ, δ, and ε and the ζ
homodimer. The CD3 chains each contain one ITAM,
whereas each ζ chain contains three ITAMs.
• TCR ligation results in tyrosine phosphorylation of CD3 and
ζ ITAMs by SRC family kinases and the recruitment of
ZAP70 to the phospho-ITAMs, with each SH2 domain of
ZAP70 binding to one phosphorylated tyrosine of the
ITAM. Activated ZAP70 phosphorylates tyrosine residues
on adaptors, and downstream enzymes are recruited to the
signalosome.
• Enzymes that mediate the exchange of GTP for GDP on
small G proteins such as RAS and RAC help initiate
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathways. These
pathways lead to the induction or activation of transcription
factors such as JUN and FOS, components of the AP1
transcription factor.
• Activation of PLCγ1 leads to the release of IP3 from PIP2,
and IP3 induces release of calcium from intracellular stores.
Depletion of calcium from intracellular stores facilitates the
opening of the calcium release–activated calcium (CRAC)
channel, a store-operated channel on the cell surface that
maintains the raised intracellular calcium levels. Calcium
binds to calmodulin and activates downstream proteins,
including calcineurin, a phosphatase that facilitates the
entry of the nuclear factor of activated T cell (NFAT)
transcription factor into the nucleus.
• DAG is generated in the membrane when PLCγ1 releases
IP3 from PIP2. DAG can activate PKCθ, which, among other
things, can contribute to NF-κB activation.
• A lipid kinase called PI3-kinase converts PIP2 to PIP3. PIP3
can recruit and activate pleckstrin homology (PH) domain–
containing proteins to the plasma membrane. PIP3 activates
ITK in T cells and BTK in B cells. It activates PDK1, a kinase
that can phosphorylate a downstream kinase called AKT
that mediates cell survival.
• Costimulatory receptors initiate signaling separately from
antigen receptors, and signaling outputs from antigen
receptors and costimulatory receptors synergize in the
nucleus. The major costimulatory receptor in T cells is
CD28.
• The BCR is made up of membrane-bound Ig and an
associated disulﬁde-linked Igα and Igβ heterodimer. Both
Igα and Igβ contain ITAMs in their cytoplasmic tails.
Signaling pathways linked to the BCR are broadly similar to
signaling pathways downstream of the TCR.
• AĴenuation of immune receptor signaling in B cells, T cells,
and NK cells, among others, is mediated by inhibitory
receptors that frequently contain inhibitory tyrosine-
containing motifs or ITIMs in their cytoplasmic tails and
recruit phosphatases.
• Another important mechanism of signal aĴenuation
involves the ubiquitination of signaling proteins by E3
ubiquitin ligases, which tags these proteins for intracellular
degradation.
• Cytokine receptors can be divided into categories based on
structural features and mechanisms of signaling.
• Many cytokine receptors use non-receptor tyrosine kinases
called JAKs to phosphorylate transcription factors called
p
p
y
p
STATs, which dimerize after phosphorylation, translocate to
the nucleus, and induce transcription of target genes.
• Some cytokine receptors such as those of the interleukin-1
(IL-1), IL-17, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor
families activate either canonical or noncanonical NF-κB
signaling.
• Canonical NF-κB signaling is activated downstream of many
receptors, including TNF receptor family cytokine
receptors, Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and IL-1R family
members, and antigen receptors. The pathway involves
activation of IKKβ in the IKK complex, phosphorylation of
the IκBα inhibitor by activated IKKβ, ubiquitination and
proteasomal degradation of IκBα, and transport of NF-κB to
the nucleus.
• Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) binds to TGF-βRII,
which phosphorylates and activates TGF-βRI, which in turn
phosphorylates and activates an R-SMAD. The
phosphorylated R-SMAD then dimerizes with a co-SMAD,
and this dimer enters the nucleus and stimulates
transcription of target genes.
Selected Readings
∗Indicates publications of historical interest, generally reporting
the discovery of a phenomenon or process that was later shown to
be of fundamental importance in the immune system. Many (but
not all) of these discoveries led to Nobel Prizes for the
discoverer(s). The nature of the discovery is summarized brieﬂy in
each reference.
Signal Transduction in Immune Cells
Wu N, VeilleĴe A. SLAM family receptors in normal immunity and immune pathology. 
Curr Opin Immunol . 2016;38:45–51.
Wu X, Karin M. Emerging roles of lys63-linked polyubiquitylation in immune responses. 
Immunol Rev . 2015;266:161–174.
T Cell Receptor Structure and Signaling
Courtney A.H, Lo W.L, Weiss A. TCR signaling: mechanisms of initiation and propagation. 
Trends Biochem Sci . 2018;43:108–123.
Gaud G, Lesourne R, Love P.E. Regulatory mechanisms in T cell receptor signalling.  Nat
Rev Immunol . 2018;18:485–497.
Geltink R.I.K, Kyle R.L, Pearce E.L. Unraveling the complex interplay between T cell
metabolism and function.  Annu Rev Immunol . 2018;36:461–488.
∗Hedrick S.M, Cohen D.I, Nielsen E.A, Davis M.M. Isolation of cDNA clones encoding T
cell-speciﬁc membrane-associated proteins.  Nature . 1984;308:149–
153 andYanagi Y, Yoshikai Y, LeggeĴ K, et al. A human T cell-speciﬁc cDNA clone
encodes a protein having extensive homology to immunoglobulin chains.  Nature
. 1984;308:145–149 (These two reports describe the molecular cloning of the gene encoding
one of the chains of the T cell receptor.).
Man K, Kallies A. Synchronizing transcriptional control of T cell metabolism and function. 
Nat Rev Immunol . 2015;15:574–584.
Mariuzza R.A, Agnihotri P, Orban J. The structural basis of T-cell receptor (TCR) activation:
an enduring enigma.  J Biol Chem . 2020;295:914–925.
Trebak M, Kinet J.P. Calcium signalling in T cells.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2019;19:154–169.
B Cell Receptor Structure and Signaling
Harwood N.E, Batista F.D. Early events in B cell activation.  Annu Rev Immunol
. 2010;28:185–210.
Kurosaki T, Shinohara H, Baba Y. B cell signaling and fate decision.  Ann Rev Immunol
. 2010;28:21–55.
Kwak K, Akkaya M, Pierce S.K. B cell signaling in context.  Nat Immunol . 2019;20:963–969.
∗Reth M. Antigen receptor tail clue.  Nature . 1989;338:383–384 (This was the ﬁrst
identiﬁcation of a key signaling motif called an ITAM, which is important for signaling by the
BCR, the TCR and many other immune receptors.).
Signal Attenuation in Lymphocytes
Acuto O, Di Bartolo V, Michel F. Tailoring T-cell receptor signals by proximal negative
feedback mechanisms.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2008;8:699–712.
O’Leary C.E, Lewis E.L, Oliver P.M. Ubiquitylation as a rheostat for TCR signaling: from
targeted approaches toward global proﬁling.  Front Immunol . 2015;6:618.
Cytokine Receptors
Brenner D, Blaser H, Mak T.W. Regulation of tumour necrosis factor signalling: live or let
die.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2015;15:362–374.
Leonard W.J, Lin J.X, O’Shea J.J. The γc family of cytokines: basic biology to therapeutic
ramiﬁcations.  Immunity . 2019;50:832–850.
Taniguchi K, Karin M. NF-kappaB, inﬂammation, immunity and cancer: coming of age. 
Nat Rev Immunol . 2018;18:309–324.
Chapter 8: Lymphocyte
Development and Antigen
Receptor Gene Rearrangement
Overview of Lymphocyte Development,
Commitment to the B and T Cell Lineages and
Proliferation of Progenitors,
Role of Epigenetic Changes and MicroRNAs in
Lymphocyte Development,
Antigen Receptor Gene Rearrangement and
Expression,
Selection Processes That Shape the B and T
Lymphocyte Repertoires,
Rearrangement of Antigen Receptor Genes in B and T
Lymphocytes,
Germline Organization of Immunoglobulin and T
Cell Receptor Genes,
V(D)J Recombination,
Generation of Diversity in B and T Cells,
B Lymphocyte Development,
Stages of B Lymphocyte Development,
Selection of the Mature B Cell Repertoire,
T Lymphocyte Development,
Role of the Thymus in T Cell Maturation,
Stages of T Cell Maturation,
Selection Processes in the Maturation of MHC-
Restricted αβ T Cells,
γδ T Lymphocytes,
Summary,
Lymphocytes express highly diverse antigen receptors that are
capable of recognizing a wide variety of foreign substances. This
diversity is generated during the development of mature B and T
lymphocytes from precursor cells that do not express antigen
receptors and cannot recognize and respond to antigens. The
process by which lymphocyte progenitors in the thymus and bone
marrow diﬀerentiate into mature lymphocytes that populate
peripheral lymphoid tissues is called lymphocyte development or
lymphocyte maturation. (The terms development and maturation
are used interchangeably in this context.) Maturation is initiated by
signals from cell surface receptors that have two main roles: they
promote the proliferation of progenitors, and they initiate the
rearrangement of antigen receptor genes, which is required for the
development of B and T lymphocytes with diverse antigen
speciﬁcities.
We begin this chapter by considering the process of commitment
to the B and T lymphocyte lineages and discussing some common
principles and mechanisms of lymphocyte development. This is
followed by a description of the processes that are unique to the
development of B cells and then those unique to T cells.
Overview of Lymphocyte Development
The maturation of B and T lymphocytes involves a series of events
that occur in the primary (also called generative or central)
lymphoid organs (Fig. 8.1). These events include the following:
• Commitment of progenitor cells to the B lymphoid or T
lymphoid lineage.
• Proliferation of progenitors and immature commiĴed cells
at speciﬁc early stages of development, providing a large
pool of cells that can generate useful lymphocytes.
• The sequential and ordered rearrangement of antigen
receptor genes and the expression of antigen receptor
proteins. (The terms rearrangement and recombination are
used interchangeably.)
• Selection events that preserve cells that have produced
functional antigen receptor proteins and eliminate
potentially dangerous cells that strongly recognize self
antigens. These selection processes during development
ensure that lymphocytes that express functional receptors
with useful speciﬁcities will mature and enter the
peripheral immune system.
• Diﬀerentiation of B and T cells into functionally and
phenotypically distinct subpopulations. B cells develop into
follicular, marginal zone, and B-1 cells, and T cells develop
into CD4+ and CD8+ αβ T lymphocytes, γδ T cells, natural
killer T (NKT) cells, and mucosa-associated invariant T
(MAIT) cells. The properties and functions of these
diﬀerent lymphocyte populations are discussed in later
chapters.
FIGURE 8.1  Stages of lymphocyte
maturation.Development of both B and T
lymphocytes involves the sequence of
maturational stages shown. B cell maturation
is illustrated, but the basic stages of T cell
maturation are similar.
Commitment to the B and T Cell Lineages
and Proliferation of Progenitors
Multipotent stem cells in the fetal liver and bone marrow, known as
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), give rise to all lineages of blood
cells, including lymphocytes (see Chapter 2) . HSCs mature into
common lymphoid progenitors that can give rise to B cells, T cells,
NK cells, and innate lymphoid cells (Fig. 8.2). The maturation of B
cells from progenitors commiĴed to this lineage occurs before birth
in the fetal liver and after birth in the bone marrow, with the ﬁnal
steps being completed in the spleen. Fetal liver–derived stem cells
give rise mainly to a type of B cell called a B-1 cell, whereas bone
marrow–derived HSCs give rise to the majority of circulating B cells
(follicular B cells) and a subset of B cells called marginal zone B
cells. Precursors of T lymphocytes emerge from the fetal liver
before birth and from the bone marrow later in life and circulate to
the thymus, where they complete their maturation. T cells that
express γδ T cell receptors (TCRs) arise from fetal liver HSCs, and
the majority of T cells, which express αβ TCRs, develop from bone
marrow–derived HSCs. In general, the B and T cells that are
generated early in fetal life have less diverse antigen receptors.
Despite their diﬀerent anatomic locations, the early maturation
events of both B and T lymphocytes are fundamentally similar.
Commitment of common lymphoid progenitors to the B or T cell
lineage depends on transcriptional regulators that drive development
toward either B cells or T cells. Key events in the commitment of
precursor cells to the B cell or T cell lineage are expression of the
proteins involved in antigen receptor gene rearrangements,
described later in the chapter, and the generation of accessibility, at
the level of chromatin, of particular antigen receptor gene loci to
these 
proteins. 
In 
the 
case 
of 
developing 
B 
cells, 
the
immunoglobulin (Ig) heavy chain locus, initially in a closed
chromatin conﬁguration, is opened so that it becomes accessible to
the proteins that will mediate Ig gene rearrangement and
expression. In developing αβ T cells, the TCR β gene locus is made
accessible ﬁrst. These changes in the chromatin accessibility of
antigen receptor loci during development are initiated by sets of
lineage-speciﬁc transcription factors.
Numerous transcription factors are involved in the maturation of
T and B cells (see Fig. 8.2). Notch1 and GATA3 commit developing
lymphocytes to the T cell lineage. The Notch family of proteins are
cell surface molecules that are proteolytically cleaved when they
interact with speciﬁc ligands on neighboring cells (see Fig. 7.2). The
cleaved intracellular portions of Notch proteins migrate to the
nucleus and modulate the expression of speciﬁc target genes.
Notch1 is activated in lymphoid progenitor cells, and together with
GATA3 it induces expression of a number of genes that are
required for the further development of αβ T cells. Some of these
genes encode components of the pre-T cell receptor (pre-TCR) and
the RAG1 and RAG2 proteins, which are required for V(D)J
recombination, described later. The EBF, E2A, and PAX5
transcription factors induce the expression of genes required for B
p
p
g
q
cell development. These include genes encoding the RAG1 and
RAG2 proteins, components of the pre-B cell receptor (pre-BCR),
and proteins that contribute to signaling through the pre-BCR and
the BCR. The role of these proteins in T and B cell development will
be considered later in this chapter.
FIGURE 8.2  Multipotent stem cells give rise to
distinct B and T lineages.Hematopoietic stem cells
(HSCs) give rise to distinct progenitors for various
types of blood cells. One of these progenitor
populations (shown here) is called a common
lymphoid progenitor (CLP). CLPs give rise to B
and T cells and also contribute to natural killer
(NK) cells, innate lymphoid cells (ILCs), and some
dendritic cells (not depicted here). Pro-B cells can
eventually differentiate into follicular (FO) B cells,
marginal zone (MZ) B cells, and B-1 cells. Pro-T
cells may commit to either the αβ or γδ T cell
lineages. Commitment to different lineages is
driven by various transcription factors, indicated in
italics.
During B and T cell development, commiĴed progenitor cells
proliferate ﬁrst in response to cytokines and later in response to
signals generated by a pre-antigen receptor that select cells that
have successfully rearranged the ﬁrst set of antigen receptor genes.
Proliferation ensures that a large enough pool of progenitor cells
will be generated to eventually produce a highly diverse repertoire
of mature, antigen-speciﬁc lymphocytes. In mice, widely used for
basic 
research 
of 
lymphocyte 
development, 
the 
cytokine
interleukin-7 (IL-7) drives proliferation of early T and B cell
progenitors; in humans, IL-7 is required for the proliferation of T
cell progenitors but not of progenitors in the B lineage. The factors
that drive the proliferation of human progenitor B cells remain to
be identiﬁed. IL-7 is produced by stromal cells in the bone marrow
and by epithelial and other cells in the thymus. Mice with targeted
mutations in the gene encoding either IL-7 or the IL-7 receptor
show defective maturation of lymphocyte precursors beyond the
earliest stages and, as a result, profound deﬁciencies in mature T
and B cells. Mutations in the human gene encoding the common γ
chain, a protein that is shared by the receptors for several
cytokines, including IL-2, IL-7, and IL-15, give rise to an
immunodeﬁciency disorder called X-linked severe combined
immunodeﬁciency disease (X-SCID) (see Chapter 21). This disease
is characterized by a block in T cell and NK cell development, but
normal B cell development, because IL-7 is required for T cell
development in humans and IL-15 for NK cells.
The greatest proliferative expansion of lymphocyte precursors
occurs after successful rearrangement of the genes encoding one of
the two chains of the T or B cell antigen receptor, producing a pre-
antigen receptor (described later). Signals generated by pre-antigen
receptors are responsible for far greater proliferation of developing
lymphocytes (which have successfully rearranged the Ig heavy
chain gene or the TCR β chain gene, as the case may be) than the
earlier proliferation driven by cytokines such as IL-7.
Role of Epigenetic Changes and MicroRNAs
in Lymphocyte Development
Many nuclear events in lymphocyte development are regulated by
epigenetic mechanisms. Epigenetics refers to the control of gene
expression and phenotypes by mechanisms other than changes in
the coding sequences themselves. In developing lymphocytes,
epigenetic mechanisms also control antigen receptor gene
rearrangement events. DNA exists in chromosomes tightly bound
to histones and nonhistone proteins, forming what is known as
chromatin. DNA in chromatin is wound around a protein core of
histone octamers, forming structures called nucleosomes, which
may be either well separated from other nucleosomes or densely
packed. Chromatin may therefore exist as relatively loosely packed
structures, called euchromatin, wherein genes can be accessed by
transcription factors and are transcribed, or as tightly packed
heterochromatin in which genes are maintained in a silenced state.
The structural organization of portions of chromosomes varies in
diﬀerent cells, making certain genes available for transcription
factors to bind to, while these very same genes may be unavailable
to transcription factors in other cells. Epigenetic mechanisms
regulate the accessibility and activity of genes by inducing changes
in promoter and enhancer regions of genes. These changes include:
the methylation of DNA on certain cytosine residues that generally
silences genes; post-translational modiﬁcations of the histone tails
of nucleosomes (e.g., acetylation, methylation, and ubiquitination)
that may render genes either active or inactive depending on the
histone modiﬁed and the nature of the modiﬁcation; active
remodeling of chromatin by protein machines called remodeling
complexes that can also either enhance or suppress gene
expression; and the silencing of gene expression by noncoding
RNAs.
Some critical components of lymphocyte development are
regulated by epigenetic mechanisms.
• Histone modiﬁcations in antigen receptor gene loci are
required for recruitment of proteins that mediate gene
recombination to form functional antigen receptor genes.
This process is discussed later in the chapter.
• Commitment of developing T cells to the CD4 or CD8
lineage depends on epigenetic mechanisms that silence the
expression of the CD4 gene in CD8+ T cells. Silencing
involves chromatin modiﬁcations that place the CD4 gene
into an inaccessible heterochromatin state.
• In Chapter 7, we discussed microRNAs (miRNAs) in the
context of T cell activation. They contribute in signiﬁcant
ways to modulating gene and protein expression during
development as well. As mentioned in Chapter 7, Dicer is a
key enzyme in miRNA generation. Deletion of Dicer in the
T lineage results in a preferential loss of regulatory T cells
and the consequent development of an autoimmune
phenotype similar to that seen in the absence of FOXP3
(discussed in Chapters 15 and 21). The loss of Dicer in the B
lineage results in a block at the pro-B to pre-B cell transition
(discussed in more detail later), primarily due to enhanced
apoptosis of pre-B cells. Gene ablation studies have
revealed that many speciﬁc miRNAs are involved in
lymphocyte development.
Antigen Receptor Gene Rearrangement and
Expression
The rearrangement of antigen receptor genes is an essential event in
lymphocyte development, and this process is responsible for the
generation of a diverse adaptive immune repertoire. As we discussed
in previous chapters, each clone of B or T lymphocytes produces an
antigen receptor with a unique antigen-binding structure. In any
individual, there may be 107 to 109 diﬀerent B and T lymphocyte
clones, each with a unique receptor. The ability of each individual
to generate these large and diverse lymphocyte repertoires has
evolved in such a way that a fairly small number of genes can give
rise to a vast number of distinct Ig and TCR molecules, each
capable of binding to a diﬀerent antigen. Functional antigen
receptor genes are produced in immature B cells in the bone
marrow and in immature T cells in the thymus by a process of gene
rearrangement. In this process, segments of antigen receptor genes
are randomly recombined and nucleotide sequence variations are
introduced at the joints, resulting in the production of a large
number 
of 
variable 
region–encoding 
exons. 
The 
DNA
rearrangement events that lead to the production of antigen
receptors are not dependent on or inﬂuenced by the presence of
antigens. In other words, as the clonal selection hypothesis had
proposed, diverse antigen receptors are generated and expressed
before encounter with antigens (see Fig. 1.7). We will discuss the
molecular details of antigen receptor gene rearrangement later in
this chapter.
Selection Processes That Shape the B and T
Lymphocyte Repertoires
The process of lymphocyte development contains numerous steps,
called checkpoints, at which the developing cells are tested and
continue to mature only if a preceding step in the process has been
successfully completed. One of these developmental checkpoints is
based on the successful production of one of the polypeptide
chains of the two-chain antigen receptor protein, and a second
checkpoint requires the second chain and thus assembly of a
complete 
receptor. 
The 
requirement 
for 
traversing 
these
developmental checkpoints is a quality control mechanism that
ensures that only lymphocytes that produce complete antigen
receptors and are therefore likely to be functional are selected to
mature. Additional selection processes operate after antigen
receptors are expressed and serve to eliminate potentially harmful,
self-reactive lymphocytes and to commit developing cells to
particular lineages. (Note that the term checkpoints is also used to
describe very diﬀerent phenomena in the context of peripheral
immune activation and cancer immunotherapy [see Chapter 18]).
We will next summarize the general principles of these events.
Pre-antigen receptors and antigen receptors deliver signals to
developing lymphocytes that are required for the survival of these
cells and for their proliferation and continued maturation (Fig. 8.3) .
Pre-antigen receptors, called pre-BCRs in B cells and pre-TCRs in T
cells, are signaling structures expressed during B and T cell
development that contain only one of the two polypeptide chains
present in a mature antigen receptor. Cells of the B lymphocyte
lineage that successfully rearrange their Ig heavy chain genes
express the µ heavy chain protein and assemble a pre-BCR. In an
analogous fashion, developing T cells that make a successful TCR β
chain gene rearrangement synthesize the TCR β chain protein and
assemble a pre-TCR. The assembled pre-BCR and pre-TCR form
complexes with proteins that generate signals for survival,
proliferation, and the phenomenon of allelic exclusion (discussed
later), and for the further development of B and T cells. Because of
the random addition of nucleotides at junctions between segments
of antigen receptor genes that are joined together during
lymphocyte development and the triplet base pair code for
determining amino acids, only about one in three antigen receptor
gene rearrangements is in frame and, therefore, capable of
generating a proper full-length protein. Such a successful
rearrangement is sometimes called a productive rearrangement. If
cells make out-of-frame or nonproductive gene rearrangements at
the Ig µ or TCR β chain loci, the pre-antigen receptors are not
expressed, the cells do not receive necessary survival signals, and
they undergo programmed cell death. Thus, expression of the pre-
antigen receptor is the ﬁrst checkpoint during lymphocyte
development.
In the next step of maturation, developing B and T cells express
complete antigen receptors and the cells are selected for survival.
Lymphocytes that have successfully navigated the pre–antigen
receptor checkpoint go on to rearrange and express genes encoding
the second chain of the BCR or TCR and express the complete
antigen receptor while they are still immature. At this immature
stage, cells that express useful antigen receptors may be preserved,
and potentially harmful cells that strongly recognize self antigens
may be eliminated or induced to alter their antigen receptors (see
Fig. 8.3).
A process called positive selection facilitates the survival of
potentially useful lymphocytes. In the T cell lineage, positive
selection ensures the maturation of T cells whose receptors
recognize self major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules.
Also, the expression of the coreceptor on a T cell (CD8 or CD4) is
matched to the recognition of the appropriate type of MHC
molecule (class I MHC or class II MHC, respectively). Mature T cells
whose precursors were positively selected by self MHC molecules
in the thymus are able to recognize foreign peptide antigens
displayed by the same self MHC molecules on antigen-presenting
cells (APCs) in peripheral tissues. In the B cell lineage, positive
selection preserves receptor-expressing cells and is coupled to the
generation of diﬀerent B cell subsets.
FIGURE 8.3  Checkpoints in lymphocyte
maturation.During development, the lymphocytes
that express receptors required for continued
proliferation and maturation are selected to
survive, and cells that do not express functional
receptors die by apoptosis. Positive and negative
selection further preserve cells with useful
specificities. The presence of multiple checkpoints
ensures that only cells with useful receptors
complete their maturation.
Negative selection is the process that eliminates or alters
developing lymphocytes whose antigen receptors bind strongly to
self antigens present in the generative lymphoid organs.
Developing B and T cells are susceptible to negative selection
during a short period after antigen receptors are ﬁrst expressed.
Developing T cells with a high aﬃnity for self antigens are
eliminated by apoptosis, a phenomenon known as clonal deletion.
Strongly self-reactive immature B cells may be induced to make
further Ig gene rearrangements and thus avoid self reactivity. This
phenomenon is called receptor editing. If editing fails, the self-
reactive B cells die, which is also called clonal deletion. Negative
selection of immature lymphocytes is an important mechanism for
maintaining tolerance to many self antigens; this is also called
central tolerance because it develops in the central (generative)
lymphoid organs (see Chapter 15).
With this introduction, we will proceed to a more detailed
discussion of lymphocyte maturation, starting with the key event in
the process, the rearrangement and expression of antigen receptor
genes.
Rearrangement of Antigen Receptor Genes in
B and T Lymphocytes
The genes that encode diverse antigen receptors of individual B and T
lymphocytes are generated by the recombination of diﬀerent variable
(V) region gene segments with diversity (D) and joining (J) gene
segments. 
This 
specialized 
process 
of 
site-speciﬁc 
gene
rearrangement is called V(D)J recombination. Elucidation of the
mechanisms of antigen receptor gene rearrangement, and therefore
of the underlying basis for the generation of lymphocyte diversity,
represents one of the landmark achievements of modern
immunology.
The ﬁrst insights into how millions of diﬀerent antigen receptors
could be generated from a limited amount of coding DNA in the
genome came from analyses of the amino acid sequences of Ig
molecules. These analyses showed that the polypeptide chains of
many diﬀerent antibodies of the same isotype shared identical
sequences at their C-terminal ends (corresponding to the constant
domains of antibody heavy and light chains) but diﬀered
considerably in the sequences at their N-terminal ends that
correspond to the variable domains of antibodies (see Chapter 5).
Contrary to one of the central tenets of molecular genetics,
enunciated 
as 
the 
one 
gene–one 
polypeptide 
hypothesis,
immunologists postulated in 1965 that each antibody chain is
actually encoded by at least two genes, one variable and the other
constant, and that the two are physically combined at the level of
DNA or of messenger RNA (mRNA) to eventually give rise to
functional Ig proteins. Formal proof of this hypothesis came more
than a decade later when Susumu Tonegawa demonstrated that the
structure of Ig genes in the cells of an antibody-producing tumor,
called a myeloma or plasmacytoma, is diﬀerent from that in
embryonic tissues or in nonlymphoid tissues not commiĴed to Ig
production. These diﬀerences arise because DNA segments
encoding Ig heavy and light chains are separated within the
inherited (or germline) loci and are brought together and joined
only in developing B cells but not in other tissues or cell types.
Similar rearrangements were found to occur during T cell
development in the loci encoding the polypeptide chains of TCRs.
Antigen receptor gene rearrangement is best understood by ﬁrst
describing the inherited unrearranged (germline) organization of
Ig and TCR genes and then describing their rearrangement during
lymphocyte maturation.
Germline Organization of Immunoglobulin
and T Cell Receptor Genes
Germline Ig and TCR genes are composed of multiple DNA segments
that are spatially separate in all cells and are combined in
developing lymphocytes. We will ﬁrst describe the Ig loci and then
the TCR loci.
Organization of Immunoglobulin Gene Loci
Three separate loci encode, respectively, all of the Ig heavy chains,
the Ig κ light chain, and the Ig λ light chain. Each locus is on a
diﬀerent chromosome. The organization of human Ig genes is
illustrated in Fig. 8.4. Ig genes are organized in essentially the same
way in all mammals, although their chromosomal locations and the
number and order of diﬀerent gene segments in each locus may
vary.
At the 5′ end of each Ig locus, there is a cluster of variable (V)
gene segments, each about 300 base pairs long. The numbers of
functional V gene segments vary considerably among the diﬀerent
Ig loci and among diﬀerent species. For example, in humans there
are about 35 functional V gene segments in the κ light chain locus,
about 30 in the λ locus, and about 45 in the heavy chain locus;
whereas in mice, there are about 30 functional V gene segments in
the κ locus, only two in the λ light chain locus, and about 250 in the
heavy chain locus. In both species V gene segments for each locus
are spaced over large stretches of DNA, up to 2000 kilobases long.
Located 5′ of each V gene segment is a leader exon that encodes the
20 to 30 N-terminal residues of the translated protein. These
residues are moderately hydrophobic and make up the leader (or
signal) peptide. Signal sequences are found in all newly synthesized
secreted and transmembrane proteins and are involved in guiding
nascent polypeptides being translated on ribosomes to bind to a
cytosolic complex that docks these speciﬁc ribosomes onto the
endoplasmic reticulum membrane to allow protein translocation
into the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum. Here the signal
sequences are rapidly cleaved, and they are not present in the
mature proteins. Upstream of each leader exon is a V gene segment
promoter at which transcription can be initiated, but as discussed
later, this occurs most eﬃciently after rearrangement.
FIGURE 8.4  Germline organization of human
immunoglobulin gene loci.The human heavy chain,
κ light chain, and λ light chain genes are shown.
Only functional gene segments are shown;
pseudogenes have been omitted for simplicity.
Exons and introns are not drawn to scale. Each
CH gene is shown as a single box but is
composed of several exons, as illustrated for Cμ.
Gene segments are indicated as follows: C,
constant; D, diversity; enh, enhancer; J, joining; L,
leader (often called signal sequence); V, variable.
In this and in subsequent figures, the tubular
structures depict double-stranded segments of
chromosomes, with the 5′ and 3′ ends referring to
the coding strands.
At varying distances 3′ of the V gene segments are several joining
(J) segments that are typically 30 to 50 base pairs long and are
separated by noncoding sequences. Between the V and J segments
in the Ig heavy chain (IgH) locus, there are additional segments
known as diversity (D) segments. D segments are not found in Ig
light chain loci. Like V gene segments, the numbers of D and J
segments vary in diﬀerent Ig loci and diﬀerent species.
The constant (C) region genes are located 3′ of the J segments.
Each Ig locus has a distinct arrangement and number of C region
genes. In humans, the Ig κ light chain locus has a single C gene
(Cκ), and the λ light chain locus has four functional C genes (Cλ).
The Ig heavy chain locus has nine C genes (CH), arranged in a
tandem array, that encode the C regions of the nine diﬀerent Ig
isotypes and subtypes (see Chapter 5). The Cκ and Cλ genes are
each composed of a single exon that encodes the entire C domain of
the light chains. In contrast, each CH gene is composed of ﬁve or six
exons. Three or four exons (each similar in size to a V gene
segment) each encode a CH domain of the Ig heavy chain, and two
smaller exons code for the carboxy-terminal ends of the membrane
form of each Ig heavy chain, including the transmembrane and
cytoplasmic domains of the heavy chains (Fig. 8.5A).
The V, J, and D (if present) gene segments are brought together
to create the coding sequence for the variable domains of antibody
chains (see Fig. 8.5A). In an Ig light chain protein (κ or λ), the V
domain is encoded by the rearranged V and J gene segments; in the
Ig heavy chain protein, the V domain is encoded by the recombined
V, D, and J gene segments. In the case of Ig heavy chain V domains,
the non-germline junctional residues between the rearranged V and
D segments and the D and J segments, as well as the germline
sequences of the D and J segments themselves, make up the third
hypervariable region, also known as complementarity-determining
region 3 (CDR3) (see Chapter 5). The junctional sequences between
the rearranged V and J segments as well as the J segment itself
make up the third hypervariable region of Ig light chains. CDR1
and CDR2 are encoded in the V gene segment only.
A complete Ig light chain or heavy chain protein contains a V
domain encoded by a rearranged VJ or VDJ exon, fused to a C
domain or domains. The apposition of Ig V and C domains does not
occur at the level of DNA rearrangement but by RNA-splicing of
the rearranged Ig gene transcript.
Noncoding sequences in the Ig loci play important roles in
recombination and gene expression. As we will see later, sequences
that dictate recombination of diﬀerent gene segments are found
adjacent to each coding segment in Ig genes. Also present are V
gene promoters and other cis-acting regulatory elements, such as
locus control regions, enhancers, and silencers, which regulate gene
expression at the level of transcription.
FIGURE 8.5  Domains of immunoglobulin and T cell
receptor proteins.The domains of immunoglobulin
(Ig) heavy and light chains are shown in A, and
the domains of T cell receptor (TCR) α and β
chains are shown in B. The relationships between
the Ig and TCR gene segments and the domain
structure of the antigen receptor polypeptide
chains are indicated. The V and C regions of each
polypeptide are encoded by different gene
segments. The locations of intrachain and
interchain disulfide bonds (S-S) are approximate.
Areas in the dashed boxes are the hypervariable
(complementarity-determining) regions. In the Ig μ
chain and the TCR α and β chains,
transmembrane (TM) and cytoplasmic (CYT)
domains are encoded by separate exons. C,
Carboxy termini; N, amino termini.
FIGURE 8.6  Germline organization of human T cell
receptor gene loci.The human T cell receptor
(TCR) β, α, γ, and δ chain genes are shown, as
indicated. Exons and introns are not drawn to
scale, and nonfunctional pseudogenes are not
shown. Each C gene is shown as a single box but
is composed of several exons, as illustrated for
Cβ1. Gene segments are indicated as follows: C,
constant; D, diversity; enh, enhancer; J, joining; L,
leader (usually called signal sequence); sil,
silencer (sequences that regulate TCR gene
transcription); V, variable.
Organization of T Cell Receptor Gene Loci
Each germline TCR locus is arranged in a very similar way to the Ig
loci described earlier, with a 5′ cluster of several V gene segments,
followed by D segments (in the β and δ loci only), followed by a
cluster of J segments, all upstream of C region genes (Fig. 8.6). In
the human β locus there are about 50 V, 2 D, and 12 J gene
segments, and in the α locus there are 45 V and 50 J segments. The
γ and δ loci overall have fewer gene segments than the α and β loci,
with a total of only 7 V genes. Upstream of each TCR V gene
segment is an exon that encodes a leader peptide, and upstream of
each leader exon is a promoter for each V gene segment. In the TCR
β and δ proteins, the V domain is encoded by the V, D, and J gene
segments, and in the TCR α and γ proteins, the V domain is
encoded by the V and J gene segments. In all these V domains,
CDR1 and CDR2 are encoded by germline sequences within V gene
segments. CDR3 in each TCR β and TCR δ chain is encoded by a D
and a J segment as well as non-germline junctional sequences that
are added between the V, D, and J segments. CDR3 in each α and γ
chain is encoded by non-germline junctional sequences between
the V and J segment and by the J segment itself. There are two C
genes in each of the human TCR β and TCR γ loci, but only one is
used in any T cell clone, and each of the two has its own associated
5′ cluster of J segments. There is only one C gene in each of the α
and δ loci. Each TCR C region gene is composed of four exons
encoding the extracellular C region Ig domain, a short hinge region,
the transmembrane segment, and the cytoplasmic tail.
The 
relationship 
of 
the 
TCR 
gene 
segments 
and 
the
corresponding portions of TCR proteins that they encode is shown
in Fig. 8.5B.
V(D)J Recombination
The germline organization of Ig and TCR loci described in the
preceding section exists in all cell types in the body. The germline
genes cannot be transcribed into mRNAs that encode functional
antigen receptor proteins. Functional antigen receptor genes are
created only in developing B and T lymphocytes after DNA
rearrangement brings randomly chosen V, D (if present), and J
gene segments into contiguity.
The process of V(D)J recombination at any Ig or TCR locus
involves the rearrangement of one V gene segment, one D segment
(only in Ig heavy chain and TCR β and δ chain loci), and one J
segment in each lymphocyte to form a single V(D)J exon that will
code for the variable region of an antigen receptor protein (Fig. 8.7) .
In the Ig light chain and TCR α and γ loci, which lack D segments, a
single rearrangement event joins a randomly selected V gene
segment to a randomly selected J segment. The Ig H and TCR β and
δ loci contain D segments, and at these loci two sequential
rearrangement events are needed, ﬁrst joining a D to a J and then a
V segment to the fused DJ segment, with each segment type
randomly selected from the inherited group of V, D, or J segments.
Each rearrangement event involves a number of steps. First, the
chromatin is opened in speciﬁc regions of the chromosome to make
antigen receptor gene segments accessible to the enzymes that
mediate recombination. Next, two selected gene segments are
brought next to one another across a considerable chromosomal
distance. Double-stranded breaks are then introduced at the coding
ends of these two segments, nucleotides are added or removed at
the broken ends, and ﬁnally the processed ends are ligated to
produce antigen receptor genes that can be eﬃciently transcribed.
The C regions lie downstream of the rearranged V(D)J exon
separated by the germline J-C intron. This rearranged gene is
transcribed to form a primary (nuclear) RNA transcript.
Subsequent RNA splicing brings together the leader exon, the
V(D)J exon, and the C region exons, forming an mRNA that can be
translated to produce one of the chains of the antigen receptor. The
use of diﬀerent combinations of V, D, and J gene segments and the
addition and removal of nucleotides at the junctions contribute to
the tremendous diversity of antigen receptors, as we will discuss in
more detail later. Also, because the gene segment combinations
and the junctions between them are diﬀerent in each developing B
or T lymphocyte, each cell and its clonal progeny produce a distinct
antigen receptor.
FIGURE 8.7  An overview of V(D)J
recombination.Only a small number of V, D, and J
gene segments are shown for simplicity.
Recognition Signals That Drive V(D)J Recombination
Lymphocyte-speciﬁc proteins that mediate V(D)J recombination
recognize DNA sequences called recombination signal sequences
(RSSs) that are located 3′ of each V gene segment, 5′ of each J
segment, and ﬂanking each side of every D segment (Fig. 8.8A) . The
RSSs consist of a conserved stretch of 7 nucleotides, called the
heptamer, usually CACAGTG, located adjacent to the coding
sequence, followed by a spacer of either 12 or 23 non-conserved
nucleotides, followed by a conserved AT-rich stretch of 9
nucleotides, called the nonamer. Speciﬁc residues in the heptamer
and nonamer contribute to the binding of the recombinase enzyme
that mediates joining that will be described in the next section. The
12- and 23-nucleotide spacers roughly correspond to one or two
turns of a DNA helix, respectively, and they ensure that two
distinct RSSs, each adjacent to a diﬀerent type of coding gene
segment, are brought close to one another for recombination, as
discussed in the following section.
During V(D)J recombination, double-strand breaks are generated
between the heptamer of the RSS and the adjacent V, D, or J coding
sequence. In Ig light chain V-to-J recombination, for example,
breaks will be made 3′ of a V segment and 5′ of a J segment. The
intervening DNA, containing signal ends (the ends that contain the
heptamer and the rest of the RSS), is removed in the form of a
circle, and the V and J coding ends are joined (Fig. 8.8B). In some V
gene segments, especially in the Ig κ locus, the RSSs are 3′ of a Vκ
and 3′ of Jκ, and therefore do not face each other. In these cases, the
intervening DNA is inverted and the V and J segments are properly
aligned; the fused RSSs are not deleted but retained in the
chromosome (Fig. 8.8C). Most Ig and TCR gene rearrangements
occur by deletion; inversion is the basis of up to 50% of
rearrangements in the Ig κ locus. Recombination occurs between
two segments only if one of the segments is ﬂanked by a 12-
nucleotide spacer and the other is ﬂanked by a 23-nucleotide
spacer. This is called the 12/23 rule. Thus, the location of ﬂanking
RSSs ensures that the appropriate gene segments will recombine.
For example, in the Ig heavy chain locus, the RSSs ﬂanking both V
and J segments have 23-nucleotide spacers (two turns of the DNA
helix) and therefore cannot join directly; D-to-J recombination
occurs ﬁrst, followed by V-to-DJ recombination. This is possible
because the D segments are ﬂanked on both sides by 12-nucleotide
spacers, allowing D-J and then V-DJ joining. The RSSs described
here are unique to Ig and TCR genes. Therefore, V(D)J
recombination can occur in antigen receptor genes but not in other
genes.
One of the consequences of V(D)J recombination is that the
process brings promoters located immediately 5′ of V genes close to
downstream enhancers that are located in the introns between J
and C segments and also 3′ of the C region genes (Fig. 8.9). These
enhancers maximize the transcriptional activity of the V gene
p
y
g
promoters and are thus important for high-level transcription of
rearranged V genes in lymphocytes. Because Ig and TCR genes are
sites for multiple DNA recombination events in B and T cells, and
because 
these 
sites 
become 
transcriptionally 
active 
after
recombination, genes from other loci can be abnormally
translocated to these loci and, as a result, may be aberrantly
transcribed. In tumors of B and T lymphocytes, oncogenes are often
translocated to Ig or TCR gene loci. Such chromosomal
translocations 
are 
frequently 
accompanied 
by 
enhanced
transcription of the oncogenes and are a major mechanism leading
to the development of lymphoid tumors.
FIGURE 8.8  V(D)J recombination.The DNA
sequences and mechanisms involved in
recombination in the immunoglobulin (Ig) gene loci
are depicted. The same sequences and
mechanisms apply to recombinations in the T cell
receptor (TCR) loci. A, Conserved heptamer (7
bp) and nonamer (9 bp) sequences, separated by
12- or 23-bp spacers, are located adjacent to V
and J segments (for κ and λ loci) or to V, D, and J
segments (in the H chain locus). The V(D)J
recombinase recognizes these recombination
signal sequences and brings the exons together.
B and C, Recombination of V and J exons may
occur by deletion of intervening DNA and ligation
of the V and J segments (B) or, if the RSS is 3′ of
a J segment, by inversion of the DNA followed by
ligation of adjacent gene segments (C). Red
arrows indicate the sites where germline
sequences are cleaved before their ligation to
other Ig or TCR gene segments.
FIGURE 8.9  Transcriptional regulation of
immunoglobulin genes.V(D)J recombination brings
inactive promoter sequences (shown as P) close
to the enhancer (enh). The enhancer promotes
transcription of the rearranged V gene (V2, whose
active promoter is indicated by a bold blue
arrow). Several receptor genes have an enhancer
in the J-C intron and another 3′ of the C region.
Only the 3′ enhancer is depicted here.
Mechanism of V(D)J Recombination
Rearrangement of Ig and TCR genes represents a special kind of
nonhomologous DNA recombination event that is mediated by the
coordinated activities of several enzymes. Some of these enzymes
are found only in developing lymphocytes, whereas others are
ubiquitous DNA double-stranded break repair (DSBR) enzymes.
Although the mechanism of V(D)J recombination is fairly well
understood and will be described here, how exactly speciﬁc loci are
made accessible to the machinery involved in recombination
remains to be determined. It is likely that the accessibility of the Ig
and TCR loci to the enzymes that mediate recombination is
regulated in developing B and T cells by several mechanisms,
including epigenetic alterations in chromatin structure and basal
transcriptional activity in the gene loci. There are two main steps
involved in achieving accessibility. First, only RSSs that are located
in open euchromatin in a speciﬁc cell type will be exposed to
recombination enzymes. For example, the IgH, Igκ, and Igλ loci will
be exposed in a B cell but not in a developing T cell. Secondly,
within this open euchromatin state, gene segments that are actually
undergoing recombination acquire additional histone marks, such
as the hypermethylation of lysine 4 on histone 3 (H3K4). This
modiﬁcation speciﬁcally facilitates recruitment of enzymes, as
discussed shortly.
The process of V(D)J recombination can be divided into four
distinct sequential events (Fig. 8.10):
1. Synapsis. Synapsis refers to the process by which two distant
selected coding segments and their adjacent RSSs that have
acquired speciﬁc histone marks are brought together by a
chromosomal looping event and held in position for
subsequent cleavage, processing, and joining.
2. Cleavage. A lymphocyte-speciﬁc enzyme called the V(D)J
recombinase creates double-stranded breaks at RSS-coding
sequence junctions. The V(D)J recombinase is composed of
two molecules each of two diﬀerent proteins called RAG1
and RAG2. These proteins are encoded by lymphoid-speciﬁc
genes, called recombination-activating gene 1 and
recombination-activating gene 2 (RAG1 and RAG2),
respectively. This RAG1/RAG2 complex is required for
V(D)J recombination, but only RAG1 possesses catalytic
activity. The RAG2 protein binds to hypermethylated H3K4
sites in chromatin and associates with and activates RAG1.
The RAG1 protein, in a manner similar to a bacterial
restriction endonuclease, recognizes the DNA sequence at
the junction between a heptamer and a coding segment, but
it is enzymatically active only when complexed with the
RAG2 protein. RAG1 then makes a nick (on one DNA
strand) between the coding end and the heptamer. The
released 3′ OH of the coding end then aĴacks a
phosphodiester bond on the other DNA strand, forming a
covalent hairpin. The signal end (including the heptamer
and the rest of the RSS) does not form a hairpin and is
generated as a blunt double-strand DNA terminus that
undergoes no further processing. This double-strand break
results in a closed hairpin of one coding segment being held
in apposition to the closed hairpin of the other coding end
and two blunt recombination signal ends being placed next
to each other. RAG1 and RAG2, in addition to generating
the double-strand breaks, also hold the hairpin ends and the
blunt ends together before the modiﬁcation of the coding
ends and the process of ligation begins.
RAG genes are expressed only in developing B and T cells.
RAG proteins are produced mainly in the G0 and G1 stages of
the cell cycle and are inactivated in proliferating cells. It is
thought that limiting DNA cleavage and recombination to the
G0 and G1 stages minimizes the risk for generating
inappropriate DNA breaks during DNA replication or during
mitosis. Mice without functional Rag1 or Rag2 genes (Rag
knockout mice) fail to develop B or T lymphocytes, and RAG1
or RAG2 mutations are a cause of SCID, in which patients lack
B and T lymphocytes (see Chapter 21).
FIGURE 8.10  Sequential events during V(D)J
recombination.Synapsis and cleavage of DNA
at the heptamer/coding segment boundary
are mediated by Rag-1 and Rag-2. The
coding end hairpin is opened by the
ARTEMIS endonuclease, and broken ends
are repaired by the nonhomologous end
joining machinery present in all cells. Note
that the two strands of DNA are shown in the
hairpins but not in other schematic
illustrations of genes.
3. Hairpin opening and end processing. After the formation of
double-strand breaks, hairpins must be opened at the
coding junctions, and nucleotides may be added to or
removed from the coding ends to create even greater
diversiﬁcation. ARTEMIS is an endonuclease that opens up
the hairpins at the coding ends. In the absence of ARTEMIS,
hairpins cannot be opened and mature T and B cells cannot
be generated. Mutations in ARTEMIS are a rare cause of
SCID, similar to patients with RAG1 or RAG2 mutations (see
Chapter 21). A lymphoid-speciﬁc enzyme, called terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT), adds nucleotides to
broken DNA ends and will be discussed later in the context
of junctional diversity.
4. Joining. The broken coding ends as well as the signal ends
(the ends that terminate in noncoding RSS sequences) are
brought together and ligated by a double-strand break
repair process found in all cells that is called
nonhomologous end joining. A number of ubiquitous
proteins participate in nonhomologous end joining. KU70
and KU80 are DNA end-binding proteins that bind to the
breaks and recruit the catalytic subunit of DNA-dependent
protein kinase (DNA-PK), a DNA repair enzyme. Mutations
aﬀecting DNA-PK result in a failure to produce mature B
and T lymphocytes, causing SCID in mice and humans (see
Chapter 21). DNA-PK also phosphorylates and activates
ARTEMIS, which, as mentioned before, is involved in end
processing. Ligation of the processed broken ends is
mediated by DNA ligase IV and XRCC4, the laĴer being a
noncatalytic but essential subunit of the ligase.
Generation of Diversity in B and T Cells
The diversity of the B and T cell repertoires is created by random
combinations of germline gene segments being joined together and by
the addition or deletion of sequences at the junctions between these
segments. Several genetic mechanisms contribute to this diversity
(Fig. 8.11 and Table 8.1).
• Combinatorial diversity. Diﬀerent combinations of gene
segments united by V(D)J recombination encode antigen
receptors with diﬀerent antigen-binding sites. The maximum
possible number of combinations of these gene segments is
the product of the numbers of V, J, and (if present) D gene
segments at each antigen receptor locus. Therefore, the
amount of combinatorial diversity that can be generated at
each locus reﬂects the number of germline V, J, and D gene
segments at that locus. After synthesis of antigen receptor
proteins, combinatorial diversity is further enhanced by the
juxtaposition of two diﬀerent, randomly generated V
regions (i.e., VH and VL in Ig molecules and Vα and Vβ in
TCR molecules). Therefore, the total combinatorial diversity
is theoretically the product of the combinatorial diversity of
each of the two associating chains. The actual degree of
combinatorial diversity in the expressed Ig and TCR
repertoires in any individual is likely to be considerably less
than the theoretical maximum. This is because not all
combinations of gene segments are equally likely to occur
and not all pairings of Ig heavy and light chains or TCR α
and β chains may form functional antigen receptors.
Importantly, because the numbers of V, D, and J segments
in each locus are limited (see Table 8.1), the maximum
possible numbers of combinations are on the order of 1 to 3
million (the upper limit of combinatorial diversity). This is
much less than the actual diversity of antigen receptors in
mature lymphocytes.
FIGURE 8.11  Diversity of antigen receptor
genes.The figure shows the two mechanisms
that give rise to the diversity of antigen
receptors—combinations of different V, D,
and J gene segments and addition or removal
of nucleotides at the joints. Although different
V-D-J combinations and addition of N/P
nucleotides are shown separately, to
emphasize the different contributions of
combinatorial and junctional diversity, both
processes occur at the same time during
rearrangement of gene segments. Not shown
is removal of nucleotides, which also occurs
simultaneously and contributes to more
junctional diversity. The figure illustrates a
few distinct antigen receptor genes produced
by these mechanisms, but the total diversity
is enormous (see Table 8.1).
• Junctional diversity. The largest contribution to the diversity
of antigen receptors is made by the addition or removal of
nucleotides at the junctions of the V and D, D and J, or V and
J segments at the time these segments are joined. One way in
which this can occur is if endonucleases remove nucleotides
from the germline sequences at the ends of the
recombining gene segments. In addition, new nucleotide
sequences, not present in the germline, may be added at
junctions (Fig. 8.12). As described earlier, coding segments
(e.g., V and J gene segments) that are cleaved by RAG1
form hairpin loops. Each hairpin DNA is nicked (cleavage
of a single DNA strand) asymmetrically by the enzyme
ARTEMIS so that the hairpin is opened and one DNA
strand is then longer than its complementary strand. The
shorter strand has to be extended with nucleotides
complementary to the longer strand before the two coding
segments can be ligated. The longer strand thus serves as a
template for the addition of short lengths of new
nucleotides called P nucleotides, and this process
introduces new sequences at the V-D-J junctions. Another
mechanism of junctional diversity is the random addition of
up to 20 non-template-encoded nucleotides called N
nucleotides (see Fig. 8.12). N region diversiﬁcation is more
common in Ig heavy chains and in TCR β and γ chains than
in Ig κ or λ chains. This addition of new nucleotides is
mediated by the enzyme TdT. In mice rendered deﬁcient in
TdT by gene knockout, the diversity of B and T cell
repertoires is substantially less than in normal mice. The
addition of P nucleotides and N nucleotides at the
recombination sites may introduce frameshifts,
theoretically generating termination codons in two of every
three joining events (if the total number of added bases is
not a multiple of three). These genes cannot produce
functional proteins, but such ineﬃciency is the price that is
paid for generating diversity.
Because of junctional diversity, antibody and TCR molecules show
the greatest variability at the junctions of V and C regions, which
form the third hypervariable region, or CDR3 (see Fig. 8.5) . In fact,
because of junctional diversity, the numbers of diﬀerent amino acid
sequences that are present in the CDR3 regions of Ig and TCR
molecules are much greater than the numbers that can be encoded
by germline gene segments. As expected, the CDR3 regions of Ig
and TCR molecules are also the most important portions of these
molecules for determining the speciﬁcity of antigen binding (see
Chapters 5 and 7).
TABLE 8.1
The potential number of antigen receptors with junctional diversity is much greater than the
number that can be generated only by combinations of V, D, and J gene segments. The
calculated figures for lymphocyte repertoire magnitudes should be considered very gross
approximations. The calculations for the Ig repertoire do not account for the phenomenon of
somatic hypermutation, which will be discussed in Chapter 12.
Although the theoretical limit to the number of Ig and TCR
proteins that can be produced is enormous (see Table 8.1), the
actual number of antigen receptors on B or T cells expressed in each
individual at any one point in time is probably on the order of only
107 or 108. This is largely a reﬂection of the ﬁnite number of
lymphocytes that an individual can accommodate at any time.
There are a number of clinical applications of our knowledge of
junctional diversity. One is the determination of the clonality of
lymphoid tumors that arise from B or T cells. This laboratory test is
used to identify monoclonal tumors of lymphocytes and to
distinguish tumors from polyclonal proliferations. Because every
lymphocyte clone expresses a unique antigen receptor CDR3
region, the sequence of nucleotides at the V(D)J recombination site
serves as a speciﬁc marker for each clone. Thus, by determining the
sequence of the junctional regions of Ig or TCR genes in diﬀerent B
or T cell proliferations, one can establish whether these lesions
arose from a single clone (indicating a tumor) or independently
from diﬀerent clones (implying nonneoplastic proliferation of
lymphocytes). The same method may be used to identify small
numbers of tumor cells in the blood or tissues. Other applications
include analyzing CDR3 sequences of T and B cells in infectious
and autoimmune diseases and tumor-inﬁltrating lymphocytes in
cancers to determine expansion of some clones during immune
responses (although this method does not indicate what antigens
the clones might recognize).
With this background, we proceed to a discussion of B
lymphocyte development and then the maturation of T cells.
B Lymphocyte Development
The steps in the maturation of B lymphocytes are the rearrangement
and expression of Ig genes in a precise order, selection and
proliferation of developing B cells at the pre-antigen receptor
checkpoint, and selection of the mature B cell repertoire. Before
birth, B lymphocytes develop from commiĴed precursors in the
fetal liver, and after birth, B cells are generated in the bone marrow.
The majority of B lymphocytes arise from adult bone marrow
progenitors that initially do not express Ig. These precursors
develop into immature B cells that express membrane-bound IgM
molecules and then leave the bone marrow to mature further,
mainly in the spleen. IgM-expressing B cells that emerge from the
bone marrow into the peripheral blood in humans are called
transitional B cells, and they exist in three distinguishable stages of
maturation. At the late transitional B cell stages, self-reactive cells
are inactivated or eliminated in the spleen and other secondary
lymphoid organs (see Chapter 15). Eventually the surviving B cells
mature into follicular B cells that express IgM and IgD on the
surface and acquire the ability to recirculate and populate all
secondary lymphoid organs. These follicular B cells home to
lymphoid follicles in secondary lymphoid organs and are able to
recognize and respond to foreign antigens. The development of a
mature B cell from a lymphoid progenitor is estimated to take 2 to 3
days in humans.
Stages of B Lymphocyte Development
During their maturation, cells of the B lymphocyte lineage go
through sequential stages, each characterized by distinct cell surface
markers and a speciﬁc paĴern of Ig gene expression (Fig. 8.13) . The
major stages and the events in each are described next.
The Pro-B and Pre-B Stages of B Cell Development
The earliest bone marrow cell commiĴed to the B cell lineage is the
pro-B cell. Pro-B cells do not produce Ig, but they can be
distinguished from other immature cells by the expression of B
lineage–restricted surface molecules such as CD19 and CD10.
RAG1 and RAG2 proteins are ﬁrst expressed at this stage, and the
ﬁrst recombination of Ig genes occurs at the heavy chain locus. This
recombination brings together one D and one J gene segment, with
deletion of the intervening DNA (Fig. 8.14A). The D segments that
are 3′ of the rearranged D segment, and the J segments that are 5′
of the rearranged J segment are deleted by this recombination (e.g.,
D1 and J2 to J6 in Fig. 8.14A). After the D-J recombination event,
one of the many 5′ V gene segments is joined to the DJ unit, giving
rise to a rearranged VDJ exon. At this stage, all V and D segments
between the rearranged V and D gene segments are also deleted. V-
to-DJ recombination at the Ig heavy chain locus occurs only in
commiĴed B lymphocyte precursors and is a critical event in Ig
expression because only the rearranged V gene is subsequently
transcribed. The TdT enzyme, which catalyzes the addition of
junctional N nucleotides (see Fig. 8.12), is expressed most
abundantly during the pro-B stage when VDJ recombination occurs
at the IgH locus, and levels of TdT decrease before light chain gene
V-J recombination is complete. Therefore, junctional diversity
aĴributed to addition of N nucleotides is more prominent in
rearranged heavy chain genes than in light chain genes.
FIGURE 8.12  Junctional diversity.During the joining
of different gene segments, addition or removal of
nucleotides may lead to the generation of novel
nucleotide and amino acid sequences at the
junction. Nucleotides (P sequences) may be
added to asymmetrically cleaved hairpins in a
templated manner. Other nucleotides (N regions)
may be added to the sites of V-D, V-J, or D-J
junctions in a nontemplated manner by the action
of the enzyme terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase (TdT). These additions generate new
sequences that are not present in the germline.
RSSs, Recombination signal sequences.
FIGURE 8.13  Stages of B cell maturation.Events
corresponding to each stage of B cell maturation
from a bone marrow stem cell to a mature
follicular B lymphocyte are illustrated. “Ongoing”
Ig gene rearrangement implies that at this stage
these are the gene segments being actively
rearranged. “Germline” implies that the gene locus
in question had not been altered by V(D)J
recombination. Several surface markers in
addition to those shown have been used to define
distinct stages of B cell maturation. Maturation of
B-1 and other B cell subsets is not shown. Ig,
Immunoglobulin.
The heavy chain C region exons remain separated from the newly
created VDJ exon by DNA containing the distal J segments and the
J-C intron. The rearranged Ig heavy chain gene is transcribed to
produce a primary transcript that includes the rearranged VDJ exon
and the Cµ exons. The nuclear RNA of the rearranged heavy chain
gene 
is 
cleaved 
downstream 
of 
one 
of 
two 
consensus
polyadenylation sites, and multiple adenine nucleotides, called
poly-A tails, are added to the 3′ end. This nuclear RNA undergoes
splicing, an RNA processing event in which the introns are
removed and exons joined together. In the case of the µ RNA,
introns between the leader exon and the VDJ exon, between the
VDJ exon and the ﬁrst exon of the Cµ locus, and between each of
the subsequent constant region exons of Cµ are removed, thus
giving rise to a spliced mRNA encoding the µ heavy chain. If the
mRNA is derived from an Ig locus at which rearrangement was
productive (in the correct reading frame), translation of the
rearranged µ heavy chain mRNA leads to synthesis of the µ
protein. Approximately half of all pro-B cells make productive
rearrangements at the IgH locus on at least one chromosome and
can thus go on to synthesize the µ heavy chain protein. Only cells
that make productive rearrangements survive and diﬀerentiate
further.
Once a productive Ig µ rearrangement is made, a cell ceases to be
called a pro-B cell and has diﬀerentiated into the pre-B stage. Pre-B
cells are developing B lineage cells that express the Ig µ protein but
have yet to rearrange their light chain loci. The pre-B cell expresses
the µ heavy chain on the cell surface, in association with other
proteins, in a complex called the pre-BCR, which has several
important roles in B cell maturation.
The Pre-B Cell Receptor
Complexes of µ heavy chain, surrogate light chains, and the signal-
transducing proteins Igα and Igβ form the pre-antigen receptor of
the B lineage, known as the pre-BCR. The µ heavy chain associates
with the λ5 and Vpre-B proteins, also called surrogate light chains
because they are structurally homologous to κ and λ light chains
but are invariant (i.e., they are identical in all pre-B cells) and are
synthesized only in pro-B and pre-B cells (Fig. 8.15A). This receptor
associates with the signaling molecules Igα and Igβ (also known as
CD79A and CD79B) to form the pre-BCR complex, similar to the
BCR complex in mature B cells (see Chapter 7). Signals from the
pre-BCR allow the cells to survive and are responsible for the
largest proliferative expansion of B lineage cells during B cell
development. During this proliferation, synthesis of RAG proteins
is transiently shut oﬀ, so Ig gene rearrangement is temporarily
halted. It is not known if the pre-BCR recognizes any ligand; the
consensus view is that this receptor functions in a ligand-
independent manner and that it is activated by the process of
assembly. The importance of pre-BCRs is illustrated by studies of
knockout mice and rare cases of human deﬁciencies of these
receptors. For instance, in mice, engineered deletion of the gene
encoding the µ chain or one of the surrogate light chains results in
markedly reduced numbers of mature B cells because development
is blocked at the pro-B stage.
FIGURE 8.14  Immunoglobulin heavy and light chain
gene recombination and expression.The sequence
of DNA recombination and gene expression
events is shown for the immunoglobulin (Ig) μ
heavy chain (A) and the Ig κ light chain (B). In the
example shown in A, the V region of the μ heavy
chain is encoded by the rearranged V1, D2, and
J1 gene segments. In the example shown in B,
the V region of the κ chain is encoded by the V2
and J1 gene segments.
FIGURE 8.15  Pre-B cell and pre-T cell
receptors.The pre-B cell receptor (pre-BCR) (A)
and the pre-T cell receptor (pre-TCR) (B) are
expressed during the pre-B cell and pre-T cell
stages of maturation, respectively, and the
receptors share similar structures and functions.
The pre-BCR is composed of the μ heavy chain
and an invariant surrogate light chain. The
surrogate light chain is composed of two proteins:
the V pre-B protein, which is homologous to a light
chain V domain, and a λ5 protein that is covalently
attached to the μ heavy chain by a disulfide bond.
The pre-TCR is composed of the TCR β chain
and the invariant pre-T α (pTα) chain. The pre-
BCR is associated with the Igα and Igβ signaling
molecules that are also part of the BCR complex
in mature B cells (see Chapter 9), and the pre-
TCR associates with the CD3 and ζ proteins that
are also part of the TCR complex in mature T
cells (see Chapter 7). Ig, Immunoglobulin.
The expression of the pre-BCR is the ﬁrst checkpoint in B cell
maturation. Numerous signaling molecules linked to the pre-BCR
(and the BCR in mature B cells) are required for cells to successfully
negotiate the pre-BCR–mediated checkpoint at the pro-B to pre-B
cell transition. A kinase called Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK) is
activated downstream of the pre-BCR and is required for delivery of
signals from this receptor that mediate survival, proliferation, and
maturation at and beyond the pre-B cell stage. In humans,
mutations in the BTK gene result in the disease called X-linked
agammaglobulinemia (XLA), which is characterized by a failure of
B cell maturation (see Chapter 21). In a mouse strain called Xid (for
X-linked immunodeﬁciency), mutations in btk result in a less severe
B cell defect because murine pre-B cells express a second Btk-like
kinase called Tec that partially compensates for the defective Btk.
Other molecules upstream and downstream of the BTK signaling
pathway that are required at this checkpoint include the µ heavy
chain gene, the λ5 gene, Igα, Igβ, SYK, the BLNK/SLP65 signaling
adaptor, and the p85 subunit of PI3-kinase. Mutations of these
genes are the causes of rare cases of autosomal recessive
agammaglobulinemia (see Chapter 21).
The pre-BCR regulates further rearrangement of Ig genes in two
ways. First, if a µ protein is produced from the recombined heavy
chain locus on one chromosome and forms a pre-BCR, this receptor
signals to irreversibly inhibit rearrangement of the Ig heavy chain
locus on the other chromosome. If the ﬁrst rearrangement is
nonproductive, the heavy chain allele on the other chromosome can
complete VDJ rearrangement at the IgH locus. Thus, in any B cell
clone, one heavy chain allele is productively rearranged and
expressed and the other is either retained in the germline
conﬁguration or nonproductively rearranged. As a result, an
individual B cell can express an Ig heavy chain protein encoded by
only one of the two inherited alleles. This phenomenon is called
allelic exclusion, and it ensures that every B cell will express a
single receptor, thus maintaining clonal speciﬁcity. Ig heavy chain
allelic exclusion involves changes in chromatin structure in the
heavy chain locus that limit accessibility to the V(D)J recombinase.
If both alleles undergo nonproductive IgH gene rearrangements,
the developing cell cannot produce Ig heavy chains, cannot
generate a pre-BCR–dependent survival signal, and undergoes
programmed cell death. The second way in which the pre-BCR
regulates the production of the antigen receptor is by stimulating κ
light chain gene rearrangement. Pre-B cells proliferate ﬁrst as large
pre-B cells, and then shut oﬀ surrogate light chain gene expression
and become nondividing small pre-B cells that express the µ heavy
chain intracellularly. These nondividing cells synthesize RAG
proteins and are thus able to rearrange their κ light chain genes.
Pre-BCR signals contribute to making the κ light chain locus
available to the enzymes that mediate V(D)J recombination. If an
in-frame rearrangement occurs at the κ locus, the cell will produce a
κ light chain protein, which associates with the previously
synthesized µ chain to produce a complete IgM protein. If the κ
light chain contributes to a self-reactive BCR (see below) or if the κ
locus is not productively rearranged, the cell can rearrange the λ
locus and again produce a complete IgM molecule.
DNA recombination in the κ light chain locus occurs in a similar
manner as in the Ig heavy chain locus (see Fig. 8.14B). There are no
D segments in the light chain loci, and therefore recombination
involves only the joining of one V segment to one J segment,
forming a VJ exon. This VJ exon remains separated from the C
region by an intron, and this separation is retained in the primary
RNA transcript. Splicing of the primary transcript results in the
removal of the intron between the VJ and C exons and generates an
mRNA that is translated to produce the κ or λ protein. In the λ
locus, alternative RNA splicing may lead to the use of any one of
p
g
y
y
the four functional Cλ exons, but there is no known biologic
diﬀerence between the resulting types of λ light chains. Production
of a κ protein prevents λ rearrangement, and λ rearrangement
occurs only if the κ rearrangements in both the inherited κ chain
loci were nonproductive or, more commonly, if the rearranged κ
light chain is deleted by receptor editing because it contributes to
the formation of a self-reactive BCR, discussed later. As a result, an
individual B cell clone can express only one of the two types of light
chains; this phenomenon is called light chain isotype exclusion. As
in the heavy chain locus, a κ or λ gene is expressed from only one of
the two parental chromosomes in any given B cell, and the other
inherited locus is excluded. Also, as for heavy chains, if both
inherited loci for both κ and λ chains are nonfunctionally
rearranged in a developing B cell, that cell fails to receive survival
signals that are normally generated by the BCR and dies.
Immature B Cells
The ﬁrst IgM-expressing cell during B cell development is called an
immature B cell. The assembled IgM molecules on immature B cells
and in all later stages of development are expressed on the cell
surface in association with Igα and Igβ, where they function as
speciﬁc receptors for antigens. The presence of a complete BCR on
the cell surface is essential for a developing B cell to survive. There
are survival signals provided by the BCR alone in the absence of any
triggering antigen, and these are called tonic signals. Assembly of
the complete BCR suﬃces to activate signaling molecules, including
PI3-kinase, that keep the B cell alive. These signals also suppress
RAG 
gene 
expression, 
thus 
preventing 
further 
Ig 
gene
rearrangement. Immature B cells do not proliferate and
diﬀerentiate in response to antigens. In fact, if they recognize
antigens in the bone marrow with high avidity, which may occur if
the B cells express receptors for multivalent self antigens that are
present in the bone marrow, the B cells may undergo receptor
editing or cell death, as described later. These processes are
important for the negative selection of strongly self-reactive B cells.
Immature B cells that are not strongly self-reactive leave the bone
marrow and complete their maturation in the spleen and other
secondary lymphoid organs.
Subsets of Mature B Cells
B cells in the periphery are made up of distinct subsets that develop
from diﬀerent progenitors (Fig. 8.16) . Bone marrow–derived HSCs
give rise to the majority of B cells. These cells, also called B-2 cells,
rapidly pass through two transitional stages and can commit to
development either into marginal zone B cells or into follicular B
cells. B-1 cells represent a distinct lineage that develops from fetal
liver–derived HSCs.
Follicular B Cells
Most mature B cells belong to the follicular B cell subset and produce
membrane-associated IgD in addition to IgM. Each of these B cells
coexpresses µ and δ Ig heavy chains using the same VDJ exon to
generate the V domain. In each B cell these heavy chain proteins
associate with the same κ or λ light chain to produce two
membrane receptors with the same antigen speciﬁcity. Each B cell
produces a long primary RNA transcript containing the rearranged
VDJ unit that encodes the V domain, as well as both the Cµ and Cδ
genes (Fig. 8.17). If the primary transcript is cleaved and
polyadenylated after the µ exons, after RNA splicing the VDJ exon
becomes contiguous with Cµ exons, resulting in the generation of a
µ mRNA. If, however, the VDJ complex is not linked to Cµ exons
but is spliced to Cδ exons, a δ mRNA is produced. Subsequent
translation results in the synthesis of a complete µ or δ heavy chain
protein, both containing the same V region and therefore having
the same speciﬁcity. The precise mechanisms that regulate the
choice of polyadenylation or splice acceptor sites, by which the
rearranged VDJ is joined to either Cµ or Cδ, are poorly understood,
as are the signals that determine when and why a B cell expresses
both IgM and IgD rather than IgM alone.
FIGURE 8.16  B Lymphocyte subsets. A, Most B
cells that develop from fetal liver–derived stem
cells differentiate into the B-1 lineage. B, B
lymphocytes that arise from bone marrow
precursors after birth give rise to the B-2 lineage.
Two major subsets of B lymphocytes are derived
from B-2 B cell precursors. Follicular B cells are
recirculating lymphocytes; marginal zone B cells
are abundant in the spleen in rodents but also can
be found in lymph nodes in humans. CD21 is
expressed on both follicular and marginal zone B
cells, but the levels of this coreceptor are higher
on marginal zone B cells. BM, bone marrow; FL,
fetal liver; HSC, hematopoietic stem cell; Ig,
immunoglobulin.
The coexpression of IgM and IgD is accompanied by the ability to
recirculate and the acquisition of functional competence, and this is
why IgM+IgD+ B cells are also called mature B cells. This correlation
between expression of IgD and acquisition of functional
competence has led to the suggestion that IgD is the essential
activating receptor of mature B cells. However, there is no evidence
for a functional diﬀerence between membrane IgM and membrane
IgD. Moreover, knockout of the Ig δ gene in mice does not have a
signiﬁcant impact on the maturation or antigen-induced responses
of B cells. Follicular B cells are also often called recirculating B cells
because they migrate from one secondary lymphoid organ to the
next, and within these organs they reside in follicles (see Chapter
2).
FIGURE 8.17  Coexpression of immunoglobulin M
and immunoglobulin D.Alternative processing of a
primary RNA transcript results in the formation of
a μ or δ mRNA. Dashed lines indicate the H chain
segments that are joined by RNA splicing.
Naive follicular B cells survive for limited periods until they
encounter antigen. Follicular B cell survival depends on tonic
antigen-independent signals from the BCR as well as stimulation by
a cytokine called BAFF (B cell–activating factor of the TNF family,
also known as BLyS, for B lymphocyte stimulator), which provides
maturation and survival signals through the BAFF receptor. BAFF
and a related ligand, APRIL, also can bind to two other receptors,
TACI and BCMA, which participate in later stages of B cell
activation and diﬀerentiation (and will be discussed in Chapter 12).
These cytokines are produced by specialized ﬁbroblastic reticular
cells and by myeloid cells in lymphoid follicles and in the bone
marrow. Naive follicular B cells, like recirculating naive T cells,
leave lymph nodes through eﬀerent lymphatics, enter the blood,
and return to lymph nodes via high endothelial venules (see
Chapter 3).
Mature, naive B cells are responsive to antigens, and unless the
cells encounter antigens that they recognize with high aﬃnity and
respond to, they die in a few months. In Chapter 12, we will discuss
how these cells respond to antigens and how the paĴern of Ig gene
expression changes during antigen-induced B cell diﬀerentiation.
B-1 and Marginal Zone B Cells
A subset of B lymphocytes, called B-1 cells, expresses antigen
receptors with limited diversity and may serve roles in humoral
immunity that are diﬀerent from those of follicular B cells. B-1 cells
develop from fetal liver–derived HSCs and are best deﬁned in
rodents. Most murine B-1 cells express the CD5 molecule. After
birth, large numbers of these cells are found as a self-renewing
population in the peritoneum and mucosal sites. They develop
earlier during ontogeny than follicular and marginal zone B cells,
express a relatively limited repertoire of V genes, and exhibit far
less junctional diversity than conventional B cells because TdT is
not expressed in developing B-1 cells in the fetal liver. B-1 cells
spontaneously secrete IgM antibodies that often react with
microbial polysaccharides and lipids as well as oxidized lipids
produced by lipid peroxidation; most IgM antibodies against ABO
blood group antigens are derived from B-1 cells. These antibodies
are sometimes called natural antibodies because they are present in
individuals without overt immunization; it is possible that
microbial ﬂora in the gut are the source of antigens that stimulate
their production. B-1 cells contribute to rapid antibody production
against microbes in particular tissues, such as the peritoneum. At
mucosal sites, many IgA-secreting plasma cells in the lamina
propria may be derived from B-1 cells. B-1 cells are analogous to γδ
T cells in that they both have antigen receptor repertoires of limited
diversity and they are both presumed to respond to antigens that
are commonly encountered at epithelial interfaces with the external
environment. B-1–like cells have been described in humans, but
phenotypically this population overlaps with activated B cells,
making human B-1 cells harder to deﬁne.
Marginal zone B cells are located primarily in the vicinity of the
marginal sinus in the spleen and like B-1 cells have limited diversity,
respond to polysaccharide antigens, and produce natural antibodies.
Marginal zone B cells exist in both mice and humans and express
IgM in the absence of IgD and additional surface receptors that
distinguish them from follicular B cells. In humans, marginal zone
B cells cannot be distinguished from IgM-producing memory cells.
In mice, marginal zone B cells exist only in the spleen, whereas in
humans, they can be found in the spleen as well as outside
follicular areas near the periphery of lymph nodes. Marginal zone B
cells 
respond 
very 
rapidly 
to 
blood-borne 
microbes 
and
diﬀerentiate into short-lived IgM-secreting plasma cells. These B
cells can also participate in T-dependent immune responses.
Selection of the Mature B Cell Repertoire
The repertoire of mature B cells is positively and negatively selected
from the pool of immature B cells. As we will see later, positive
selection is well deﬁned in T lymphocytes and is responsible for
matching the TCRs on newly generated CD8+ and CD4+ T cells with
their ability to recognize self class I and class II MHC molecules,
respectively. There is no comparable restriction for B cell antigen
recognition. Nevertheless, positive selection appears to be a general
phenomenon primarily geared to identifying lymphocytes that have
successfully completed their antigen receptor gene rearrangement
program. Only B cells that express functional membrane Ig
molecules can receive tonic BCR-derived signals, which, as
described earlier, are required to keep immature B cells alive.
Immature B cells that recognize self antigens with high avidity
are often induced to change their speciﬁcities by the process of
receptor editing. Self antigen recognition by immature B cells
induces reactivation of RAG genes and the rearrangement and
production of a new Ig light chain, allowing the cell to express a
diﬀerent (edited) BCR that is not self-reactive. The original VκJκ
exon encoding the variable domain of an autoreactive light chain
gene is typically deleted and replaced by a new rearrangement
involving an upstream Vκ and a downstream Jκ gene segment. If
the editing process fails to generate an in-frame productive κ light
chain rearrangement on either chromosome, the activated
immature B cell may then go on to rearrange the λ light chain ﬁrst
on one chromosome, and if that is nonproductive, then the λ light
chain on the other chromosome. Almost all B cells bearing λ light
chains are likely derived from immature B cells that were self-
reactive and have undergone receptor editing.
If receptor editing fails, the immature B cells that express high-
aﬃnity receptors for self antigens and encounter these antigens in
the bone marrow or the spleen may die by apoptosis. This process
is called negative selection. Most negative selection occurs in
transitional B cells in the spleen. The antigens mediating negative
selection deliver strong signals to IgM-expressing immature B
lymphocytes whose receptors happen to be speciﬁc for these self
antigens. Both receptor editing and deletion are responsible for
maintaining B cell tolerance to self antigens that are present in the
bone marrow (see Chapter 15).
Once the transition is made to the IgM+IgD+ mature B cell stage,
antigen recognition leads to proliferation and diﬀerentiation, not to
receptor editing or apoptosis. As a result, mature B cells that
recognize antigens with high aﬃnity in peripheral lymphoid tissues
are activated, and this process leads to humoral immune responses.
Follicular B cells make most of the helper T cell–dependent
antibody responses to protein antigens (see Chapter 12).
T Lymphocyte Development
The development of mature T lymphocytes from commiĴed
progenitors involves the sequential rearrangement and expression of
TCR genes, cell proliferation, antigen-induced selection, and
commitment to phenotypically and functionally distinct subsets (Fig.
8.18) . In many ways, this is similar to B cell maturation. However, T
cell maturation has some unique features that reﬂect the speciﬁcity
of the majority of T lymphocytes for peptide antigens bound to self
MHC molecules, and the need for a special microenvironment for
selecting cells with this speciﬁcity.
FIGURE 8.18  Stages of T cell maturation.Events
corresponding to each stage of T cell maturation
from a bone marrow stem cell to a mature T
lymphocyte are illustrated. Several surface
markers in addition to those shown have been
used to define distinct stages of T cell maturation.
Thymocytes in the cortex lacking CD4 and CD8
expression are called double negative or DN T
cells and are further subdivided into stages based
on the expression of two markers, CD25 and
CD44. The CD44+CD25– cells in the cortex that
have recently arrived from the bone marrow and
are located at the cortico-medullary junction are
sometimes called DN1 T cells or pro-T cells and
correspond to the pro-B cell stage of B cell
maturation. CD44+CD25+ thymocytes are present
in the mid-cortex and often referred to as DN2 T
cells; these are committed to becoming T cells,
and it is at this stage that TCR β , TCR γ and
TCR δ rearrangement commences. CD44–CD25+
thymocytes are also known as DN3 T cells. An
intermediate between DN3 and double-positive
(DP) cells has been called the DN4 subset.
Role of the Thymus in T Cell Maturation
The thymus is the major site of maturation of T cells. The thymus
involutes with age and is virtually undetectable in postpubertal
humans, resulting in a gradual reduction in the output of mature T
cells. However, some maturation of T cells continues throughout
adult life, as indicated by the successful reconstitution of the
immune system in adult recipients of bone marrow transplants. It
may be that the remnant of the involuted thymus is adequate for
some T cell maturation. Because memory T cells have a long life
span (perhaps longer than 20 years in humans) and accumulate
with age, the need to generate new T cells decreases as individuals
age (see Fig. 2.12).
T lymphocytes originate from precursors that arise in the fetal
liver and adult bone marrow and seed the thymus. These precursors
are multipotent progenitors that enter the thymus from the blood
stream, crossing the endothelium of postcapillary venules in the
corticomedullary junction region of the thymus. In mice, immature
lymphocytes are ﬁrst detected in the thymus on the 11th day of the
normal 21-day gestation. This corresponds to about week 7 or 8 of
gestation in humans. While in the cortex, thymocytes ﬁrst express
γδ and αβ TCRs. The αβ T cells mature into CD4+ class II MHC–
restricted or CD8+ class I MHC–restricted T cells as they leave the
cortex and enter the medulla. From the medulla, CD4+ and CD8+
single-positive thymocytes exit the thymus into the circulation. We
will discuss the maturation of αβ T cells in the following sections
and γδ T cells later in the chapter.
The thymic environment provides stimuli that are required for the
proliferation and maturation of thymocytes. Many of these stimuli
come from thymic cells other than the maturing T cells. Within the
cortex, thymic cortical epithelial cells form a meshwork of long
cytoplasmic processes around which thymocytes must pass to reach
the medulla. Epithelial cells of a distinct type known as medullary
thymic epithelial cells are also present in the medulla and may
serve a unique role in presenting self antigens for the negative
selection of developing T cells (see Chapter 15). Bone marrow–
derived dendritic cells (DCs) are present at the corticomedullary
junction and within the medulla, and macrophages are present
primarily within the medulla. The migration of thymocytes through
this anatomic arrangement allows physical interactions between
the thymocytes and these other cells that are necessary for the
maturation and selection of the T lymphocytes. Epithelial cells and
DCs in the thymus express class I and class II MHC molecules. The
interactions of maturing thymocytes with these MHC molecules are
essential for the selection of the mature T cell repertoire, as we will
discuss later.
The movement of cells into and through the thymus is driven by
chemokines. The progenitors of thymocytes express the chemokine
receptor CCR9. Entry of these precursors into the thymus is
dependent on CCR9 binding the chemokine ligand CCL25, which is
produced in the thymic cortex. Chemokines such as CCL21 and
CCL19, which bind to the CCR7 chemokine receptor on thymocytes,
direct the movement of developing T cells from the cortex to the
medulla. Eventually, newly formed T lymphocytes, which express
the sphingosine-1 phosphate receptor (see Chapter 3), exit the
thymic medulla following a gradient of sphingosine-1 phosphate
into the blood stream.
Thymic stromal cells, including epithelial cells, secrete IL-7,
which was mentioned earlier as a critical lymphopoietic growth
factor. The rates of cell proliferation and apoptotic death are
extremely high in cortical thymocytes. A single precursor gives rise
y
g
y
y
g
p
g
to many progeny, and 95% of these cells die by apoptosis before
reaching the medulla. The cell death is due to a combination of
factors, including failure to productively rearrange the TCR β chain
gene and thus to fail the pre-TCR/β selection checkpoint (described
later), failure to be positively selected by self MHC molecules in the
thymus, and self antigen–induced negative selection (see Fig. 8.3).
Stages of T Cell Maturation
During T cell maturation, there is a precise order in which TCR genes
are rearranged and in which the TCR and CD4 and CD8 coreceptors
are expressed (Fig. 8.19; see also Fig. 8.18) . In the mouse fetal
thymus, surface expression of the γδ TCR occurs ﬁrst, 3 to 4 days
after precursor cells ﬁrst arrive, and the αβ TCR is expressed 2 or 3
days later. In human fetal thymuses, γδ TCR expression begins at
about 9 weeks of gestation, followed by expression of the αβ TCR at
10 weeks.
Double-Negative Thymocytes
The most immature thymocytes, which are recent arrivals from the
bone marrow, contain TCR genes in their germline conﬁguration
and do not express TCR, CD3, ζ chains, CD4, or CD8; these cells are
called double-negative (DN) thymocytes (based on the lack of
expression of CD4 and CD8). The majority (>90%) of the DN
thymocytes that survive thymic selection processes will ultimately
give rise to αβ TCR–expressing, MHC-restricted CD4+ and CD8+ T
cells; some DN thymocytes give rise to γδ T cells.
The earliest largely undiﬀerentiated DN thymocytes are located
near the cortico-meduallary junction and are beginning to migrate
towards the mid-cortex. They are not yet commiĴed to the T
lineage. It is at the next stage of cortical thymocyte diﬀerentiation
in the mid-cortex that DN thymocytes express both CD44 and CD25
(see Fig 8.18), are considered to be at the pro-T cell stage of
maturation, and start to rearrange their TCR genes. The RAG1 and
RAG2 proteins are ﬁrst expressed at this stage of T cell
development and are required for the rearrangement of TCR genes.
In αβ T cells, Dβ-to-Jβ rearrangements at the TCR β chain locus
occur ﬁrst; these involve either joining of the Dβ1 gene segment to
one of the six Jβ1 segments or joining of the Dβ2 segment to one of
the six Jβ2 segments (Fig. 8.20A). Vβ-to-DJβ rearrangements occur
at the next pre-T stage in the cortex. The DNA sequences between
the segments undergoing rearrangement, including D, J, and
possibly Cβ1 genes (if Dβ2 and Jβ2 segments are used), are deleted
during this rearrangement process. The primary nuclear transcripts
of the TCR β genes contain the intron between the recombined
VDJβ exon and the relevant Cβ gene (as well as the three additional
introns between the four exons that make up each Cβ gene). Poly-A
tails are added after cleavage of the primary transcript downstream
of consensus polyadenylation sites located 3′ of the Cβ region, and
the sequences between the VDJ exon and Cβ are spliced out to form
a mature mRNA in which VDJ segments are juxtaposed to the ﬁrst
exon of either of the two Cβ genes (depending on which J segment
was selected during the rearrangement process). Translation of this
mRNA gives rise to a full-length TCR β protein. The two Cβ genes
appear to be functionally interchangeable, and the use of either Cβ
gene does not inﬂuence the speciﬁcity of the TCR. Furthermore, an
individual T cell never switches from one C gene to another. The
promoters in the 5′ ﬂanking regions of Vβ genes function together
with a powerful enhancer that is located 3′ of the Cβ2 gene once
rearranged functional V genes are brought close to the C gene by
VDJ recombination. This proximity of the promoter to the enhancer
is responsible for high-level T cell–speciﬁc transcription of the
rearranged TCR β chain gene. After the addition and removal of
nucleotides during TCR gene rearrangement, the number of new
nucleotides in the TCR β chain gene are a multiple of three (in one
of the two inherited TCR β loci) in only about half of all developing
pre-T cells, and therefore only approximately half of all developing
pre-T cells express a TCR β protein. The next step in T cell
development selects cells that express the ﬁrst chain of the antigen
receptor and can pass this checkpoint.
FIGURE 8.19  An overview of T cell development in
the thymus.Precursors of T cells travel from the
bone marrow through the blood to the thymus.
The progenitors of αβ T cells are double-negative
(DN) T cells. In the thymic cortex, these cells
begin to express T cell receptors (TCRs) and
CD4 and CD8 coreceptors. Selection processes
eliminate self-reactive T cells in the cortex at the
double-positive (DP) stage and also eliminate
single-positive (SP) medullary thymocytes. They
promote survival of thymocytes whose TCRs bind
self major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
molecules with low affinity. Functional and
phenotypic differentiation into CD4+CD8 − or
CD8+CD4 − SP T cells occurs in the medulla, and
mature T cells are released into the circulation.
Some DP cells differentiate into CD4+CD8 −
regulatory T cells (Treg; see Chapter 15). The
development of γδ T cells is not shown.
Pre-T Cell Receptor
If a productive (i.e., in-frame) rearrangement of the TCR β chain gene
occurs in a given double-negative T cell, the TCR β chain is expressed
on the cell surface in association with an invariant protein called
pre-Tα, which, along with CD3 and ζ proteins, forms the pre-TCR
complex (see Fig. 8.15B) . The pre-TCR mediates the selection of the
developing pre-T cells that have successfully rearranged the β chain
of the TCR. The function of the pre-TCR complex in T cell
development is similar to that of the surrogate light chain–
containing pre-BCR complex in B cell development. Signals from
the pre-TCR select cells that have productively rearranged the TCR
β chain gene and mediate the survival of these pre-T cells,
contribute to the largest proliferative expansion during T cell
development, and drive the transition from the double-negative to
the double-positive stage of thymocyte development. In addition,
these signals inhibit further rearrangement of the TCR β chain
locus on the unrearranged allele. This results in β chain allelic
exclusion (i.e., mature T cells express an antigen receptor chain
from only one of the two inherited β chain loci). As in pre-B cells, it
is not known what, if any, ligand the pre-TCR recognizes. Pre-TCR
signaling, like pre-BCR signaling, may be initiated in a ligand-
independent manner, after the successful assembly of the pre-TCR
complex. Pre-TCR signaling is mediated by a number of cytosolic
kinases and adaptor proteins that are also linked to TCR signaling
(see Chapter 7). The essential function of the pre-TCR complex in T
cell maturation has been demonstrated by numerous studies with
genetically mutated mice, in which lack of any component of the
pre-TCR complex or associated signaling molecules (i.e., the TCR β
chain, pre-Tα, CD3, ζ, or LCK) results in a block in the maturation
of T cells at the double-negative stage. CD3ε mutations in humans
result in SCID (see Chapter 21), whereas mutations in LCK in
humans result in the near absence of CD4+ T cells. CD4+ cells are
aﬀected more because stronger LCK signals are required for CD4+
than for CD8+ T cell development during positive selection,
discussed later.
Double-Positive Thymocytes
At the next stage of T cell maturation, thymocytes express both CD4
and CD8 and are called double-positive T cells. The expression of
CD4 and CD8 is essential for subsequent selection events. The
rearrangement of the TCR α chain genes and the expression of TCR
αβ 
heterodimers 
occur 
in 
the 
CD4+CD8+ 
double-positive
population soon after cells cross the pre-TCR checkpoint (see Figs.
8.18 and 8.19). A second wave of RAG gene expression late in the
pre-T stage promotes TCR α gene recombination. Because there are
no D segments in the TCR α locus, rearrangement consists of the
joining of only V and J segments (see Fig. 8.20B). The large number
of Jα segments permits multiple aĴempts at productive V-J joining
on each chromosome, thereby increasing the probability that a
functional αβ TCR will be produced. In contrast to the TCR β chain
locus, where production of the protein and formation of the pre-
TCR suppress further rearrangement, there is liĴle or no allelic
exclusion in the α chain locus. Therefore, productive TCR α
rearrangements may occur on both chromosomes, and if this
happens, the T cell will express two α chains. In fact, up to 30% of
mature peripheral T cells express two diﬀerent TCRs, with diﬀerent
α chains but the same β chain in each cell. It is possible that only
one of the two diﬀerent TCRs participates in self MHC-driven
positive selection, described later. Transcriptional regulation of the
α chain gene occurs in a manner similar to that of the β chain.
There are promoters 5′ of each Vα gene that have low-level activity
and are responsible for high-level T cell–speciﬁc transcription when
brought close to an α chain enhancer located 3′ of the Cα gene.
Unsuccessful rearrangements of the TCR α gene on both
chromosomes lead to a failure of positive selection (discussed
later). Thymocytes of the αβ T cell lineage that fail to make a
productive rearrangement of the TCR α chain gene will die by
apoptosis.
FIGURE 8.20  T cell receptor α and β chain gene
recombination and expression.The sequence of
recombination and gene expression events is
shown for the T cell receptor (TCR) β chain (A)
and the TCR α chain (B). In the example shown in
A, the variable (V) region of the rearranged TCR
β chain includes the Vβ1 and Dβ1 gene segments
and the third J segment in the Jβ1 cluster. The
constant (C) region in this example is encoded by
the exons of the Cβ1 gene, depicted for
convenience as a single exon (though it is actually
made up of four exons with three intervening
introns). Note that at the TCR β chain locus,
rearrangement begins with D-to-J joining followed
by V-to-DJ joining. In humans, 14 Jβ segments
have been identified, and not all are shown in the
figure. In the example shown in B, the V region of
the TCR α chain includes the Vα1 gene and the
second J segment in the Jα cluster. 
This cluster is made up of at least 61 Jα segments in humans; not
all are shown here.
TCR α gene expression at the double-positive stage leads to the
formation of the complete αβ TCR, which is expressed on the cell
surface in association with CD3 and ζ proteins. The coordinate
expression of CD3 and ζ proteins and the assembly of intact TCR
complexes are required for surface expression. Rearrangement and
expression of the TCR α gene at the double-positive stage results in
deletion of the TCR δ locus that lies between V segments (common
to both α and δ loci) and Jα segments (see Fig. 8.6). As a result, this
T cell is no longer capable of becoming a γδ T cell and is commiĴed
to the αβ T cell lineage. The expression of RAG genes and further
TCR gene recombination cease after this stage of maturation.
Double-positive thymocytes that successfully undergo selection
processes go on to mature into CD4 +   or CD8 +   cells, which are
called single-positive T cells. Thus, the stages of T cell maturation in
the thymus can be distinguished by the expression of CD4 and CD8
(Fig. 8.21). This phenotypic maturation is accompanied by
commitment to diﬀerent functional programs upon activation in
secondary lymphoid organs. CD4+ and CD8+ T cells acquire unique
properties during their maturation; CD4+ cells are able to produce
diﬀerent cytokines in response to antigen stimulation and to
express eﬀector molecules (such as CD40 ligand) that activate B
lymphocytes, DCs, and macrophages, and CD8+ cells are able to
produce molecules that kill other cells. Mature single-positive
thymocytes enter the thymic medulla and then leave the thymus to
populate peripheral lymphoid tissues.
Selection Processes in the Maturation of
MHC-Restricted αβ T Cells
The selection of developing T cells is dependent on recognition of
antigen (peptide-MHC complexes) in the thymus and is responsible
for preserving useful cells and eliminating potentially harmful ones.
The immature, or unselected, repertoire of T lymphocytes consists
of cells whose receptors may recognize any peptide antigen (self or
foreign) displayed by any MHC molecule (also self or foreign). In
addition, receptors may theoretically be expressed that do not
recognize any peptide–MHC molecule complex. In every individual,
the only useful T cells are the ones speciﬁc for foreign peptides
presented by that individual’s MHC molecules—that is, self MHC
molecules. When double-positive thymocytes ﬁrst express αβ TCRs,
these receptors encounter self peptides (the only peptides normally
present in the thymus) displayed by self MHC molecules (the only
MHC molecules available to display peptides), mainly on thymic
epithelial cells in the cortex. Thus, from the many TCRs of diﬀerent
speciﬁcities that are produced, the ones that recognize self MHC
have to be preserved, and self peptide recognition has to preserve
speciﬁcities for foreign antigens. We describe these processes in the
next section.
Positive Selection of Thymocytes: Development of the Self
MHC–Restricted T Cell Repertoire
Positive selection is the process in which thymocytes whose TCRs
bind with low avidity (i.e., weakly) to self peptide–self MHC
complexes are stimulated to survive and to diﬀerentiate either into
CD4 +   T cells or CD8 +   T cells (see Fig. 8.19) . Double-positive
thymocytes are produced without antigenic stimulation and begin
to express αβ TCRs. In the thymic cortex, these immature cells
encounter epithelial cells that display a variety of self peptides
bound to class I and class II MHC molecules. Weak recognition of
these self peptide–self MHC complexes promotes the survival of
selected T cells. Thymocytes whose receptors do not recognize self
MHC molecules are permiĴed to die by a default pathway of
apoptosis; this phenomenon is called death by neglect (see Fig.
8.19).
During the transition from double-positive to single-positive cells,
thymocytes whose TCRs recognize self class I MHC become CD8 +
CD4 − , and cells with TCRs that recognize self class II MHC become
CD4 + CD8 − . Thus, these cells become commiĴed to the CD4 or
CD8 lineage. Two models have been proposed to explain the
process of lineage commitment, as a result of which coreceptors are
correctly matched with the TCRs that recognize a speciﬁc class of
MHC molecules. The stochastic or probabilistic model suggests
that the commitment of immature T cells toward either lineage
depends on the random probability of a double-positive cell
diﬀerentiating into a single-positive CD4+ or a CD8+ thymocyte. In
this model, a newly generated single-positive CD8+ T cell that has a
TCR that can recognize self class I MHC and peptide in the thymus
with a low aﬃnity survives because it can engage the CD8
coreceptor, but a newly generated CD8+ T cell whose TCR
recognizes only self class II MHC and peptide with low aﬃnity does
not survive because its coreceptor does not help trigger the TCR on
this T cell. Similarly, only single-positive CD4+ T cells whose TCRs
can recognize self class II MHC and peptide (and not self class I
MHC and peptide) with low aﬃnity would be assumed to survive
positive selection in this stochastic model. An alternative and more
widely accepted view is that the process of lineage commitment
linked to positive selection is driven by speciﬁc signals that instruct
the double-positive T cell to become CD4+ or CD8+. According to
this instructional model, class I MHC– and class II MHC–restricted
TCRs deliver diﬀerent signals that actively induce expression of the
correct coreceptor and shut oﬀ expression of the other coreceptor.
It is known that double-positive cells go through a stage at which
they express high CD4 and low CD8. If the TCR on such a cell is
class I MHC–restricted, when it sees the appropriate class I MHC
and self peptide, it will receive a weak signal because levels of the
CD8 coreceptor are low, and in addition, CD8 associates less well
p
with the LCK tyrosine kinase than does CD4. These weak signals
activate transcription factors such as RUNX3 that maintain the
CD8+ T cell phenotype by regulating the expression of the CD8
gene and by silencing the CD4 gene. Conversely, if the TCR on the
cell is class II MHC–restricted, when it sees class II MHC it will
receive a stronger signal because CD4 levels are high and CD4
associates relatively well with LCK. These strong signals activate
the transcription factor GATA3, which commits cells toward a CD4
fate, and induces the expression of a repressor called ThPoK, which
prevents the expression of lineage deﬁning genes of CD8+ T cells.
FIGURE 8.21  CD4 and CD8 expression on
thymocytes and maturation of T cells in the
thymus.The maturation of thymocytes can be
followed by changes in expression of the CD4 and
CD8 coreceptors. A two-color flow cytometric
analysis of thymocytes using anti-CD4 and anti-
CD8 antibodies, each tagged with a different
fluorochrome, is illustrated. The percentages of all
thymocytes contributed by each major population
are shown in the four quadrants. The least mature
subset is the CD4 − CD8 − (double-negative) cells.
Arrows indicate the sequence of maturation.
Peptides bound to MHC molecules on thymic epithelial cells play
an essential role in positive selection. In Chapter 6, we described
how MHC molecules that are expressed on the cell surface always
contain bound peptides. These MHC-associated peptides on thymic
APCs probably serve two roles in positive selection—ﬁrst, they
promote stable cell surface expression of MHC molecules, and
second, they may inﬂuence the speciﬁcities of the T cells that are
selected. It is also clear from a variety of experimental studies that
some peptides are beĴer than others in supporting positive
selection, and diﬀerent peptides diﬀer in the repertoires of T cells
they select. These results suggest that speciﬁc antigen recognition,
and not just MHC recognition, has some role in positive selection.
In Chapter 6 we described the unique proteasomal subunit, β5t,
that is expressed only in thymic cortical epithelial cells in
proteasomes called thymoproteasomes. These functionally altered
proteasomes generate unique self peptides that contribute to
positive selection on class I MHC expressed on thymic cortical
epithelial cells. Similarly, cathepsin V, the human equivalent of
murine cathepsin L, is expressed speciﬁcally in thymic cortical
epithelial cells and generates unique class II MHC binding peptides
that are also used in positive selection in the thymic cortex. There is
evidence from knockout mice and human polymorphisms in the
gene encoding β5t that the generation of unique peptides in the
thymic cortex reduces the likelihood of autoreactivity in the pool of
positively selected T cells.
The model of positive selection based on weak recognition of self
antigens raises a fundamental question: How does positive
selection driven by weak recognition of self antigens produce a
repertoire of mature T cells speciﬁc for foreign antigens? The likely
answer is that positive selection allows many diﬀerent T cell clones
to survive, and many of these T cells that recognize self peptides
with low aﬃnity will, after maturing, recognize foreign peptides
with a high enough aﬃnity to be activated and to generate useful
immune responses.
Negative Selection of Thymocytes: Central Tolerance
Thymocytes whose receptors recognize peptide-MHC complexes in
the thymus with high avidity undergo apoptosis (called negative
selection) or diﬀerentiate into regulatory T cells (see Fig. 8.19) .
Among the double-positive T cells that are generated in the
thymus, some may express TCRs that recognize self antigens with
high aﬃnity. The peptides present in the thymus are self peptides
derived from widely expressed protein antigens and from some
proteins thought to be restricted to particular tissues. (Recall that
microbes that enter through the common routes, i.e., epithelia, are
captured and transported to lymph nodes and tend not to enter the
thymus.) In immature T cells, a major consequence of high-avidity
antigen recognition is the triggering of apoptosis, leading to death,
or deletion, of the cells. Therefore, many of the immature
thymocytes that express high-aﬃnity receptors for self antigens in
the thymus die, resulting in negative selection of the T cell
repertoire. This process eliminates the potentially most dangerous
self-reactive T cells and is one of the mechanisms of self tolerance,
ensuring that the immune system does not respond to many self
antigens. Tolerance induced in immature lymphocytes by
recognition of self antigens in the generative (or central) lymphoid
organs is also called central tolerance, to be contrasted with
peripheral tolerance induced in mature lymphocytes by self
antigens in peripheral tissues. We will discuss the mechanisms and
physiologic importance of immunologic tolerance in more detail in
Chapter 15.
The deletion of immature self-reactive T cells may occur at both
the double-positive stage in the cortex and in newly generated
single-positive T cells in the medulla. The thymic APCs that
mediate negative selection at the double-positive stage are cortical
thymic epithelial cells (which also mediate positive selection).
Negative selection of single-positive thymocytes may be mediated
by bone marrow–derived DCs and macrophages, which are
abundant in the medulla, as well as by medullary thymic epithelial
cells. Single-positive T cells are drawn to the thymic medulla by
chemokines. In the medulla, medullary thymic epithelial cells
express a nuclear protein called AIRE (autoimmune regulator) that
induces low-level expression of many self antigens that are
normally expressed only in speciﬁc peripheral organs (so-called
tissue-restricted antigens). Their AIRE-dependent expression in the
thymus 
makes 
these 
tissue-speciﬁc 
antigens 
available 
for
presentation to immature T cells, facilitating the deletion (negative
selection) of these cells. A mutation in the gene that encodes AIRE
results in an autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome, underscoring
the importance of AIRE in mediating central tolerance to tissue-
speciﬁc antigens (see Chapter 15).
p
g
p
The mechanism of negative selection in the thymus is the
induction of death by apoptosis. Unlike the phenomenon of death
by neglect, which occurs in the absence of positive selection, in
negative selection, active death-promoting signals are generated
when the TCR of immature thymocytes binds with high aﬃnity to
antigen. TCR signaling may induce expression of a pro-apoptotic
protein called BIM, which probably plays an important role in
thymocyte apoptosis during negative selection (see Chapter 15). It
is also clear that although high-avidity antigen recognition by
immature T cells triggers apoptosis, the same recognition by
mature lymphocytes, in concert with other signals, initiates
proliferative T cell responses (see Chapter 9). The biochemical basis
of this fundamental diﬀerence in responses of immature and
mature cells is not known.
Recognition of self antigens in the thymus can generate a
population of CD4 +   regulatory T cells (Treg) that function to
prevent autoimmune reactions (see Chapter 15) . It is not clear
which factors determine the choice between the two alternative
fates of immature T cells that recognize self antigens with high
avidity—namely, the deletion of immature T cells or the
development of regulatory T cells. One possibility is that weak
signals induce positive selection of thymocytes, strong signals
induce negative selection, and intermediate signals induce
diﬀerentiation into Tregs. But how the level of signals is controlled
and how they inﬂuence the fate of developing T cells is not clear.
Whereas CD28 is not required for the development of naive CD4+
and CD8+ T cells, this costimulatory receptor is required for the
generation of some Tregs in the thymus.
γδ T Lymphocytes
TCR αβ- and γδ-expressing thymocytes are separate lineages with a
common precursor. In fetal thymuses, the ﬁrst TCR gene
rearrangements involve the γ and δ loci. Recombination of TCR γ
and δ loci proceeds in a fashion similar to that of other antigen
receptor 
gene 
rearrangements, 
although 
the 
order 
of
rearrangement appears to be less rigid than in other loci. In a
developing double-negative T cell, rearrangement of TCR β, γ, or δ
loci is initially possible. If a cell succeeds in productively
rearranging its TCR γ as well as its TCR δ loci before it makes a
productive TCR β rearrangement, it is selected into the γδ T cell
lineage. This happens in about 10% of developing double-negative
T cells. About 90% of the time, a productive TCR β gene
rearrangement is made ﬁrst. In this situation, pre-TCR signaling
selects these cells to mature into the αβ T cell lineage, and eventual
deletion of TCR δ when TCR α is rearranged (because the TCR δ
locus is embedded in the TCR α locus) results in irreversible
commitment to the αβ lineage.
The diversity of the γδ T cell repertoire is theoretically even
greater than that of the αβ T cell repertoire, in part because the
heptamer-nonamer recombination signal sequences adjacent to D
segments permit D-to-D joining. Paradoxically, however, the actual
diversity of expressed γδ TCRs is limited because only a few of the
available V, D, and J segments are used in mature γδ T cells, for
unknown reasons. This limited diversity is similar to the limited
diversity of the B-1 subset of B lymphocytes and is in keeping with
the concept that γδ T cells serve as an early defense against a
limited number of commonly encountered microbes at epithelial
barriers. The functions of γδ T cells are described in Chapter 10.
Other populations, called NKT cells and MAIT cells, also develop
in the thymus; these are described in Chapter 10 as well.
Summary
• B and T lymphocytes arise from a common bone marrow–
derived precursor that becomes commiĴed to the
lymphocyte lineage. Early maturation is characterized by
cell proliferation induced by cytokines, mainly interleukin-
7.
• Transcription factors induce the expression of lineage-
speciﬁc genes and open up speciﬁc antigen receptor gene
loci.
• The initial expression of pre-antigen receptors and the
subsequent expression of antigen receptors are essential for
the survival, expansion, and maturation of developing
lymphocytes and for selection processes that lead to a
diverse repertoire of useful antigen speciﬁcities.
• The antigen receptors of B and T cells are encoded by a
limited number of gene segments that are spatially
segregated in the germline loci but are somatically
recombined in developing B and T cells.
• Separate loci encode the immunoglobulin (Ig) heavy chain,
Ig κ light chain, Ig λ light chain, T cell receptor (TCR) β
chain, TCR α and δ chains, and TCR γ chain. These loci
contain V, J, and in the Ig heavy chain and TCR β and δ loci
only, D gene segments. Somatic rearrangement of both Ig
and TCR loci involves the joining of D and J segments in
the loci that contain D segments followed by the joining of
the V segment to the recombined DJ segments in these loci,
or direct V-to-J joining in the other loci.
• This process of somatic gene recombination is mediated by
a recombinase enzyme complex made up of the
lymphocyte-speciﬁc components RAG-1 and RAG-2.
• The diversity of the antibody and TCR repertoires is
generated by the combinatorial associations of multiple
germline V, D, and J gene segments and junctional diversity
generated by the addition or removal of random
nucleotides at the sites of recombination. These
mechanisms generate the most diversity at the junctions of
the segments that form the third hypervariable regions of
both antibody and TCR polypeptides.
• B cell maturation occurs in stages characterized by diﬀerent
paĴerns of Ig gene rearrangement and expression. In the
earliest B cell precursors, called pro-B cells, Ig genes are
initially in the germline conﬁguration, and D to J
rearrangement occurs at the Ig heavy chain locus.
• At the pro-B to pre-B cell transition, V-D-J recombination is
completed at the Ig H chain locus, and the VDJ exon is
spliced to the µ C region exons of the heavy chain RNA to
generate a mature mRNA that is translated into the µ heavy
chain protein. The pre-B cell receptor is formed by pairing
of the µ chain with surrogate light chains and by
association with the signaling molecules Igα and Igβ. This
receptor delivers survival and proliferation signals and also
signals to inhibit rearrangement on the other heavy chain
allele (allelic exclusion).
• As cells diﬀerentiate into immature B cells, V-J
recombination occurs initially at the Ig κ locus, and light
chain proteins are expressed. Heavy and light chains are
then assembled into intact IgM molecules and expressed on
the cell surface. Immature B cells leave the bone marrow to
populate peripheral lymphoid tissues, where they complete
their maturation. At the mature B cell stage, synthesis of µ
and δ heavy chains occurs in parallel mediated by
alternative splicing of primary heavy chain RNA
transcripts, and membrane IgM and IgD are expressed.
• During B lymphocyte maturation, immature B cells that
express high-aﬃnity antigen receptors speciﬁc for self
antigens present in the bone marrow are induced to edit
their receptor genes, or these cells are eliminated.
• T cell maturation in the thymus progresses in stages
distinguished by the paĴern of expression of the antigen
receptor and CD4 and CD8 coreceptor molecules. The
earliest T lineage immigrants to the thymus do not express
T cell receptors (TCRs) or CD4 or CD8 molecules. The
developing thymocytes initially populate the outer cortex,
where they undergo proliferation and rearrangement of
TCR genes, and express CD3, TCR, CD4, and CD8
molecules.
• At the pre-T stage, thymocytes remain double-negative, but
V-D-J recombination is completed at the TCR β chain locus,
and TCR β chain polypeptides are produced. The TCR β
chain associates with the invariant pre-Tα protein to form a
pre-TCR, which transduces signals that inhibit
rearrangement on the other β chain allele (allelic exclusion)
and promote dual CD4 and CD8 expression. At the
CD4+CD8+ (double-positive) stage, V-J recombination
occurs at the TCR α locus, α chain polypeptides are
produced, and low levels of TCR are expressed on the cell
surface.
• Positive selection of CD4+CD8+ TCR αβ thymocytes requires
low-avidity recognition of peptide–major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) complexes. As TCR αβ thymocytes mature,
they move into the medulla and become either CD4+CD8 −
or CD8+CD4 − . Lineage commitment accompanying
positive selection results in the matching of TCRs that
recognize MHC class I with CD8 expression and the
silencing of CD4; TCRs that recognize MHC class II
molecules are matched with CD4 expression and the loss of
CD8 expression.
• Negative selection of CD4+CD8+ TCR αβ double-positive
thymocytes occurs when these cells recognize, with high
avidity, antigens that are present in the thymus. This
process is responsible for tolerance to many self antigens.
Selected Readings
∗Indicates publications of historical interest, generally reporting
the discovery of a phenomenon or process that was later shown to
be of fundamental importance in the immune system. Many (but
not all) of these discoveries led to Nobel Prizes for the
discoverer(s). The nature of the discovery is summarized brieﬂy in
each reference.
Early B Cell Development and V(D)J Recombination
Carmona L.M, Schaĵ D.G. New insights into the evolutionary origins of the recombination-
activating gene proteins and V(D)J recombination.  FEBS J . 2017;284:1590–1605.
Clark M.R, Mandal M, Ochiai K, Singh H. Orchestrating B cell lymphopoiesis through
interplay of IL-7 receptor and pre-B cell receptor signalling.  Nat Rev Immunol
. 2014;14:69–80.
∗Dreyer W.J, BenneĴ J.C. The molecular basis of antibody formation: a paradox.  Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A . 1965;54:864–869 (The hypothesis by Dreyer and BenneĴ that antibody
genes are made up of germline gene segments that need to recombined in B cells paved the way
for the eventual studies almost a decade later that established V(D)J recombination as the
mechanism by which antibody diversity is generated.).
Kreslavsky T, Wong J.B, Fischer M, et al. Control of B-1a cell development by instructive
BCR signaling.  Curr Opin Immunol . 2018;51:24–31.
Lin S.G, Ba Z, Alt F.W, Zhang Y. Rag chromatin scanning during V(D)J recombination and
chromatin loop extrusion are related processes.  Adv Immunol . 2018;139:93–135.
∗Schaĵ D.G, OeĴinger M.A, Baltimore D. The V(D)J recombination activating gene, RAG-1
.  Cell . 1989;59:1035–1048 (This study described the molecular cloning and identiﬁcation of
the enzyme that mediates V(D)J recombination.).
∗Tonegawa S, Steinberg C, Dube S, Bernardini A. Evidence for somatic generation of
antibody diversity.  Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 1974;71:4027–4031 (This study established
that immunoglobulin gene segments exist and are physically separate in non-lymphoid cells
but are recombined in B lymphocytes, thus establishing that antibody diversity is generated by
gene recombination. This work led to a Nobel prize for Susumu Tonegawa. See 
hĴps://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/1987/tonegawa/lecture .).
T Cell Development
Boehm T, Swann J.B. Thymus involution and regeneration: two sides of the same coin?  Nat
Rev Immunol . 2013;13:831–838.
Carpenter A.C, Bosselut R. Decision checkpoints in the thymus.  Nat Immunol
. 2010;11:666–673.
De Obaldia M.E, Bhandoola A. Transcriptional regulation of innate and adaptive
lymphocyte lineages.  Annu Rev Immunol . 2015;33:607–642.
Gascoigne N.R, Rybakin V, Acuto O, Brzostek J. TCR signal strength and T cell
development.  Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . 2016;32:327–348.
Hogquist K.A, Jameson S.C. The self-obsession of T cells: how TCR signaling thresholds
aﬀect fate ‘decisions’ and eﬀector function.  Nat Immunol . 2014;15:815–823.
Inglesﬁeld S, Cosway E.J, Jenkinson W.E, Anderson G. Rethinking thymic tolerance: lessons
from mice.  Trends Immunol . 2019;40:279–291.
∗Kappler J.W, Roehm N, Marrack P. T cell tolerance by clonal elimination in the thymus. 
Cell . 1987;49:273–280; and Kisielow P, Bluthmann H, Staerz U.D, et al. Tolerance in T-
cell-receptor transgenic mice involves deletion of nonmature CD4+8+ thymocytes. 
Nature . 1988;333:742–746 (The ﬁrst studies demonstrating that a mechanism of T cell
tolerance is through deletion of developing self-antigen speciﬁc T cells in the thymus.).
Klein L, Robey E.A, Hsieh C.S. Central CD4+ T cell tolerance: deletion versus regulatory T
cell diﬀerentiation.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2019;19:7–18.
Rodewald H.R. Thymus organogenesis.  Annu Rev Immunol . 2008;26:355–388.
Rothenberg E.V. Programming for T-lymphocyte fates: modularity and mechanisms.  Genes
Dev . 2019;33:1117–1135.
Takahama Y, Ohigashi I, Baik S, Anderson G. Generation of diversity in thymic epithelial
cells.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2017;17:295–305.
Taniuchi I. CD4 helper and CD8 cytotoxic T cell diﬀerentiation.  Annu Rev Immunol
. 2018;36:579–601.
MicroRNAs and Lymphocyte Development
Mehta A, Baltimore D. MicroRNAs as regulatory elements in immune system logic.  Nat Rev
Immunol . 2016;16:279–294.
Simpson L.J, Ansel K.M. MicroRNA regulation of lymphocyte tolerance and
autoimmunity.  J Clin Invest . 2015;125:2242–2249.
Xiao C, Rajewsky K. MicroRNA control in the immune system: basic principles.  Cell
. 2009;136:26–36.
Chapter 9: Activation of T
Lymphocytes 
Overview of T Lymphocyte Activation,
Signals for T Lymphocyte Activation,
Recognition of Antigen,
Role of Costimulation in T Cell Activation,
Functional Responses of T Lymphocytes,
Changes in Surface Molecules During T Cell
Activation,
Cytokines in T Cell Activation,
Clonal Expansion of T Cells,
Differentiation of Activated T Cells Into Effector
Cells,
Development and Properties of Memory T
Cells,
Decline of T Cell Responses,
Summary,
The process of T cell activation generates, from a small pool of
naive lymphocytes speciﬁc for an antigen, a large number of
eﬀector cells with the same speciﬁcity that function to eliminate
that antigen and a population of long-lived memory cells that can
rapidly react against the antigen if it is reintroduced. A
fundamental characteristic of the T cell response, like all adaptive
immune responses, is that it is highly speciﬁc for the antigen that
elicits the response. Both the initial activation of naive T cells and
the eﬀector phases of T cell–mediated adaptive immune responses
are triggered by recognition of antigen by the antigen receptors of T
lymphocytes. In Chapter 6, we described the speciﬁcity of T cells for
peptide fragments, derived from protein antigens, which are bound
to and displayed by self major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
molecules. In Chapter 7, we described the antigen receptors and
other molecules that are involved in the activation of T cells by
antigens and the biochemical signals initiated by these receptors.
In this chapter, we will describe the functional responses of T cells.
We begin with a brief overview of T cell activation, discuss the role
of costimulators and other signals provided by antigen-presenting
cells (APCs) in T cell activation, and introduce the sequence of
proliferation and diﬀerentiation that occurs when CD4+ and CD8+ T
cells recognize foreign antigens. The generation and functions of
eﬀector CD4+ and CD8+ T cells are described in more detail in
Chapters 10 and 11. Thus, Chapters 9, 10, and 11 together cover the
biological functions of T lymphocytes and their roles in cell-
mediated immunity.
Overview of T Lymphocyte Activation
In immune responses, T lymphocytes have to recognize the same
antigen at two stages: ﬁrst to initiate the response and later to
perform eﬀector functions. Antigen activates naive cells to
proliferate and diﬀerentiate into eﬀector and memory cells. Then,
eﬀector T cells are activated by the same antigen to perform the
functions that lead to elimination of the source of the antigen
(infected cells or tumors). As we discuss later, the requirements for
these two activation events diﬀer in terms of the APCs involved and
the other signals needed.
The initial activation of naive T lymphocytes occurs mainly in
secondary (peripheral) lymphoid organs, through which these cells
normally circulate and where foreign antigens are concentrated and
presented by mature dendritic cells (DCs) (Fig. 9.1) . Clones of T
lymphocytes, each with a diﬀerent speciﬁcity, are generated in the
thymus before antigen exposure. Naive T lymphocytes, which have
not previously responded to antigens, circulate throughout the
body in a resting state, and they acquire powerful functional
capabilities only after they are activated. The activation of naive T
lymphocytes occurs in specialized regions of lymph nodes, spleen,
and mucosal lymphoid tissues, where naive lymphocytes interact
with DCs that have captured antigens from tissues or blood (see
Chapters 2 and 6).
Antigen recognition together with other activating stimuli induce
several biologic responses in T cells: cytokine secretion and increased
cytokine receptor expression; proliferation, leading to an increase in
the numbers of cells in the antigen-speciﬁc clones (called clonal
expansion); and diﬀerentiation of the naive cells into eﬀector and
memory lymphocytes (Fig. 9.2) . The process of T cell activation is
associated with changes in the expression of numerous surface
molecules, some of which are involved in traﬃcking of T cells and
others play important roles in inducing and regulating T cell
responses. APCs not only display antigens but also express surface
molecules and secrete cytokines that aﬀect the magnitude and
nature of the T cell response. The roles of APCs in instructing T
cells how to respond to diﬀerent categories of pathogens are
discussed later in this chapter and in Chapter 10.
FIGURE 9.1  Activation of naive and effector T cells
by antigen.Antigens that are transported by
dendritic cells to lymph nodes are recognized by
naive T lymphocytes that recirculate through these
lymph nodes. The T cells are activated to
differentiate into effector cells, which may remain
in the lymphoid organs to help B lymphocytes or
migrate to sites of infection, where they are again
activated by antigens and perform their various
functions, such as macrophage activation.
FIGURE 9.2  Sequence of events in T cell
responses.Antigen recognition by T cells induces
cytokine (e.g., interleukin-2 [IL-2]) secretion,
particularly in CD4+ T cells, clonal expansion as a
result of cell proliferation, and differentiation of the
T cells into effector cells or memory cells. In the
effector phase of the response, the effector CD4+
T cells respond to antigen by producing cytokines
that have several actions, such as the recruitment
and activation of leukocytes and activation of B
lymphocytes, while CD8+ CTLs respond by killing
other cells and secreting inflammatory cytokines.
APC, Antigen-presenting cell; CTL, cytotoxic T
lymphocyte.
Proliferation and diﬀerentiation of T cells are regulated by
several feedback mechanisms. For example, activated T cells deliver
signals back to the APCs, further increasing the APCs’ ability to
activate T cells in a positive feedback loop. At the same time, some
surface molecules expressed on activated T cells as well as cytokines
secreted by these cells inhibit further activation, and these negative
feedback mechanisms serve to establish safe limits to the response.
Eﬀector T cells recognize antigens in lymphoid organs or in
peripheral nonlymphoid tissues and are activated to perform
functions that contribute to the elimination of microbes, and, in
disease states, induce tissue damage. Whereas naive cells are
activated mainly in secondary lymphoid organs, diﬀerentiated
eﬀector cells may respond to antigens and carry out their functions
in any tissue (see Fig. 9.1). The process of diﬀerentiation from naive
to eﬀector cells gives the cells the capacity to perform specialized
functions and the ability to migrate to any site of infection or
inﬂammation. At these sites, the eﬀector cells again encounter the
antigen for which they are speciﬁc and respond in ways that serve
to eliminate the source of the antigen. Eﬀector CD4+ T cells, called
helper T cells, can recognize antigens of microbes ingested by
macrophages or B cells and activate these cells, and eﬀector CD8+ T
cells can recognize antigens on infected or tumor cells and kill
these cells. Upon antigen-induced activation, CD4+ T cells secrete
cytokines and express cell surface molecules that can activate other
immune 
cells. 
These 
eﬀector 
T 
cells 
are 
classiﬁed 
into
subpopulations on the basis of their cytokine proﬁles and functions
(see Chapter 10). Some of the CD4+ eﬀector T cells activate
macrophages to kill phagocytosed microbes; others secrete
cytokines that recruit diﬀerent types of leukocytes, such as
eosinophils and neutrophils, which destroy diﬀerent types of
pathogens; and yet others remain in lymphoid organs and help B
cells diﬀerentiate into antibody-secreting plasma cells and memory
cells. Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), the eﬀector cells of the CD8+
lineage, kill infected cells and tumor cells and also secrete cytokines
that activate macrophages and induce inﬂammation.
Memory T cells that are generated by T cell activation are long-
lived and have an enhanced ability to react against the antigen.
These cells are present in the recirculating lymphocyte pool and are
abundant in mucosal tissues and the skin and in lymphoid organs.
After a T cell response wanes, there are many more memory cells of
the responding clone than there were naive T cells before the
response. These memory cells respond rapidly to subsequent
encounters with the antigen and generate new eﬀector cells that
can eliminate the antigen.
T cell responses decline after the antigen is eliminated. This
process of contraction is important for returning the immune
system to a state of equilibrium, or homeostasis. It occurs mainly
because the majority of antigen-activated eﬀector T cells die by
apoptosis. One reason for this is that as the antigen is eliminated,
lymphocytes are deprived of survival stimuli that are normally
provided by the antigen and by the costimulators and cytokines
produced during inﬂammatory reactions associated with infections
and other types of antigen exposure. In addition, inhibitory
mechanisms activated by antigen recognition function to control
the magnitude and duration of the response.
With this overview, we will proceed to a discussion of the signals
required for T cell activation and the steps in the responses of CD4+
and CD8+ T cells. We will conclude with a discussion of memory
cells and the decline of immune responses.
Signals for T Lymphocyte Activation
The proliferation of T lymphocytes and their diﬀerentiation into
eﬀector and memory cells require antigen recognition, costimulation,
and cytokines. In this section, we will summarize the nature of
antigens recognized by T cells and discuss speciﬁc costimulators
and their receptors that contribute to T cell activation. Cytokines
are discussed later in this chapter and in Chapter 10.
Recognition of Antigen
Antigen is the necessary ﬁrst signal for the activation of
lymphocytes, ensuring that the resultant immune response is antigen
speciﬁc. Because CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes recognize peptide-
MHC complexes displayed by APCs, they respond to protein
antigens, the natural source of peptides, or to chemicals that bind
to and modify proteins, thus creating novel peptides. Protein
antigens that cross epithelial barriers or are produced in tissues are
captured by DCs and transported to lymph nodes. Antigens that
enter the circulation may be captured by DCs in the spleen. As
discussed in Chapter 6, both naive T cells and mature DCs are
drawn to the T cell zones of secondary lymphoid organs by
chemokines produced at these sites that engage the CCR7
chemokine receptor on the cells. By the time the mature DCs reach
the T cell areas, they display antigenic peptides on MHC molecules
and also express costimulators. Some soluble protein antigens in
the lymph may be delivered to lymph nodes independent of DCs
and are taken up, processed, and presented as peptide-MHC
complexes by resident DCs within the lymph nodes. DCs present
peptides derived from endocytosed protein antigens mainly in
association with class II MHC molecules to naive CD4+ T cells, and
peptides derived from cytosolic and nuclear proteins displayed by
class I MHC molecules to CD8+ T cells (see Chapter 6).
Naive T lymphocytes move around within secondary lymphoid
organs transiently interacting with many DCs and stop when they
recognize the antigen for which they express speciﬁc receptors. T
cells are in constant motion, mainly guided by the ﬁbroblast
reticular network, a matrix substratum produced by ﬁbroblastic
reticular cells (FRCs) in the T cell zone of the lymphoid organs (see
Chapter 2). The DCs in lymphoid organs adhere to the FRC
conduits, are relatively immobile, and simultaneously present
many diﬀerent antigens. The T cells move along the conduits,
making many successive contacts with diﬀerent DCs. T cell
recognition of antigen being displayed by these DCs results in the
generation of biochemical signals that lead to rapid arrest of the T
cells. This process stabilizes the contact between the antigen-
speciﬁc T cells and the relevant antigen-expressing APC and allows
the activation program of these T cells to be initiated.
FIGURE 9.3  Functions of costimulators in T cell
activation. A, The resting antigen-presenting cell
(APC) (typically dendritic cells presenting self
antigens) expresses few or no costimulators and
fails to activate naive T cells. Antigen recognition
without costimulation may make T cells
unresponsive (tolerant) or lead to death of the T
cells; we will discuss this phenomenon in Chapter
15. B, Microbes and cytokines produced during
innate immune responses activate APCs to
express costimulators, such as B7 molecules. The
APCs (usually presenting microbial antigens) then
become capable of activating naive T cells.
Activated APCs also produce cytokines such as
interleukin-12 (IL-12), which stimulate the
differentiation of naive T cells into effector cells
(not shown).
Diﬀerentiated eﬀector T cells can respond to antigens presented
by cells other than DCs. In humoral immune responses, B cells
present antigens to helper T cells and are the recipients of
activating signals from the helper cells (see Chapter 12); in cell-
mediated immune responses, macrophages present antigens to and
respond to CD4+ T cells (see Chapter 10); and virtually any
nucleated cell can present antigens to and be killed by CD8+ CTLs
(see Chapter 11).
Role of Costimulation in T Cell Activation
The proliferation and diﬀerentiation of naive T cells require signals
provided by molecules on APCs, called costimulators, in addition to
antigen-induced 
signals 
(Fig. 
9.3) 
. 
The 
requirement 
for
costimulatory signals was ﬁrst suggested by the experimental
ﬁnding that T cell antigen receptor signaling alone (e.g., induced by
anti-CD3 antibodies that cross-link TCR-CD3 complexes, mimicking
antigen) resulted in lower responses than those seen with antigens
presented by activated APCs. This result indicated that APCs
express molecules that work together with antigen for inducing T
cell activation. These molecules were called costimulators, and the
second signal for T cell activation was called costimulation, the ﬁrst
signal being antigen. In the absence of costimulation, T cells that
encounter antigens fail to respond, enter a state of prolonged
unresponsiveness, or die (see Chapter 15).
The B7:CD28 Family of Costimulators
The best characterized costimulatory pathway in T cell activation
involves the T cell surface receptor CD28, which binds the
costimulatory molecules B7-1 (CD80) and B7-2 (CD86) expressed on
the surface of activated APCs. CD28 was discovered when
stimulatory (agonistic) antibodies against human T cell surface
molecules were screened for their ability to enhance T cell
responses when added together with an activating anti-CD3
antibody. This was soon followed by the identiﬁcation of the
ligands for CD28, called B7 and later shown to be two homologous
proteins, named B7-1 (CD80) and B7-2 (CD86), often collectively
called B7. The essential role of CD28 and B7 in T cell activation has
been established by the T cell immune deﬁciency caused by
knockout of genes encoding these proteins in mice and by the
ability of agents that bind to and block B7 molecules to inhibit T
cell responses in experimental animals and in humans. The
development of therapeutic agents based on these principles is
described later.
B7-1 and B7-2 are structurally similar integral membrane single-
chain glycoproteins, each with two extracellular immunoglobulin
(Ig)-like domains. CD28 is a disulﬁde-linked homodimer, each
subunit of which has a single extracellular Ig domain. Its
cytoplasmic portion contains several tyrosine and proline residues
that are involved in binding of adaptor and signaling proteins and
in the delivery of activating signals (discussed later). CD28 is
expressed on the vast majority of CD4+ T cells, but in adult humans,
almost 50% of blood CD8+ T cells, mainly eﬀector and memory
cells, express liĴle or no CD28. This loss of CD28 is believed to be
the result of chronic antigen stimulation (e.g., in chronic viral
infections) and may be a way that T cells limit their own activation
by persistent antigens.
FIGURE 9.4  Mechanisms of T cell costimulation by
CD28.CD28 engagement by B7 induces several
signals, some of which enhance T cell receptor
(TCR) signals and others that function together
with TCR signals to stimulate the expression of
survival proteins, cytokines, and cytokine
receptors. This results in cell proliferation and
differentiation toward effector and memory cells
(see Chapters 10 and 11). IL-2, Interleukin-2.
The expression of B7 costimulators is increased by microbial
products and the innate immune responses to infections, which
ensures that T lymphocytes are activated only when needed. The B7
molecules are expressed mainly on APCs, including DCs,
macrophages, and B lymphocytes. They are expressed at low levels
on resting APCs and are induced by various stimuli, including
microbial products that engage Toll-like receptors and cytokines
such as interferon-γ (IFN-γ) produced during innate immune
reactions to microbes. The induction of costimulators by microbes
and by the cytokines of innate immunity promotes T cell responses
to microbial antigens. This illustrates an important role of innate
immune responses in enhancing adaptive immunity (see Chapter
4). In addition, activated CD4+ T cells themselves enhance the
expression of B7 costimulators on the APCs by a pathway
dependent on CD40, described later, and this positive feedback
loop serves to amplify T cell responses. Of all potential APCs,
mature DCs express the highest levels of costimulators and, as a
result, are the most potent stimulators of naive T cells.
In Chapter 6, we mentioned the essential role of adjuvants in
inducing primary T cell responses to protein antigens such as
vaccines. Many adjuvants are products of microbes or mimic
molecules produced by microbes and necrotic cells and thus elicit
innate immune responses. One of the major functions of adjuvants
in T cell activation is to stimulate the expression of B7 costimulators
on APCs.
Unactivated, or resting, APCs in normal tissues are capable of
presenting self antigens to naive T cells, but because these tissue
APCs express only low levels of costimulators, potentially self-
reactive T cells that see the self antigens are not activated and may
be 
rendered 
permanently 
unresponsive 
(see 
Chapter 15).
Regulatory T cells, which are important for tolerance to self
antigens (see Chapter 15), are also dependent on B7:CD28-mediated
costimulation for their generation and maintenance. It is possible
that the low levels of B7 costimulators that are constitutively
expressed by resting APCs function together with the self antigens
that are displayed by these APCs to maintain regulatory T cells.
CD28 signals work in cooperation with antigen recognition to
promote the survival, proliferation, and diﬀerentiation of the
antigen-speciﬁc T cells. Costimulatory signaling via CD28 ampliﬁes
signaling pathways that are also induced downstream of the TCR
(see Chapter 7) and may trigger additional signals that cooperate
with TCR-induced signals (Fig. 9.4). PI3-kinase is recruited to the
cytoplasmic tail of CD28, and this in turn activates the kinase AKT,
which alters cellular metabolism and promotes cell survival. CD28
can also contribute to the activation of the JNK mitogen-activated
protein (MAP) kinase via the RAC small G protein and can amplify
the activation of nuclear factor κB (NF-κB). The net results of these
signaling pathways in T cells are the increased expression of anti-
apoptotic proteins such as BCL-2 and BCL-XL that promote cell
survival; increased metabolic activity; enhanced proliferation;
production of cytokines such as IL-2; and diﬀerentiation of the
naive T cells into eﬀector and memory cells.
FIGURE 9.5  The major members of the B7 and
CD28 families.The known B7 family ligands are
expressed on antigen-presenting cells (APCs)
(dendritic cells [DCs], macrophages, and B cells),
and CD28 family receptors are expressed mainly
on T cells. Different CD28 family members
stimulate or inhibit different stages and types of T
cell responses. The functions of cytotoxic T
lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4) and programmed
cell death protein-1 (PD-1) are discussed in
Chapter 15, and the role of inducible costimulator
(ICOS) in the generation and function of T
follicular helper cells is discussed in Chapter 12.
Other widely distributed molecules with limited
homology to B7, such as B7-H3 and B7-H4, have
been identified, but their physiologic roles are not
yet established. Other inhibitory receptors have
also been identified, such as BTLA, TIM-3, and
TIGIT, but these are not homologous to CD28 and
are not shown.
Previously activated eﬀector and memory T cells are less
dependent on costimulation by the B7:CD28 pathway than are naive
cells. This property of eﬀector and memory cells enables them to
respond to antigens presented by various APCs that may reside in
nonlymphoid tissues and may express no or low levels of B7. For
instance, the diﬀerentiation of CD8+ T cells into eﬀector CTLs
requires costimulation, but eﬀector CTLs can respond to and kill
other cells that do not express costimulators.
Other receptors homologous to CD28 and their ligands
homologous to B7 have been identiﬁed, and these proteins regulate T
cell responses both positively and negatively (Fig. 9.5) . Following
the demonstration of the importance of B7 and CD28, several other
proteins structurally related to B7-1 and B7-2 or to CD28 were
discovered. Some members of the B7 and CD28 families are
involved in T cell activation, and others are inhibitors of T cells. In
addition to CD28, the costimulator whose function is best
understood is ICOS (inducible costimulator, CD278). Its ligand,
called ICOS-L (CD275), is expressed on DCs, B cells, and other cell
populations. ICOS plays an essential role in T cell–dependent
antibody responses, particularly in the germinal center reaction. It
is required for the development and activation of T follicular helper
cells, which are essential for the formation of germinal centers and
for the generation of B cells that produce high-aﬃnity antibodies
(see Chapter 12).
The outcome of T cell activation is inﬂuenced by a balance
between engagement of activating and inhibitory receptors of the
CD28 family. The inhibitory receptors of the CD28 family are
CTLA-4 (cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen 4, CD152) and PD-1
(programmed cell death protein 1, CD279). (Their names do not
accurately reﬂect their distribution or function.) The function of
these receptors is often described as coinhibtion, to contrast with
CD28 and ICOS whose function is costimulation. (Note that
sometimes, CD28, the activating receptor, is called a costimulator.)
Both inhibitory receptors are expressed following T cell activation
and function to limit immune responses. The concept that a
balance between activating and inhibitory receptors controls the
magnitude of responses in the immune system was discussed in
Chapter 4 in the context of natural killer (NK) cells (see Fig. 4.10). A
similar idea is applicable to responses of T and B lymphocytes,
although the receptors involved are quite diﬀerent. Because the
physiologic function of the inhibitory receptors CTLA-4 and PD-1 is
to prevent and control responses to self and microbial antigens and
deﬁciencies in their functions due to gene mutations or blockade
with antibodies cause autoimmune diseases, we will discuss them
in more detail in Chapter 15, when we consider immunologic
tolerance and autoimmunity. Suﬃce it to say here that CTLA-4
functions as a competitive inhibitor of CD28 by binding more
strongly to B7 molecules, and PD-1 recruits and activates a tyrosine
phosphatase that blocks tyrosine kinase–dependent signaling by
the TCR and CD28.
It is likely that the various costimulators and inhibitory receptors
of the B7-CD28 family serve distinct roles in diﬀerent immune
responses or at diﬀerent stages of a response. It is thought that the
CD28:B7 interaction is most important for initiating T cell
responses 
by 
activating 
naive 
T 
cells; 
ICOS:ICOS-ligand
interactions are critical for helper T cell–dependent antibody
responses; CTLA-4:B7 interactions inhibit the initial activation of T
lymphocytes in secondary lymphoid organs; and PD1:PD-ligand
y
p
y
y y
p
g
g
interactions mainly inhibit the activation of eﬀector T cell responses
to antigens, such as CD8+ T cell responses, especially in
nonlymphoid tissues.
Other Costimulatory Pathways
Many other T cell surface molecules have been shown to deliver
costimulatory signals in vitro, but their physiologic role in
promoting T cell activation is less clear than that of the CD28
family. Several putative costimulatory receptors belong to the large
tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR) superfamily, and their
ligands are members of the TNF family. Many of these receptors
are expressed on activated T cells and regulatory T cells and have
been shown to stimulate or to inhibit immune responses under
various experimental conditions. OX40 (CD134) is a TNFR family
member, expressed on activated CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, that
functions to maintain cell survival and sustained responses. Its
ligand, OX40L, is expressed on activated APCs. 4-1BB (CD137) and
CD27 are two other TNFR superfamily molecules that are expressed
on activated and memory T cells as well as regulatory T cells; their
roles in regulating immune responses are not well deﬁned. T cells
also express numerous inhibitory receptors in addition to CTLA-4
and PD-1, but their physiologic functions are also not well
established (see Chapter 15). Two that have received considerable
interest are TIM-3 and LAG-3. Inherited mutations in TIM-3 are
associated with systemic inﬂammatory disease.
The interaction of CD40L on T cells with CD40 on APCs enhances
T cell responses by activating the APCs. CD40 ligand (CD40L) is a
TNF superfamily membrane protein that is expressed primarily on
activated T cells, and CD40 is a member of the TNFR superfamily
expressed on B cells, macrophages, and DCs. The functions of CD40
in activating macrophages in cell-mediated immunity and activating
B cells in humoral immune responses are described in Chapters 10
and 12, respectively. Activated helper T cells express CD40L, which
engages CD40 on the APCs and activates the APCs, making them
more potent by enhancing their expression of B7 molecules and
cytokines such as IL-12 that promote T cell diﬀerentiation (Fig. 9.6).
This phenomenon is sometimes called licensing, meaning that
activated T cells license APCs to become more powerful stimulators
of immune responses. Thus, the CD40 pathway indirectly ampliﬁes
T cell responses by inducing costimulators on APCs, but CD40L
does not by itself function as a costimulator for T cells.
Therapeutic Targeting of Costimulators
Based on the understanding of costimulatory pathways, therapeutic
agents have been developed for controlling injurious immune
responses by inhibiting costimulation, called costimulatory
blockade (Fig. 9.7). CTLA-4-Ig, a fusion protein consisting of the
extracellular domain of CTLA-4 and the Fc portion of human IgG,
binds to B7-1 and B7-2 and blocks the B7:CD28 interaction. The
reason for the use of the extracellular domain of CTLA-4 rather
than of CD28 to bind to and block B7 molecules is that CTLA-4 has
a higher aﬃnity for B7 than does CD28. AĴachment of the Fc
portion of IgG increases the in vivo half-life of the protein (see
Chapter 5). CTLA-4-Ig is an approved therapy for rheumatoid
arthritis and transplant rejection. Inhibitors of the CD40L:CD40
pathway are in clinical trials for transplant rejection and
autoimmune diseases.
Antibodies that block the CTLA-4 and PD-1 inhibitory receptors
are approved for the immunotherapy of tumors; they work by
preventing CTLA-4 or PD-1 from binding their ligands, thereby
reducing inhibition and thus enhancing T cell activation and
enabling the cancer-bearing individual to mount more eﬀective
antitumor immune responses (see Chapter 18). Because these
inhibitory receptors impose checkpoints on immune responses,
blocking them therapeutically to enhance immune responses is
called checkpoint blockade. As one might predict from the role of
these inhibitory receptors in maintaining self-tolerance, blocking
them for cancer immunotherapy induces autoimmune reactions in
many patients.
FIGURE 9.6  Role of CD40 in T cell
activation.Antigen recognition by T cells induces
the expression of CD40 ligand (CD40L) on the
activated T cells. CD40L engages CD40 on APCs
and may stimulate the expression of more B7
molecules and the secretion of cytokines that
activate T cells. Thus, CD40L on the T cells
makes the APCs better at promoting and
amplifying T cell activation. APCs, Antigen-
presenting cells; DCs, dendritic cells.
Functional Responses of T Lymphocytes
The earliest responses of antigen-stimulated T cells consist of
changes in the expression of various surface molecules, including
cytokine receptors, as well as the secretion of cytokines. These are
followed by proliferation of the antigen-speciﬁc cells, driven in part
by the secreted cytokines, and then by diﬀerentiation of the
activated cells into eﬀector and memory cells. In the remainder of
this chapter, we will describe these steps, their underlying
mechanisms, and their functional consequences.
FIGURE 9.7  The mechanism of therapeutic
costimulatory blockade. A, The normal T cell
response induced by antigen recognition and
costimulation mediated by B7-CD28. B, A fusion
protein consisting of the extracellular portion of
cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4) and
the Fc tail of an immunoglobulin G (IgG) molecule
is used to bind to and block B7 molecules, thus
preventing their interaction with the activating
receptor CD28 and inhibiting T cell activation. DC,
Dendritic cell.
Changes in Surface Molecules During T Cell
Activation
After activation by antigen recognition and costimulation, there are
characteristic changes in the expression of various surface molecules
in T cells (Fig. 9.8) . Many of the molecules that are expressed in
activated T cells are also involved in the functional responses of the
cells.
• CD69. Within a few hours, T cells increase their expression
of CD69. This protein binds to and reduces surface
expression of the sphingosine-1 phosphate receptor 1
(S1PR1), which we described in Chapter 3 as a receptor that
mediates egress of T cells from secondary lymphoid organs.
The consequence of decreased S1PR1 expression is that
activated T cells are retained in lymphoid organs long
enough to receive the signals that initiate their proliferation
and diﬀerentiation into eﬀector and memory cells. After
that occurs, CD69 expression decreases, the activated T cells
reexpress high levels of S1PR1, and therefore the eﬀector
and memory cells can exit the lymphoid organs (see
Chapter 3).
• CD25 (IL-2Rα). The expression of this component of the
receptor for the growth factor interleukin-2 (IL-2) enables
activated T cells to respond to this cytokine. This process is
described later.
• CD40 ligand (CD40L, CD154). Within 24 to 48 hours after
antigen recognition, CD4+ T cells express high levels of the
ligand for CD40. The expression of CD40L enables these
activated T cells to mediate their key eﬀector functions,
which are to help macrophages and B cells. In addition, as
discussed earlier, CD40L on the T cells activates DCs to
become beĴer APCs, thus providing a positive feedback
mechanism for amplifying T cell responses.
• CTLA-4 and PD-1. CTLA-4 is expressed on T cells within 24
to 48 hours after antigen recognition, and PD-1 may be
induced even more rapidly. The role of these inhibitors in
limiting immune responses is described later in this
chapter, in self tolerance in Chapter 15, and in tumor
immunity in Chapter 18.
FIGURE 9.8  Changes in surface molecules
after T cell activation. A, The approximate
kinetics of expression of selected molecules
during activation of T cells by antigens and
costimulators are shown. The illustrative
examples include a transcription factor (c-
FOS), a cytokine (IL-2), and surface proteins.
These proteins are typically expressed at low
levels in naive T cells and are induced by
activating signals. CTLA-4 (cytotoxic T
lymphocyte antigen 4) and PD-1
(programmed cell death protein 1) are
induced hours or 1 to 2 days after initial
activation. The kinetics are estimates and will
vary with the nature of the antigen, its dose
and persistence, and the type of adjuvant. B,
The major functions of selected surface
molecules are shown and described in the
text. CD40L, CD40 ligand; IL-2R, interleukin-
2 receptor.
• Adhesion molecules and chemokine receptors. During
activation, T cells reduce expression of molecules that bring
them to secondary lymphoid organs (such as L-selectin
[CD62L] and the chemokine receptor CCR7) and increase
the expression of molecules that are involved in their
migration to peripheral sites of infection and tissue injury
(such as the integrins LFA-1 and VLA-4, the ligands for E-
and P-selectins, and various chemokine receptors). These
molecules and their roles in T cell migration were described
in Chapter 3. Activation also increases the expression of
CD44, a receptor for the extracellular matrix molecule
hyaluronan. Binding of CD44 to its ligand helps retain
eﬀector T cells in the tissues at sites of infection and tissue
damage.
Cytokines in T Cell Activation
Numerous cytokines play critical roles in adaptive immune
responses. CD4+ helper T cells make the largest amount and variety
of these cytokines, but some are also produced by CD8+ T cells and
APCs. Cytokines secreted by DCs and other APCs are especially
important for the diﬀerentiation of naive T cells into diﬀerent types
of eﬀector cells. Various cytokines are involved in the proliferation
and diﬀerentiation of antigen-stimulated T cells and in the eﬀector
functions of these cells. Most of these cytokines act on the cells that
produce them (autocrine action) or on nearby cells (paracrine
action).
The roles of cytokines in the eﬀector functions of T cells are
described in Chapters 10 and 11. Here we discuss IL-2, the
p
prototype of a T cell–derived cytokine that stimulates T cell
responses.
FIGURE 9.9  Structure of interleukin-2 and its
receptor.The crystal structure of interleukin-2 (IL-
2) and its trimeric receptor shows how the
cytokine interacts with the three chains of the
receptor. 
From Wang X, Rickert M, Garcia KC. Structure of the quaternary
complex of interleukin-2 with its α, β, and γc receptors, Science
310:1159–1163, 2005, with the permission of the publishers.
Courtesy Drs. Patrick Lupardus and K. Christopher Garcia,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, California.
IL-2 Secretion and IL-2 Receptor Expression
IL-2 is a growth, survival, and diﬀerentiation factor for T
lymphocytes that plays a major role in the proliferation of antigen-
stimulated T cells and in the maintenance of functional regulatory T
cells. IL-2 acts on the same cells that produce it and on adjacent
cells (i.e., it functions as an autocrine and paracrine cytokine).
IL-2 is produced mainly by CD4+ T lymphocytes rapidly after
recognition of antigen and costimulators. Activation of T cells
stimulates transcription of the IL2 gene and synthesis and secretion
of the protein. IL-2 production is rapid and transient, starting
within 1 to 2 hours after antigen recognition, peaking at about 8 to
12 hours, and declining by 24 hours. Secreted IL-2 is a 14- to 17-kD
globular glycoprotein containing four α helices (Fig. 9.9). It is the
prototype of the four-α-helical cytokine family that interacts with
type I cytokine receptors (see Chapter 7).
The high-aﬃnity IL-2 receptor (IL-2R) is transiently expressed on
activation of naive and eﬀector T cells; regulatory T cells always
express this receptor. The IL-2R consists of three noncovalently
associated proteins, IL-2Rα (CD25), IL-2/15Rβ (CD122), and γc
(CD132). Of the three chains, only IL-2Rα is unique to the IL-2R.
The β chain is also part of the IL-15 receptor. The γ chain is shared
with a number of cytokine receptors, including those for IL-4, IL-7,
IL-9, IL-15, and IL-21, and is therefore called the common γ chain
(γc). Both the β and γc chains engage JAK (Janus kinase)-STAT
(signal transducers and activators of transcription) signaling
pathways (see Chapter 7). IL-2Rβγc complexes are expressed at low
levels on resting T cells (and on NK cells) and bind IL-2 with an
equilibrium dissociation constant (Kd) of approximately 10 −9 M
(Fig. 9.10). Expression of IL-2Rα and, to a lesser extent, of IL-2Rβ is
increased on activation of naive CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. The α chain
associates with the βγc complex to form the complete IL-2R, the IL-
2Rαβγc complex, which can bind IL-2 more tightly, with a Kd of
approximately 10 −11 M. Growth stimulation of activated T cells
occurs at a similarly low IL-2 concentration. Because both IL-2
secretion and IL-2Rα production occur in response to antigen
stimulation, the antigen-activated T cells are the ones that
proliferate preferentially in response to the cytokine, compared
with bystander cells that have not recognized antigen. IL-2,
produced in response to antigen stimulation, is itself a stimulus for
induction of IL-2Rα, providing a feedback mechanism by which T
cell responses amplify themselves. Activated T cells express IL-2Rα
transiently, long enough to respond to the growth factor and
proliferate. CD4+ regulatory T cells express the complete IL-2R
complex and require IL-2 for their maintenance, as discussed in the
following section and in Chapter 15. Chronic T cell stimulation
leads to shedding of IL-2Rα, and an increased level of shed IL-2Rα
in the serum is a marker of strong antigenic stimulation (e.g., acute
rejection of a transplanted organ).
Functions of IL-2
The biology of IL-2 is fascinating because it plays critical roles in
both promoting and controlling T cell responses and functions (Fig.
9.11).
• IL-2 stimulates the survival, proliferation, and diﬀerentiation
of antigen-activated T cells. IL-2 promotes survival of cells
by inducing the anti-apoptotic protein BCL-2. It stimulates
cell cycle progression through activation of mTOR
(mechanistic target of rapamycin) (see Chapter 7), which
induces the synthesis of cyclins and relieves a block in cell
cycle progression through degradation of the cell cycle
inhibitor p27. In addition, IL-2 increases production of
eﬀector cytokines, such as IFN-γ and IL-4, by T cells.
• IL-2 is required for the survival and function of regulatory T
cells, which suppress immune responses against self and
other antigens. These cells constitutively express the
complete IL-2 receptor, including the α chain CD25, and are
much more sensitive to IL-2 than are activated and eﬀector
T cells. We will discuss this role of IL-2 in more detail in
Chapter 15, when we describe the properties and functions
of regulatory T cells. An interesting feature of this function
of IL-2 is that regulatory T cells do not produce the
cytokine, so they depend on IL-2 made by other T cells
responding to antigens (see Fig. 9.11B).
Clonal Expansion of T Cells
T cell proliferation in response to antigen recognition is mediated by
a combination of signals from the antigen receptor, costimulators,
and autocrine growth factors, primarily IL-2. The expansion of
antigen-speciﬁc clones that results from this proliferation converts
the small pool of naive antigen-speciﬁc lymphocytes into the large
number of cells required to eliminate the antigen. Before antigen
exposure, the frequency of naive T cells speciﬁc for any antigen is 1
in 105 to 106 lymphocytes or fewer. After microbial antigen
exposure, the frequency of CD8+ T cells speciﬁc for that microbe
may increase to as many as 1 in 3 CD8+ T lymphocytes, representing
a greater than 50,000-fold expansion of antigen-speciﬁc CD8+ T
cells, and the number of speciﬁc CD4+ cells increases up to 1 in 100
CD4+ lymphocytes, or a 1000-fold expansion (Fig. 9.12). Studies in
mice ﬁrst showed this tremendous expansion of the antigen-speciﬁc
population in some acute viral infections, and remarkably it
occurred within as liĴle as 1 week after infection. Equally
remarkable was the ﬁnding that during this massive expansion of
antigen-speciﬁc clones, bystander T cells not speciﬁc for the virus
did not proliferate. The expansion of T cells speciﬁc for the Epstein-
Barr virus and human immunodeﬁciency virus in acutely infected
humans is also on this order of magnitude.
FIGURE 9.10  Regulation of interleukin-2 receptor
expression.Resting (naive) T lymphocytes express
the IL-2Rβγc complex, which has a moderate
affinity for IL-2. Activation of the T cells by
antigen, costimulators, and IL-2 itself leads to
expression of the IL-2Rα chain (also called CD25)
and increased levels of the high-affinity IL-2Rαβγc
complex. IL-2, Interleukin-2.
FIGURE 9.11  Biologic actions of interleukin-2. A,
Interleukin-2 (IL-2) stimulates the survival,
proliferation, and differentiation of T lymphocytes,
acting as an autocrine growth factor, leading to
the generation of effector and memory cells. B,
IL-2 also promotes the survival of regulatory T
cells and maintains their functional capability, and
thus controls immune responses (e.g., against self
antigens). TCR, T cell receptor.
FIGURE 9.12  Clonal expansion of T cells.The
numbers of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells specific for
microbial antigens and the expansion and decline
of the cells during immune responses are
illustrated. The numbers are approximations
based on studies of model microbial and other
antigens in inbred mice. The relative numbers of
viable infectious organisms in an individual over
time is indicated by the tan shaded curve (not
related to the number of T cells).
Differentiation of Activated T Cells Into
Effector Cells
Many of the progeny of the antigen-stimulated T cells diﬀerentiate
into eﬀector cells. As summarized in the overview of this chapter,
eﬀector cells of the CD4+ lineage express surface molecules and
secrete cytokines that activate other cells (B lymphocytes,
macrophages, and DCs). Whereas naive CD4+ T cells produce
mostly IL-2 on activation, eﬀector CD4+ T cells are capable of
producing a large number and variety of cytokines that have diverse
biologic activities. Eﬀector CD8+ cells are cytotoxic and kill infected
cells. Because there are important diﬀerences in eﬀector cells of the
CD4+ and CD8+ lineages, we will describe their development and
functions separately in Chapters 10 and 11.
Development and Properties of Memory T
Cells
T cell–mediated immune responses to an antigen usually result in the
generation of memory T cells speciﬁc for that antigen, which may
persist for years, even a lifetime. Memory cells provide eﬀective
defense against pathogens that are prevalent in the environment
and may be repeatedly encountered. Despite the importance of
immunologic memory, many fundamental questions about the
generation and maintenance of memory cells have still not been
answered.
Memory cells may develop from eﬀector cells along a linear
pathway, or eﬀector and memory populations follow divergent
diﬀerentiation and are two alternative fates of lymphocytes
activated by antigen and other stimuli (Fig. 9.13). The mechanisms
that determine whether an individual antigen-stimulated T cell will
become a short-lived eﬀector cell or enter the long-lived memory
cell pool are not fully established. However, as eﬀector T cells
contract, a small pool of memory precursor eﬀector cells, often
called MPECs, develops from which memory populations are
mainly generated. The signals that drive the development of
memory cells are also not fully understood. These signals may
include the strength of TCR stimulation, the level of costimulation,
the cytokine environment, and others. No single transcription
factor determines whether an antigen-stimulated T cell will become
a terminal eﬀector cell or a memory cell; rather, this choice may be
controlled by quantitative diﬀerences in numerous transcription
factors and epigenetic reprogramming.
Properties of Memory T Cells
The deﬁning properties of memory cells are their ability to survive
for prolonged periods after antigen is eliminated and to mount larger
and more rapid responses to antigens than do naive cells. Several
features of memory cells account for these properties.
• Memory cells express increased levels of anti-apoptotic
proteins, which may be responsible for their prolonged
survival. Whereas naive T cells live for weeks or months
and are replaced by mature cells that develop in the
thymus, memory T cells may survive for years. Thus, as
humans age in an environment in which they are constantly
exposed and responding to infectious agents, the
proportion of memory cells induced by these microbes
compared with naive cells progressively increases. In
individuals older than 50 years of age, half or more of
circulating T cells may be memory cells (see Fig. 2.12). The
anti-apoptotic proteins that promote memory cell survival
include BCL-2 and BCL-XL, which block apoptosis induced
by a deﬁciency of survival signals (see Fig. 15.10). The
presence of these proteins allows memory cells to survive
even after antigen is eliminated and innate immune
responses have subsided, when the stimuli for eﬀector T
cell survival and proliferation are no longer present.
FIGURE 9.13  Development of memory T
cells.In response to antigen and
costimulation, naive T cells differentiate into
effector and memory cells. A, According to
the linear model of memory T cell
differentiation, most effector cells die and
some survivors develop into the memory
population. B, According to the branched
differentiation model, effector and memory
cells are alternative fates of activated T cells.
• Memory cells respond more rapidly to antigen stimulation
than do naive cells speciﬁc for the same antigen. For
example, studies in mice have shown that naive T cells
diﬀerentiate into eﬀector cells in response to antigen in 5 to
7 days, but memory cells acquire eﬀector functions within 1
to 3 days (see Fig. 1.2). This is one reason why secondary
responses to antigen exposure are more rapid than primary
responses. A possible explanation for this accelerated
response is that the gene loci for cytokines and other
eﬀector molecules are ﬁxed in an accessible chromatin state
in memory cells, in part because of changes in methylation
and acetylation of histones. These epigenetically modiﬁed
genes are poised to respond rapidly to antigen challenge.
• The number of memory T cells speciﬁc for any antigen is
greater than the number of naive cells speciﬁc for the same
antigen. As we discussed earlier, proliferation leads to a
large clonal expansion in all adaptive immune responses,
and the memory cells that remain from the expanded clone
are typically 10- to 100-fold more numerous than the pool of
naive cells before antigen encounter. The increased clone
size is one reason that antigen challenge in a previously
immunized individual induces a larger response than the
ﬁrst immunization in a naive individual.
• Memory cells are able to migrate to peripheral tissues and
respond to antigens at these sites. As we discussed in
Chapter 3, naive T cells migrate preferentially to secondary
lymphoid organs where they respond to antigens for the
ﬁrst time, but memory cells can migrate to virtually any
tissue. These diﬀerences are related to diﬀerences in the
expression of adhesion molecules and chemokine receptors.
In addition, memory T cells are less dependent on
costimulation than are naive cells, allowing memory cells to
respond to antigens presented by a wide range of APCs in
peripheral tissues; in contrast, as we have discussed earlier,
naive T cells are dependent on antigen presentation by
mature DCs in secondary lymphoid organs.
• Memory cells undergo slow proliferation, and this ability to
self-renew may contribute to the long life span of the
memory pool. The cycling of these cells may be driven by
cytokines. Because of the capacity for self-renewal, memory
cells have been likened to stem cells. Although they survive
for long periods, memory cells are functionally inactive and
have to be restimulated by antigen to become functional
eﬀector cells.
• The maintenance of memory cells is dependent on cytokines
but does not require antigen recognition. The most
important cytokine for the maintenance of memory CD4+
and CD8+ T cells is IL-7, which also plays a key role in early
lymphocyte development (see Chapter 8) and in the survival
of naive T cells (see Chapter 2). Predictably, high expression
of the IL-7 receptor (CD127) is characteristic of memory T
cells. Memory CD8+ T cells also depend on the related
cytokine IL-15 for their survival. IL-7 and IL-15 induce the
expression of anti-apoptotic proteins and stimulate low-
level proliferation, both of which maintain populations of
memory T cells for long periods. The ability of memory cells
to survive without antigen recognition has been best
demonstrated by experiments in mice in which antigen
receptors are genetically deleted after mature lymphocytes
have developed. In these mice, the number of naive
lymphocytes drops rapidly, but memory cells are
maintained.
The most reliable phenotypic markers for memory T cells appear
to be the surface expression of the IL-7 receptor and a protein of
unknown function called CD27 and the absence of markers of naive
and recently activated T cells (see Table 2.5). In humans, most naive
T cells express the 200-kD isoform of the surface molecule CD45
called CD45RA (for “restricted A”), and most memory T cells
express a 180-kD isoform of CD45 called CD45RO (see Chapter 2).
Both CD4 +  and CD8 +  memory T cells are heterogeneous and can
be subdivided into subsets based on their homing properties and
functions. Three major subsets of memory T cells are known.
• Central memory T cells (TCM) express the chemokine
receptor CCR7 and the adhesion molecule L-selectin and
home mainly to lymph nodes. They have a limited capacity
to perform eﬀector functions when they encounter antigen,
but they undergo brisk proliferative responses and generate
many eﬀector cells on antigen challenge. They provide a
pool of memory cells that can respond to antigen challenge
and develop into eﬀector cells.
• Eﬀector memory T cells (TEM), on the other hand, do not
express CCR7 or L-selectin, and they home to peripheral
sites, especially mucosal tissues. On stimulation by antigen,
TEM cells rapidly produce eﬀector cytokines such as IFN-γ
or become cytotoxic, but they do not proliferate much. This
eﬀector subset, therefore, is poised for a rapid response to
exposure to a microbe, but complete eradication of
infection may also require large numbers of eﬀectors
generated from the pool of central memory T cells. A subset
of TEM cells in humans expresses the CD45RA isoform,
which is characteristic of naive T cells. This population is
called TEMRA cells (T eﬀector memory RA+); whether it has
unique functional properties is not known.
• Tissue-resident memory T cells (TRM) are present in various
nonlymphoid tissues, do not circulate in the blood, and may
provide rapid defense against microbes in the tissues. Most
of these cells express high levels of CD69, the molecule that
reduces expression of S1PR1 (see Chapter 3). As a result,
these cells do not respond to the high concentrations of S1P
in the lymph and blood, facilitating their retention in
tissues. A fourth population of memory T cells, called
peripheral memory T cells (TPM), has been described. These
cells make important contributions to secondary responses
in tissues and, unlike TRM cells, are capable of moving
between the circulation and tissues.
Memory T cells are also heterogeneous in terms of cytokine
proﬁles. For example, some CD4+ memory T cells may be derived
from activated T cells that are not commiĴed to the Th1, Th2, or
Th17 phenotype (described in Chapter 10), and when reactivated by
exposure to antigen and cytokines, they can diﬀerentiate into any of
these subsets. Other memory T cells may be derived from
diﬀerentiated Th1, Th2, or Th17 eﬀectors and retain their respective
cytokine proﬁles on reactivation.
Decline of T Cell Responses
Elimination of antigen leads to contraction of the T cell response,
and this decline is responsible for maintaining homeostasis in the
immune system. Several mechanisms may account for the decline.
• Cell death.As the antigen is eliminated and the innate
immune response associated with antigen exposure abates,
the signals that normally keep activated lymphocytes alive
and proliferating are no longer present. As mentioned
earlier, costimulation and growth factors such as IL-2
stimulate expression of the anti-apoptotic proteins BCL-2
and BCL-XL in the activated lymphocytes, and these
proteins keep cells viable. As the level of costimulation and
the amount of available IL-2 decrease, the levels of anti-
apoptotic proteins in the cells drop. At the same time,
growth factor deprivation activates sensors of cellular stress
(such as the BH3-only protein BIM), which trigger the
mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis and are no longer
opposed by the anti-apoptotic proteins (see Fig. 15.10). The
net result of these changes is that most of the cells that
were produced by activation die and the generation of
newly activated cells declines, so the pool of antigen-
activated lymphocytes contracts.
• Inhibition of T cell activation. A number of mechanisms
inhibit T cell responses after they have been initiated. These
mechanisms likely contribute to physiological
downregulation of immune responses to pathogens, and
they also are important in maintenance of self tolerance.
○ Reduced activating signals. Several intracellular enzymes
function to limit the duration or magnitude of T cell
activation responses. These include phosphatases such
as SHP-1, SHP-2 and SHIP, which dephosphorylate
signaling substrates, and E3 ubiquitin ligases such as
CBL-b, which degrade activated signaling intermediates
(see Chapter 7). These enzymes may be activated after
TCR and costimulatory pathways are engaged.
○ Engagement of cell surface inhibitory molecules. As
mentioned earlier, PD-1 and CTLA-4 are expressed on
activated lymphocytes, and both may function to limit
continued activation. CTLA-4 upregulation on recently
activated T cells may primarily inhibit T cell activation
in lymph nodes by competing with CD28 for B7
proteins and thus prevent the generation of eﬀector
and memory cells. PD-1 is induced in both activated
CD8+ and CD4+ T cells. Its inhibitory function is best
understood in the context of restraining previously
activated CD8+ T cells in peripheral tissues. It is not
clear if these coinhibitors regulate all T cell responses
or responses mainly to selected antigens (e.g., for PD-1,
some viruses, tumors, and self antigens) (see Chapter
15).
○ Regulatory T cells. Most immune responses in which
eﬀector T cells are activated are accompanied by the
development and activation of regulatory T cells.
Regulatory T cells function in several ways to inhibit T
cell responses, including the engagement of CTLA-4 on
their surface with B7 on APCs, as discussed further in
Chapter 15. Regulatory T cells limit immunopathology
during infection and also suppress autoimmunity and
allergy.
Summary
• T cell responses are initiated by signals that are generated
by T cell receptor (TCR) recognition of peptide–major
histocompatibility complex (MCH) complexes on the
surface of antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and through
signals provided at the same time by costimulators
expressed on APCs.
• The best-deﬁned costimulators are members of the B7
family, which are recognized by receptors of the CD28
family expressed on T cells. The expression of B7
costimulators on APCs is increased by encounter with
microbes, providing a mechanism for generating optimal
responses against infectious pathogens. Some members of
the CD28 family inhibit T cell responses, and the outcome
of T cell antigen recognition is determined by the balance
between engagement of activating and inhibitory receptors
of this family.
• T cell responses to antigen and costimulators include
changes in the expression of surface molecules, synthesis of
cytokines and cytokine receptors, cellular proliferation, and
diﬀerentiation into eﬀector and memory cells.
• The surface molecules whose expression is induced on T cell
activation include proteins that are involved in retention of
T cells in lymphoid organs, cytokines and cytokine
receptors, eﬀector and regulatory molecules, and molecules
that inﬂuence migration of the T cells.
• Shortly after activation, T cells produce the cytokine
interleukin-2 (IL-2) and express high levels of the functional
IL-2 receptor. IL-2 drives the proliferation of the cells,
which can result in marked expansion of antigen-speciﬁc
clones.
• Some activated T cells may diﬀerentiate into memory cells,
which survive for long periods and respond rapidly to
antigen challenge. The maintenance of memory cells is
dependent on cytokines such as IL-7, which may promote
the expression of anti-apoptotic proteins and stimulate low-
level cycling. Memory T cells are heterogeneous and consist
of populations that diﬀer in migration properties and
functional responses.
• T cell responses decline after elimination of the antigen,
thus returning the system to rest. The decline is because the
g
y
signals for continued lymphocyte activation are eliminated
and because of various inhibitory mechanisms.
Selected Readings
∗Indicates publications of historical interest, generally reporting
the discovery of a phenomenon or process that was later shown to
be of fundamental importance in the immune system. Many (but
not all) of these discoveries led to Nobel Prizes for the
discoverer(s). The nature of the discovery is summarized brieﬂy in
each reference.
T Cell Activation
Buchholz V.R, Schumacher T.N, Busch D.H. T cell fate at the single-cell level.  Annu Rev
Immunol . 2016;34:65–92.
Chapman N.M, Boothby M.R, Chi .H. Metabolic coordination of T cell quiescence and
activation.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2020;20:55–70.
Grossman Z, Paul W.E. Dynamic tuning of lymphocytes: physiological basis, mechanisms,
and function.  Annu Rev Immunol . 2015;33:677–713.
Huppa J.B, Davis M.M. The interdisciplinary science of T-cell recognition.  Adv Immunol
. 2013;119:1–50.
Iwasaki A, Medzhitov R. Control of adaptive immunity by the innate immune system.  Nat
Immunol . 2015;16:343–353.
Jenkins M.K, Moon J.J. The role of naive T cell precursor frequency and recruitment in
dictating immune response magnitude.  J Immunol . 2012;188:4135–4140.
Kumar B.V, Connors T.J, Farber D.L. Human T cell development, localization, and function
throughout Life.  Immunity . 2018;48:202–213.
Malissen B, Bongrand P. Early T cell activation: integrating biochemical, structural, and
biophysical cues.  Annu Rev Immunol . 2015;33:539–561.
Costimulation: B7, CD28, and More
AĴanasio J, Wherry E.J. Costimulatory and coinhibitory receptor pathways in infectious
disease.  Immunity . 2016;44:1052–1068.
∗Bretscher P, Cohn M. A theory of self-nonself discrimination.  Science . 1970;169:1042–
1049 (The two-signal model for lymphocyte activation.).
Chen L, Flies D.B. Molecular mechanisms of T cell co-stimulation and co-inhibition.  Nat
Rev Immunol . 2013;13:227–242.
Esensten J.H, Helou Y.A, Chopra G, et al. CD28 Costimulation: from mechanism to
therapy.  Immunity . 2016;44:973–988.
Linsley P.S, Clark E.A, LedbeĴer J.A. T-cell antigen CD28 mediates adhesion with B cells by
interacting with activation antigen B7/BB-1.  Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 1990;87:5031–
5035.
∗Martin P.J, LedbeĴer J.A, Morishita Y, et al. A 44 kilodalton cell surface homodimer
regulates interleukin 2 production by activated human T lymphocytes.  J Immunol
. 1986;136:3282–3287.
Weiss A, Manger B, Imboden J. Synergy between the T3/antigen receptor complex and
Tp44 in the activation of human T cells.  J Immunol . 1986;137:819–825 (The two virtually
contemporaneous publications that demonstrated that CD28 provided the second signal for T
cell activation.).
Muller J, Baeyens A, Dustin M.L. Tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily in T cell
priming and eﬀector function.  Adv Immunol . 2018;140:21–57.
van den Broek T, Borghans J.A.M, van Wijk F. The full spectrum of human naive T cells. 
Nat Rev Immunol . 2018;18:363–373.
Ward-Kavanagh L.K, Lin W.W, Sedy J.R, Ware C.F. The TNF receptor superfamily in co-
stimulating and co-inhibitory responses.  Immunity . 2016;44:1005–1019.
T Cell Cytokines
Abbas A.K, TroĴa E, Simeonov D.R, et al. Revisiting IL-2: biology and therapeutic
prospects.  Sci Immunol . 2018;3:eaat1492.
Boyman O, Sprent J. The role of interleukin-2 during homeostasis and activation of the
immune system.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2012;12:180–190.
Calvo V, Izquierdo M. Imaging polarized secretory traﬃc at the immune synapse in living T
lymphocytes.  Front Immunol . 2018;9:684.
∗Morgan DA, RusceĴi FW, Gallo RC. Selective in vitro growth of T lymphocytes from
normal human bone marrows. Science. 1976;193:1007-1008; and Gillis S, Smith KA.
Long-term culture of tumor-speciﬁc cytotoxic T cells. Nature. 1977;268:154-156. (The
discovery of a soluble “factor” that stim ulated the proliferation of T lymphocytes,
subsequently puriﬁed and named IL-2.)
Ross S.H, Cantrell D.A. Signaling and function of interleukin-2 in T lymphocytes.  Annu Rev
Immunol . 2018;36:411–433.
Spolski R, Li P, Leonard W.J. Biology and regulation of IL-2: from molecular mechanisms to
human therapy.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2018;18:648–659.
Memory T Cells
Carbone F.R. Tissue-resident memory T cells and ﬁxed immune surveillance in
nonlymphoid organs.  J Immunol . 2015;195:17–22.
Chen Y, Zander R, Khatun A, et al. Transcriptional and epigenetic regulation of eﬀector and
memory CD8 T cell diﬀerentiation.  Front Immunol . 2018;9:2826.
Farber D.L, Netea M.G, Radbruch A, et al. Immunological memory: lessons from the past
and a look to the future.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2016;16:124–128.
Morris S.E, Farber D.L, Yates A.J. Tissue-resident memory T cells in mice and humans:
towards a quantitative ecology.  J Immunol . 2019;203:2561–2569.
Mueller S.N, Mackay L.K. Tissue-resident memory T cells: local specialists in immune
defence.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2016;16:79–89.
Nguyen Q.P, Deng T.Z, Witherden D.A, Goldrath A.W. Origins of CD4+ circulating and
tissue-resident memory T-cells.  Immunology . 2019;157:3–12.
Omilusik K.D, Goldrath A.W. Remembering to remember: T cell memory maintenance and
plasticity.  Curr Opin Immunol . 2019;58:89–97.
Pace L, Amigorena S. Epigenetics of T cell fate decision.  Curr Opin Immunol . 2020;63:43–
50.
Rosato P.C, Wijeyesinghe S, Stolley J.M, Masopust D. Integrating resident memory into T
cell diﬀerentiation models.  Curr Opin Immunol . 2020;63:35–42.
∗Sallusto F, Lenig D, Forster R, et al. Two subsets of memory T lymphocytes with distinct
homing potentials and eﬀector functions.  Nature . 1999;401:708–712 (The identiﬁcation of
central and eﬀector memory T cells in humans, opening the way to studies of memory cell
heterogeneity.).
Szabo P.A, Miron M, Farber D.L. Location, location, location: tissue resident memory T cells
in mice and humans.  Sci Immunol . 2019;4(34):eaas9673.
Chapter 10: Diﬀerentiation and
Functions of CD4+ Eﬀector T
Cells 
Overview of CD4+ T Cell–Mediated Immune Responses,
Subsets of CD4+ Effector T Cells,
Properties of Th1, Th2, and Th17 Subsets,
Development of Th1, Th2, and Th17 Subsets,
The Th1 Subset,
Development of Th1 Cells,
Functions of Th1 Cells,
The Th2 Subset,
Development of Th2 Cells,
Functions of Th2 Cells,
The Th17 Subset,
Development of Th17 Cells,
Functions of Th17 Cells,
Functions of Other HELPER T Cell Subsets,
Other Subsets of CD4+ Effector T Cells,
Other Cytokine-Producing T Cells,
Summary,
Defense against microbes that is mediated by T cells is called cell-
mediated immunity. T cells provide protection against intracellular
and extracellular pathogens and also assist in the elimination of
tumor cells. Historically, immunologists divided adaptive immunity
into humoral immunity, which (in experiments with animals) can
be transferred from an immunized donor to a naive host by
antibodies, and cell-mediated immunity, which can be transferred
not by antibodies but by T lymphocytes. Humoral immunity
neutralizes and eliminates extracellular microbes and toxins that
are accessible to antibodies. However, antibodies cannot aĴack
microbes that survive inside phagocytes and other cells. T cell–
mediated immunity evolved to provide defense against such
microbes. T cells can also enhance killing of microbes that normally
live and replicate outside cells but are killed upon ingestion by
phagocytes that are activated by T cell–derived cytokines.
Therefore, defects in cell-mediated immunity result in increased
susceptibility to infection by viruses and bacteria that are
obligatory intracellular microbes, as well as some extracellular
bacteria and fungi that are eliminated by phagocytes. T cell–
mediated reactions are also important in allograft rejection (see
Chapter 17), 
antitumor 
immunity 
(see 
Chapter 18), 
and
hypersensitivity diseases (see Chapter 19).
The two major classes of T cells, CD4+ and CD8+, function in
diﬀerent and complementary ways in cell-mediated immune
reactions (Fig. 10.1). The hallmark of CD4+ eﬀector T lymphocytes is
that they function mainly through secreted cytokines. They serve a
critical role in phagocyte-mediated elimination of microbes, which
is the historical deﬁnition of cell-mediated immunity. CD4+ T cells
also 
activate 
other 
leukocytes, 
including 
neutrophils 
and
eosinophils, and stimulate antibody production by B cells. CD8+
eﬀector cells kill infected cells and tumor cells and are responsible
for the eradication of microbes, typically viruses, that survive and
replicate inside any cell, including nonphagocytic cells. In this
chapter, we will describe the role of CD4+ T cells in eliminating
microbes. At the end, we will discuss some less numerous
populations of T cells whose roles in defense and disease are not as
well deﬁned. The diﬀerentiation and function of CD8+ eﬀector cells
are discussed in Chapter 11.
Overview of CD4+ T Cell–Mediated Immune
Responses
The sequence of events in the responses of CD4+ T cells involves
the initial activation of these cells in lymphoid organs to generate
eﬀector and memory cells, migration of many of these eﬀector cells
to sites of infection, and elimination of infectious pathogens at
these sites (Fig. 10.2). We described the early steps in the activation
of T cells in Chapter 9, and we will describe the generation and
functions of eﬀector CD4+ T cells in this chapter.
FIGURE 10.1  Role of T cells in eradicating
infections. A, CD4+ T cells recognize antigens of
phagocytosed and extracellular microbes and
produce cytokines and cell surface molecules that
recruit and activate the phagocytes to kill the
microbes. CD8+ T cells can also secrete some
cytokines and participate in similar reactions (not
shown). B, CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs)
recognize antigens of microbes residing in the
cytoplasm of infected cells and kill the cells.
Eﬀector CD4+ T cells are generated in secondary lymphoid organs,
and most of the eﬀector cells leave these organs and migrate to
peripheral sites of infection, where they function to eliminate
microbes. This migration of eﬀector T cells to sites of infection is
dependent on endothelial adhesion molecules and chemokines
expressed at these sites (see Chapter 3). Although migration is
largely independent of antigen, T cells that recognize antigen in
tissues may be preferentially retained there. Once in the tissues,
the T cells encounter microbial antigens presented by macrophages
and other antigen-presenting cells (APCs). T cells that speciﬁcally
recognize antigens receive signals through their antigen receptors
that increase the aﬃnity of integrins for their ligands. Two of these
integrins, VLA-4 and -5 (very late antigens-4 and -5), bind to
ﬁbronectin in extracellular matrices, and a third adhesion molecule,
CD44, which is also highly expressed on activated T cells, binds to
hyaluronan. In addition, chemokine receptors expressed on
activated T cells bind chemokines that are produced in tissues. As a
result of these adhesive and chemotactic interactions, antigen-
speciﬁc eﬀector T cells that encounter the antigen are retained at
the extravascular site. T cells not speciﬁc for the antigen that
migrate into a site of inﬂammation may die in the tissue or return
to the circulation through lymphatic vessels. Some memory T cells
also migrate to peripheral tissues, using the same adhesion
molecules and chemokine receptors as do eﬀector cells.
A fraction of the CD4+ T cells that are activated in secondary
lymphoid organs do not exit the organs but migrate into lymphoid
follicles within the organs, where they help B cells to produce high-
aﬃnity antibodies of diﬀerent isotypes. These helper T cells are
called T follicular helper (TĢ) cells; their development, properties,
and functions in humoral immune responses are described in
Chapter 12.
In 
cell-mediated 
immune 
responses 
against 
phagocytosed
microbes, T cells speciﬁcally recognize microbial antigens, but
recruited phagocytes and other myeloid cells actually destroy the
pathogens. Thus, eﬀector T cells of the CD4+ lineage link speciﬁc
recognition of microbes with the activation of other leukocytes that
destroy the microbes. This fundamental concept was ﬁrst
appreciated from studies of cell-mediated immunity to the
intracellular bacterium Listeria monocytogenes (Fig. 10.3). It was
shown that mice previously infected with a low (sublethal) dose of
Listeria were protected from challenge with higher doses that were
lethal in previously uninfected animals. Protection could be
transferred to naive animals with lymphocytes (later shown to be T
lymphocytes) from the infected mice but not with serum, the ﬂuid
fraction of cloĴed blood that contains antibodies. These results
demonstrated that speciﬁc protection against an intracellular
bacterial infection was mediated by T cells. However, in vitro, the
bacteria were killed not by T cells from immune animals but by
activated 
macrophages, 
emphasizing 
the 
central 
role 
of
macrophages in microbe elimination. Such studies established that
defense against intracellular microbes required cooperative
interactions between antigen-speciﬁc T cells and microbicidal
phagocytes, and we now know this type of interaction is an
important component of cell-mediated immunity.
Ingestion and elimination of microbes by phagocytes is also a
major reaction of innate immunity, but T cells greatly enhance this
function of phagocytes. As we discussed in Chapter 4, phagocytes
recognize microbes and are activated by pathogen-associated
molecular paĴerns, such as Toll-like receptor (TLR) ligands, and
they are capable of destroying a variety of microbes. However,
many infectious pathogens have evolved to resist this mechanism
of innate immunity and can survive and even replicate inside
macrophages. In such infections, T cells recognize microbial
protein antigens and activate phagocytes, enabling them to destroy
microbes that may not be eliminated by the innate functions of the
macrophages in the absence of T cell help. CD4+ eﬀector T cells
activate phagocytes via surface molecules, principally CD40 ligand
(CD40L), and secreted cytokines. We will see how these signals
cooperate when we discuss the activation of macrophages later in
this chapter.
FIGURE 10.2  Steps in CD4+ T cell–mediated
immune responses.CD4+ T cells recognize
peptides that are derived from protein antigens
and presented by dendritic cells in secondary
lymphoid organs. The T lymphocytes are
stimulated to proliferate and differentiate into
effector (and memory) cells, which enter the
circulation and migrate to sites of infection in
peripheral tissues. In the tissues, effector T cells
recognize the antigen and respond by secreting
cytokines that recruit more leukocytes and
activate phagocytes to eradicate the infection.
Inﬂammation, consisting of leukocyte recruitment and activation,
accompanies many of the reactions of CD4 +   T lymphocytes. This T
cell–dependent inﬂammation serves as an antimicrobial defense
mechanism but also can be injurious to tissues. When a T cell
reaction causes injury, it is called delayed-type hypersensitivity
(DTH), the term hypersensitivity referring to an excessive or
damaging immune response. DTH frequently occurs together with
protective cell-mediated immunity against microbes and may be
the cause of much of the pathology associated with certain types of
infectious and autoimmune diseases (see Chapters 16 and 19).
Because the functions of CD4+ T cells are mediated in large part
by cytokines, there has been great interest in deﬁning these
cytokines, which cells produce them, and how they function. An
important discovery in immunology was the identiﬁcation of
populations of CD4+ eﬀector T cells that produce diﬀerent
cytokines and, therefore, perform distinct functions. We will begin
with a description of the major properties of these subsets and then
describe the development and functions of each population.
Subsets of CD4+ Effector T Cells
There are four major subsets of CD4 +   eﬀector T cells, three of
which, called Th1, Th2, and Th17, secrete diﬀerent sets of cytokines,
function in host defense against distinct types of infectious
pathogens, and are involved in diﬀerent types of tissue injury in
immunologic diseases (Fig. 10.4). The fourth subset, TĢ cells, is
important in antibody-mediated immunity and is discussed in
Chapter 12. Regulatory T cells are another distinct population of
CD4+ T cells. They are not eﬀector cells; rather, their function is to
control immune reactions to self and foreign antigens, and they are
described in Chapter 15 in the context of immunologic tolerance.
FIGURE 10.3  Cell-mediated immunity to Listeria
monocytogenes.Immunity to L. monocytogenes is
measured by inhibition of bacterial growth in the
spleens of animals inoculated with a known dose
of viable bacteria. Such immunity can be
transferred to normal mice by T lymphocytes (A)
but not by serum (B) from syngeneic mice
previously immunized with killed or low doses of L.
monocytogenes. In an in vitro assay of cell-
mediated immunity, the bacteria are actually killed
by activated macrophages and not by T cells (C).
Properties of Th1, Th2, and Th17 Subsets
It was appreciated many years ago that host responses to diﬀerent
infections vary greatly, as do the reactions in diﬀerent immunologic
diseases. For instance, the immune reaction to bacteria that survive
within phagocytes, like Mycobacterium tuberculosis, is dominated by
activated macrophages, whereas the reaction to helminthic
parasites consists of the production of immunoglobulin E (IgE)
antibody and the activation of eosinophils. Furthermore, in many
chronic autoimmune diseases, tissue damage is caused by
inﬂammation with accumulation of neutrophils and macrophages,
whereas in allergic disorders, the lesions contain abundant
eosinophils along with other leukocytes. The realization that all of
these phenotypically diverse immunologic reactions are dependent
on CD4+ T cells raised an obvious question: How can the same
CD4+ cells elicit such diﬀerent responses? The answer, as we now
know, is that CD4+ T cells consist of subsets of eﬀector cells that
produce distinct sets of cytokines, elicit quite diﬀerent reactions,
and are involved in host defense against diﬀerent microbes, as well
as in distinct types of immunologic diseases. The ﬁrst two subsets
that were discovered were called types 1 and 2 helper T cells, or Th1
and Th2. The Th17 subset, so named because its characteristic
cytokine is interleukin-17 (IL-17), was identiﬁed many years later as
the T cells responsible for some CD4+ T cell–mediated
inﬂammatory diseases that could not be aĴributed to the Th1 and
Th2 subsets.
The deﬁning characteristics of diﬀerentiated subsets of eﬀector
cells are the cytokines they produce, which is related to the
transcription factors they express. The transcription factors are
responsible for production of diﬀerent cytokines by these subsets
as well as expression of diﬀerent chemokine receptors and other
proteins. These characteristics of each subset are described in the
following section.
The signature cytokines produced by the major CD4 +   T cell
subsets are interferon (IFN)-γ for Th1 cells; IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 for
Th2 cells; and IL-17 and IL-22 for Th17 cells (see Fig. 10.4) . The
cytokines produced by these T cell subsets determine their eﬀector
functions and roles in diseases. Some of the cytokines made by
each subset also stimulate the development and expansion of that
subset and inhibit diﬀerentiation of the other Th subsets, thus
contributing to ampliﬁcation of each type of helper T cell response,
a process called polarization (discussed later). The production of
distinct sets of cytokines is initiated by the expression of subset-
speciﬁc transcription factors and is sustained by epigenetic
modiﬁcations of speciﬁc cytokine gene loci. These mechanisms are
described later.
Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells have distinct paĴerns of homing, in large
part because they express chemokine receptors and adhesion
molecules that direct them to migrate into diﬀerent sites of
infections. We discussed the control of lymphocyte migration in
Chapter 3. Th1, but not Th2, cells express high levels of the
chemokine receptors CXCR3 and CCR5, which bind to chemokines
produced in tissues during innate immune responses. Therefore,
Th1 cells tend to be abundant at sites of infection where the
infectious agents trigger strong innate immune reactions; these
agents include many bacteria and viruses. Th1 cells also express
high levels of ligands for E-selectin and P-selectin, which assist in
the migration of these cells to sites of strong inﬂammation (where
the selectins are expressed on the endothelium). In contrast, Th2
cells express the chemokine receptors CCR3, CCR4, and CCR8,
which recognize chemokines that are highly expressed at sites of
helminthic infection or allergic reactions, particularly in mucosal
tissues, and so Th2 cells tend to migrate to these tissues. Th17 cells
express CCR6, which binds the chemokine CCL20, which is
produced by various tissue cells and macrophages in some bacterial
and fungal infections.
FIGURE 10.4  Properties of the major subsets of
CD4+ helper T cells.Naive CD4+ T cells may
differentiate into distinct subsets of effector cells
in response to antigen, costimulators, and
cytokines. Each subset acts mainly on another cell
of the immune system (referred to as target cells)
and serves different functions and roles in
disease. T follicular helper (Tfh) cells are
discussed in Chapter 12. IL, Interleukin.
Although for many years it was thought that Th1 and Th2 cells
help B lymphocytes to produce diﬀerent antibodies, it is now clear
that, as stated earlier, most of these diﬀerentiated eﬀector cells
leave the lymphoid organs where they are generated and migrate to
peripheral sites of infection. Antibody responses develop mostly in
secondary lymphoid organs, and particularly in germinal centers,
where antigen-speciﬁc B and T cells interact. The CD4+ helper T
cells that remain in secondary lymphoid organs to help B
lymphocytes are not classical Th1 or Th2 but TĢ cells that make
some of the same cytokines that Th1 and Th2 cells do (see Chapter
12).
Diﬀerent inﬂammatory diseases are caused by excessive reactions
of diﬀerent helper T cell subsets. In general, Th1 and Th17 cells play
prominent 
roles 
in 
autoimmune 
diseases 
associated 
with
inﬂammation, whereas allergic reactions are dominated by Th2
cells.
The identiﬁcation of Th1, Th2, and Th17 subsets has provided
many insights into lymphocyte responses. However, there are some
caveats with the idea that all eﬀector CD4+ T cells can be classiﬁed
into these subsets based on deﬁned criteria. Many CD4+ eﬀector T
cells produce combinations of cytokines or only some of the
cytokines characteristic of a particular subset and are not readily
classiﬁable into separable populations. For instance, in many
inﬂammatory reactions, there may be individual T cells that
produce both IFN-γ (characteristic of Th1 cells) and IL-17 (typical
of Th17 cells). Conversely, some cells may produce cytokines that
are not characteristic of any of the three subsets (such as IL-9) or
only some of the cytokines produced by a particular subset. These
restricted cytokine proﬁles have led to an expanding nomenclature
describing these populations (such as Th9, Th22, and so on). It is
not known whether cells with mixed or limited cytokine paĴerns
are intermediates in the development of the classical polarized
eﬀector cells or are themselves ﬁxed populations.
It is also clear that some of these eﬀector T cells may convert
from one cytokine proﬁle to another in response to changes in
activation conditions. The extent and signiﬁcance of plasticity or
stability of diﬀerentiated eﬀector T cells remain topics of active
research.
Although CD4+ eﬀector T cells are the main sources of many
cytokines in protective and pathologic adaptive immune responses,
the same cytokines may be produced by other cell types, such as γδ
T cells and innate lymphoid cells (ILCs). As we discussed in
Chapter 4, ILCs are classiﬁed into groups that produce many of the
same cytokines as subsets of eﬀector CD4+ T cells do. For this
reason, the concept has evolved that cytokine-dependent host
defense and pathologic reactions are mediated by the coordinated
actions of ILCs early in the response and eﬀector CD4+ T cells late.
Such responses may be viewed as types of immunity; type 1
immunity relies on ILC1, NK, and Th1 cells; type 2 immunity on
ILC2 and Th2 cells; and type 3 immunity on ILC3 and Th17 cells.
Development of Th1, Th2, and Th17 Subsets
Diﬀerentiated Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells all develop from naive CD4 +  
T lymphocytes, mainly in response to cytokines present early during
immune responses. The process of eﬀector T cell development
involves multiple steps. Signals that T cells receive from APCs and
other cells at the site of the immune response initiate the
conversion of antigen-stimulated T cells to eﬀector cells.
Developing eﬀector cells become progressively commiĴed to a
particular cytokine production proﬁle, and cytokines amplify these
diﬀerentiation pathways. The net result is the progressive
accumulation of T cell populations that produce distinct sets of
cytokines.
There are several important general features of T cell subset
diﬀerentiation.
• The cytokines that drive the development of CD4 +   T cell
subsets are produced by APCs (primarily dendritic cells
[DCs] and macrophages) and other immune cells (such as NK
cells and mast cells) present in the lymphoid organ where the
immune response is initiated. DCs that encounter microbes
and display microbial antigens are activated to produce
cytokines (as well as costimulators) as part of innate
immune responses to the microbes (see Chapter 4).
Diﬀerent microbes may stimulate DCs to produce distinct
sets of cytokines, perhaps because the microbes activate
diﬀerent DC populations or are recognized by diﬀerent
microbial sensors in the cells. Other cells of innate
immunity, such as NK cells, ILCs, and mast cells, also
produce cytokines that promote the development of
antigen-stimulated T cells into diﬀerent eﬀector subsets.
• Stimuli other than cytokines inﬂuence the paĴern of helper T
cell diﬀerentiation. Experimental evidence indicates that the
aﬃnity of the T cell receptor (TCR) for antigen, the amount
of antigen, and the nature of the APC all determine the
dominant subset that develops after antigen recognition.
But the contribution of these factors to the development of
eﬀector subsets in most immune responses is not clear. The
genetic makeup of the host is another important
determinant of the paĴern of T cell diﬀerentiation. Some
inbred strains of mice develop Th2 responses to the same
microbes that stimulate Th1 diﬀerentiation in most other
strains. Strains of mice that develop Th2-dominant
responses are susceptible to infections by intracellular
microbes (see Chapter 16). It is possible, but not proven,
that people diﬀer in their propensity to mount Th1, Th2, or
Th17 responses based on inherited genes.
• The distinct cytokine proﬁles of diﬀerentiated cell
populations are controlled by particular transcription
factors that activate cytokine gene expression and by
chromatin modiﬁcations aﬀecting accessibility of these
factors to the promoters and regulatory elements of cytokine
genes. The transcription factors are activated or induced by
signals from the TCR, innate immune receptors,
costimulators, and cytokine receptors. Each subset
y
p
expresses its own characteristic set of transcription factors.
As the subsets become increasingly polarized, the gene loci
encoding that subset’s signature cytokines undergo histone
modiﬁcations (such as changes in methylation and
acetylation) and other chromatin remodeling events, so that
these loci remain accessible to RNA polymerase and
transcription factors, whereas the loci for other cytokines
(those not produced by that subset) are in an inaccessible
chromatin state. Thus, the cytokine genes characteristic of a
particular subset become ﬁxed in an antigen responsive
state, whereas genes that encode cytokines not produced by
that subset remain inactive. These epigenetic changes are
inherited in the progeny of proliferating cells, thus
ensuring that the eﬀector T cells become stably commiĴed
to producing a particular set of cytokines.
• Each subset of diﬀerentiated eﬀector cells produces cytokines
that promote its own development and may suppress the
development of the other subsets. This feature of T-cell
subset development provides a powerful ampliﬁcation
mechanism. For instance, IFN-γ secreted by Th1 cells
stimulates further Th1 diﬀerentiation and inhibits the
generation of Th2 and Th17 cells. Similarly, IL-4 produced
by Th2 cells promotes Th2 diﬀerentiation. Thus, once an
immune response develops along one eﬀector pathway, it
becomes increasingly polarized in that direction, and the
most extreme polarization is seen in chronic infections or
upon chronic exposure to environmental antigens, when the
immune stimulation is prolonged.
• Diﬀerentiation of each subset is induced by the types of
microbes that the subset is best able to combat. For
instance, the development of Th1 cells is driven by
intracellular microbes, against which the principal defense
is Th1 mediated. By contrast, the immune system responds
to helminthic parasites by the development of Th2 cells,
and the cytokines produced by these cells are important for
combating helminths. Similarly, Th17 responses are
g
y
p
induced by some bacteria and fungi and are most eﬀective
at defending against these pathogens. The generation and
eﬀector functions of these diﬀerentiated T cells are an
excellent illustration of the concept of specialization of
adaptive immunity, which refers to the ability of the
immune system to respond to diﬀerent microbes in ways
that are optimal for combating those microbes.
With this background, we will proceed to a description of the
development and functions of each subset.
The Th1 Subset
The IFN-γ–producing Th1 subset is induced by microbes that are
ingested by and have evolved to survive and replicate within
phagocyte; it is the major eﬀector T cell population in phagocyte-
mediated host defense. Th1 cells were the ﬁrst deﬁned subset of
helper T cells shown to mediate cellular immunity against
pathogens that survive inside phagocytes.
FIGURE 10.5  Development of Th1 cells.Interleukin-
12 (IL-12) produced by dendritic cells and
macrophages in response to microbes, including
intracellular microbes, and interferon-γ (IFN-γ)
produced by natural killer (NK) cells (all part of
the early innate immune response to the
microbes) activate the transcription factors T-BET,
STAT1, and STAT4, which stimulate the
differentiation of naive CD4+ T cells to the Th1
subset. IFN-γ produced by the Th1 cells amplifies
this response and inhibits the development of Th2
and Th17 cells. Other cytokines, including type I
IFNs and IL-18, also promote Th1 differentiation
but are not shown.
Development of Th1 Cells
Th1 diﬀerentiation is driven mainly by the cytokines IL-12 and IFN-
γ and occurs in response to microbes that activate DCs,
macrophages and NK cells (Fig. 10.5) . The diﬀerentiation of
antigen-activated CD4+ T cells to Th1 eﬀectors is stimulated by
many intracellular bacteria, such as Listeria and mycobacteria, and
by some parasites, such as Leishmania, all of which infect DCs and
macrophages. Th1 diﬀerentiation is also stimulated by viruses and
by protein antigens administered with strong adjuvants. A common
feature of these infections and immunization conditions is that
they elicit innate immune reactions that are associated with the
production of certain cytokines, including IL-12, IL-18, and type I
IFNs. All of these cytokines promote Th1 development; of these, IL-
12 is probably the most potent. Many microbes stimulate NK cells
to produce IFN-γ, which is itself a strong Th1-inducing cytokine
and also acts on DCs and macrophages to induce more IL-12
secretion. After Th1 cells have developed, they secrete IFN-γ, which
promotes more Th1 diﬀerentiation and thus ampliﬁes the reaction.
In addition, IFN-γ inhibits the diﬀerentiation of naive CD4+ T cells
to the Th2 and Th17 subsets, thus promoting the polarization of the
immune response in one direction. T cells may further enhance
cytokine production by DCs and macrophages by virtue of CD40L
on activated T cells engaging CD40 on the APCs and stimulating IL-
12 secretion.
IFN- γ  and IL-12 stimulate Th1 diﬀerentiation by inducing and
activating the transcription factors T-BET, STAT1, and STAT4 (see
Fig. 10.5) . T-BET, a member of the T-box family of transcription
factors, is induced in naive CD4+ T cells in response to antigen and
IFN-γ. IFN-γ also activates STAT1 (signal transducer and activator
of transcription 1), which in turn stimulates expression of T-BET. T-
BET then promotes IFN-γ production through a combination of
direct transcriptional activation of the IFNG gene and by inducing
chromatin remodeling of the IFNG promoter region. The ability of
IFN-γ to stimulate T-BET expression and the ability of T-BET to
enhance IFN-γ transcription set up a positive ampliﬁcation loop
that drives diﬀerentiation of T cells toward the Th1 phenotype. IL-
12 contributes to Th1 commitment by binding to receptors on
antigen-stimulated CD4+ T cells and activating the transcription
factor STAT4, which further enhances IFN-γ production.
Functions of Th1 Cells
The principal function of Th1 cells is to activate macrophages to
ingest and destroy microbes (Fig. 10.6) . The same reaction of Th1-
mediated macrophage activation is involved in injurious DTH,
which is a component of many inﬂammatory diseases. Some of
these conditions are characterized by granulomatous inﬂammation,
including infectious diseases (such as tuberculosis) and chronic
inﬂammatory diseases (such as sarcoidosis) (see Chapter 19).
Before discussing the activation of macrophages and how they
destroy microbes, we will describe the properties of IFN-γ, the
cytokine responsible for most of the specialized functions of Th1
cells.
Interferon-γ
IFN-γ is the principal macrophage-activating cytokine. IFN-γ is also
called immune or type II IFN. Although its name interferon is
shared with the antiviral type I IFNs, it is not a potent antiviral
cytokine, and it functions mainly as an activator of eﬀector cells of
the immune system.
IFN-γ is a homodimeric protein belonging to the type II cytokine
family (see Chapter 7). In addition to CD4+ Th1 cells, ILC1s, NK
cells, and CD8+ T cells also produce IFN-γ. NK cells secrete IFN-γ
in response to activating ligands on the surface of infected or
stressed host cells (see Chapter 4) or in response to IL-12; in this
seĴing, IFN-γ functions as a mediator of innate immunity. In
adaptive immunity, T cells produce IFN-γ in response to antigen
recognition, and production is enhanced by IL-12 and IL-18.
FIGURE 10.6  Functions of Th1 cells.Th1 cells
secrete interferon-γ (IFN-γ), which acts on
macrophages to increase phagocytosis and killing
of microbes in phagolysosomes. Th1 cells also
produce tumor necrosis factor, which activates
neutrophils and promotes inflammation (not
shown). APC, Antigen-presenting cell.
The receptor for IFN-γ is composed of two structurally
homologous polypeptides belonging to the type II cytokine
receptor family, called IFNγR1 and IFNγR2. IFN-γ binds to and
induces the dimerization of the two receptor chains. This leads to
activation of the associated Janus kinases JAK1 and JAK2 and
ultimately to phosphorylation and dimerization of STAT1, which
stimulates transcription of several genes (see Chapter 7). IFN-γ–
induced genes encode many diﬀerent molecules that mediate the
biologic activities of this cytokine, described next.
• IFN-γ activates macrophages to kill phagocytosed microbes.
IFN-γ works with other signals to induce the type of
macrophage activation that is called classical activation,
discussed in more detail later.
• IFN-γ promotes the diﬀerentiation of CD4 +   T cells to the
Th1 subset and inhibits the development of Th2 and Th17
cells. These eﬀects of IFN-γ are because it induces the
expression of transcription factors needed for Th1
development and inhibits transcription factors involved in
Th2 and Th17 diﬀerentiation.
• IFN-γ stimulates expression of several diﬀerent proteins that
contribute to enhanced antigen presentation and T cell
activation (see Fig. 6.8) . These proteins include major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules; many
proteins involved in antigen processing, including
components of the proteasome; and B7 costimulators on
APCs.
• IFN-γ activates macrophages, DCs, and other cells to
produce cytokines that amplify the host response. These
cytokines include TNF, IL-1 and chemokines, which recruit
more leukocytes and induce inﬂammation, and IL-12, which
provides a positive feedback loop for IFN-γ production and
Th1 development.
Other Th1 Cytokines
In addition to IFN-γ, Th1 cells produce tumor necrosis factor
(TNF), which contributes to the recruitment of leukocytes and
enhanced inﬂammation. Somewhat surprisingly, Th1 cells are also
sources of IL-10, which functions mainly to inhibit DCs and
macrophages and thus to suppress Th1 activation. This is an
example of a negative feedback loop in T cell responses.
Th1-Mediated Classical Macrophage Activation and Killing of
Phagocytosed Microbes
Th1 cells activate macrophages through contact-mediated signals
delivered by CD40L-CD40 interactions and by IFN-γ (Fig. 10.7) .
This pathway of macrophage activation is called classical
macrophage 
activation, 
to 
distinguish 
it 
from 
alternative
macrophage activation induced by Th2 cytokines, described later.
Classically activated macrophages are also called M1 macrophages.
When Th1 cells are stimulated by antigen, the cells express CD40L
on their surface and secrete IFN-γ. The actions of IFN-γ on
macrophages, described earlier, synergize with the actions of
CD40L, and together they are potent stimuli for macrophage
activation. CD40 signals activate the transcription factors NF-κB
(nuclear factor κB) and AP1 (activation protein 1), and, as discussed
earlier, IFN-γ activates the transcription factor STAT1. These
transcription factors together induce the expression of genes
encoding several enzymes that localize in phagolysosomes of
macrophages, including inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS),
which stimulates the production of nitric oxide (NO), and
lysosomal enzymes. Macrophage activation is also associated with
the assembly of the enzyme phagocyte oxidase in the membrane of
the phagolysosome, which induces the production of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) (although this is less prominent than in
neutrophils). The requirement for interactions between the surface
molecules CD40 on the macrophages and CD40L on the T cells
ensures that macrophages that are presenting antigens to the T
cells (i.e., the macrophages that are harboring intracellular
microbes) are also the macrophages that will be in contact with T
cells and thus most eﬃciently activated by the T cells.
Activated macrophages kill phagocytosed microbes mainly by the
actions of NO, ROS, and lysosomal enzymes. All of these potent
microbicidal agents are produced within the lysosomes of
macrophages and kill ingested microbes after phagosomes fuse
with lysosomes (see Fig. 4.17). These toxic substances also may be
released into adjacent tissues, where they kill extracellular
microbes and may damage normal tissues.
Inherited immunodeﬁciencies have established the critical
importance of Th1 cells in cell-mediated immunity against
intracellular pathogens. Diﬀerent homozygous mutations aﬀecting
the IFN-γ receptor, IL-12, IL-12 receptor, and STAT1 cause defects
in the development of Th1 cells. Patients with these inherited
mutations are susceptible to infection with Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, low-virulence environmental mycobacteria, and the
aĴenuated Mycobacterium bovis strain used in the bacillus CalmeĴe-
Guérin (BCG) vaccine. As a group, these disorders are called
Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial disease. The patients are
also susceptible to infections with other intracellular bacteria, such
as Salmonella, and protozoan parasites, further establishing the
critical role of the Th1 response in defense against intracellular
microbes. Rare patients make autoantibodies against their own
IFN-γ and are also susceptible to mycobacterial infections. Humans
with 
inherited 
mutations 
in 
CD40L 
(X-linked 
hyper-IgM
syndrome) and mice in which the gene for CD40 or CD40L is
knocked out are highly susceptible to infections with intracellular
microbes, notably the fungus Pneumocystis jiroveci (see Chapter 21),
which require T cell–dependent macrophage activation to be
q
p
p
g
eradicated. These patients and knockout mice also have defects in
helper T cell–dependent antibody production, because of the
critical role of the CD40L-CD40 interaction in B cell activation (see
Chapter 12).
FIGURE 10.7  Macrophage activation by Th1 cells.
A, Macrophages are activated by CD40L-CD40
interactions and by interferon-γ (IFN-γ) expressed
by Th1 cells and perform several functions that kill
microbes, stimulate inflammation, and enhance
the antigen-presenting capacity of the cells. B,
The principal responses of macrophages
activated by the classical activation pathway, and
their roles in T cell–mediated host defense, are
listed. Macrophages are also activated during
innate immune reactions and perform similar
functions (see Chapter 4). IL, Interferon; MHC,
major histocompatibility; NO, nitric oxide; ROS,
reactive oxygen species; TNF, tumor necrosis
factor.
Macrophages activated by Th1 cells are involved in several other
reactions of host defense (see Fig. 10.7). They stimulate
inﬂammation mainly through the secretion of cytokines, including
TNF and IL-1, which recruit more leukocytes, enhancing the host’s
ability to destroy infectious pathogens. Activated macrophages may
amplify cell-mediated immune responses by becoming more
eﬃcient APCs because of increased levels of molecules involved in
antigen processing and increased surface expression of class II
MHC molecules and costimulators, and by producing cytokines
(such as IL-12) that stimulate T lymphocyte diﬀerentiation into
eﬀector cells.
Some tissue injury may normally accompany Th1 cell–mediated
immune reactions to microbes because the microbicidal products
released by activated macrophages and neutrophils are capable of
injuring normal tissue and do not discriminate between microbes
and host tissue. This tissue injury usually resolves as the infection
is cleared. However, excessive Th1 reactions are the cause of tissue
injury in many chronic inﬂammatory diseases (see Chapter 19).
The Th2 Subset
Th2 cells activate defense mechanisms that use IgE antibodies,
eosinophils, and mast cells to combat microbes. These reactions are
important for the eradication of helminthic infections and perhaps
also for elimination of other microbes in mucosal tissues. They are
central to the development of allergic diseases (see Chapter 20).
Th2 cells are also thought to be important in tissue repair.
Development of Th2 Cells
Th2 diﬀerentiation occurs in response to helminths and allergens and
is dependent on the cytokine IL-4 (Fig. 10.8) . Because the major
cytokine that promotes Th2 development is IL-4 and this is a
product of Th2 cells, there has been some uncertainty about the
source of IL-4 to initiate Th2 responses. The cytokine may be made
by antigen-stimulated T cells, by mast cells, and possibly by group
2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2; see Chapter 4), and other cells in the
vicinity of the activated T cells. Other cytokines that may promote
the development of Th2 cells include IL-25, IL-33, and thymic
stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP), all of which are produced by
damaged epithelial and other cells and are involved in the
activation of ILC2.
IL-4 stimulates Th2 development by activating the transcription
factor STAT6, which, together with TCR signals, induces expression
of GATA3 (see Fig. 10.8) . GATA3 is a transcription factor that is
required for expression of the Th2 cytokines IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13.
GATA3 works by directly interacting with the promoters of these
cytokine genes and also by causing chromatin remodeling, which
opens up the locus for accessibility to other transcription factors.
This is similar to the way in which T-BET inﬂuences IFN-γ
expression. GATA3 functions to stably commit diﬀerentiating cells
toward the Th2 phenotype, enhancing its own expression through a
positive 
feedback 
loop. 
Furthermore, 
GATA3 
blocks 
Th1
diﬀerentiation by inhibiting expression of the signaling chain of the
IL-12 receptor. Knockout mice lacking IL-4, STAT6, or GATA3 are
deﬁcient in Th2 responses.
Functions of Th2 Cells
Th2 cells stimulate IgE-, mast cell–. and eosinophil-mediated
reactions that serve to eradicate helminthic infections and to
promote tissue repair (Fig. 10.9) . Helminths are too large to be
phagocytosed by neutrophils and macrophages and may be more
resistant to the microbicidal activities of these phagocytes than are
most bacteria and viruses. Therefore, other mechanisms are needed
for defense against helminthic infections. The functions of Th2 cells
are mediated by IL-5, which activates eosinophils, and IL-13, which
has diverse actions. TĢ cells that produce IL-4 and IL-13 stimulate
the production of IgE antibodies, which are involved in most Th2-
mediated defense reactions. We will ﬁrst describe the properties of
these cytokines and then their roles in host defense.
FIGURE 10.8  Development of Th2 cells.Dendritic
cells may respond to cytokines produced in
epithelia by becoming Th2 inducers, by
mechanisms that are not well defined. Interleukin-
4 (IL-4) produced by activated T cells themselves
or by mast cells and eosinophils, especially in
response to helminths, activates the transcription
factors GATA3 and STAT6, which stimulate the
differentiation of naive CD4+ T cells to the Th2
subset. IL-4 produced by the Th2 cells amplifies
this response and inhibits the development of Th1
and Th17 cells. TSLP, Thymic stromal
lymphopoietin.
Interleukin-4
IL-4 is the signature cytokine of the Th2 subset and functions as
both an inducer and an eﬀector cytokine of these cells. It is a
member of the type I four–α-helical cytokine family. The principal
cellular sources of IL-4 are CD4+ T lymphocytes of the Th2 subset,
ILC2s, and activated mast cells. The IL-4 receptor consists of a
cytokine-binding α chain that is a member of the type I cytokine
receptor family, associated with the γc chain shared by other
cytokine receptors. This IL-4Rαγc receptor signals by a JAK-STAT
pathway involving JAK1, JAK3, and STAT6, and by a pathway that
involves the insulin response substrate (IRS) protein called IRS2.
Activated STAT6 induces transcription of genes that account for
many of the actions of this cytokine. IL-4 and IL-13 receptors share
one of their two chains (described later).
FIGURE 10.9  Functions of Th2 cells.CD4+ T cells
that differentiate into Th2 cells secrete IL-4, IL-5,
and IL-13. IL-4 (and IL-13) act on B cells to
stimulate production of antibodies that bind to
mast cells and eosinophils, such as IgE. Help for
antibody production may be provided by T
follicular helper (Tfh) cells that produce Th2
cytokines and reside in lymphoid organs, and not
by classical Th2 cells. IL-5 activates eosinophils,
a response that is important for defense against
helminthic infections. IL-4 and IL-13 are involved in
immunity at mucosal barriers, induce an
alternative pathway of macrophage activation, and
inhibit classical Th1-mediated macrophage
activation. APC, Antigen-presenting cell; Ig,
immunoglobulin; IL, interleukin
IL-4 has important actions on several cell types.
• IL-4 (and IL-13) produced by TĢ cells stimulates B cell Ig
heavy chain class switching to the IgE isotype. The
mechanisms of class switching are described in Chapter 12.
IgE is the principal mediator of immediate hypersensitivity
(allergic) reactions (see Chapter 20). IL-4 also enhances
switching to IgG4 (in humans, or the homologous IgG1 in
mice), but the signiﬁcance of this role of IL-4 is unclear
because these IgG subclasses do not bind to phagocyte Fc
receptors or activate complement (see Chapter 13).
• IL-4 stimulates the development of Th2 eﬀector cells from
naive CD4 +   T cells and may be a growth factor for
diﬀerentiated Th2 cells. This function of IL-4 was described
earlier.
• IL-4, together with IL-13, contributes to an alternative form
of macrophage activation that is distinct from the
macrophage response to IFN-γ. IL-4 and IL-13 suppress
IFN-γ–mediated classical macrophage activation and thus
inhibit defense against intracellular microbes that are
destroyed by phagocytosis. The alternative macrophage
activation pathway is described later.
• IL-4 (and IL-13) stimulates peristalsis in the gastrointestinal
tract, and IL-13 increases mucus secretion from airway and
gut epithelial cells. Both actions contribute to elimination of
microbes at epithelial surfaces.
• IL-4 and IL-13 stimulate the recruitment of leukocytes,
notably eosinophils, by promoting the expression of
adhesion molecules on endothelium and the secretion of
chemokines that bind chemokine receptors expressed on
eosinophils.
Interleukin-13
IL-13 is structurally and functionally similar to IL-4 and also plays a
role in defense against helminths (see Chapter 16) and in allergic
diseases (see Chapter 20). IL-13 is a member of the type I four–α-
helical cytokine family. IL-13 is produced mainly by the Th2 subset,
but group 2 ILCs and other leukocytes may also produce the
cytokine. The IL-13 receptor is a heterodimer of the IL-4Rα chain
and the IL-13Rα1 chain. This complex can bind both IL-4 and IL-13
with high aﬃnity and also signals through a JAK1, JAK3, and
STAT6 pathway. The receptor is expressed on a wide variety of cells,
including B cells, mononuclear phagocytes, DCs, eosinophils,
basophils, ﬁbroblasts, endothelial cells, and bronchial epithelial
cells.
IL-13 works together with IL-4 in defense against helminths and
in allergic inﬂammation. Some of the actions of IL-13 overlap those
of IL-4, and others are distinct. Both IL-13 and IL-4 can activate B
cells to switch to IgE and some IgG isotypes and recruit leukocytes,
and both are involved in alternative macrophage activation. IL-13
stimulates mucus production by airway epithelial cells, an
important component of allergic reactions, such as asthma. Unlike
IL-4, IL-13 is not involved in Th2 diﬀerentiation.
Interleukin-5
IL-5 is an activator of eosinophils and serves as the principal link
between T cell activation and eosinophilic inﬂammation. It is a
homodimer of a polypeptide containing a four–α-helical domain
and is a member of the type I cytokine family. It is produced mainly
by Th2 cells and ILC2s. The IL-5 receptor is a heterodimer
composed of a unique α chain and a common β chain (βc), which is
also part of the IL-3 and granulocyte-macrophage colony-
stimulating factor (GM-CSF) receptors (see Fig. 7.23). The major IL-
5–induced signaling pathway involves JAK2 and STAT3.
The principal actions of IL-5 are to activate mature eosinophils
and to stimulate the growth and diﬀerentiation of eosinophils.
Activated eosinophils are able to kill helminths. Eosinophils
express Fc receptors speciﬁc for IgA and some IgG antibodies and
are thereby able to bind to microbes, such as helminths, that are
coated with these antibodies.
Roles of Th2 Cells in Host Defense
Th2 cells function in defense against helminthic and other
infections by several mechanisms (see Fig. 10.9).
• IgE- and eosinophil-mediated reactions. IL-4 and IL-13
stimulate the production of helminth-speciﬁc IgE
antibodies, which may activate mast cells at the site of
infection. IL-5 activates eosinophils, and these cells release
their granule contents, including major basic protein and
major cationic protein, which are capable of destroying
even the tough integuments of helminths (see Chapter 16).
In allergic reactions, IgE coats mast cells and induces their
degranulation upon encounter with antigen (see Chapter
20).
• Host defense at mucosal barriers. Cytokines produced by
Th2 cells are involved in blocking entry and promoting
expulsion of microbes from mucosal organs by stimulating
mucus production and intestinal peristalsis. Thus, Th2 cells
play an important role in host defense at the barriers with
the external environment, sometimes called barrier
immunity.
• Alternative macrophage activation and tissue repair. IL-4
and IL-13 activate macrophages to express enzymes that
promote collagen synthesis and ﬁbrosis. The macrophage
response to Th2 cytokines has been called alternative
macrophage activation (Fig. 10.10) to distinguish it from the
activation induced by IFN-γ, which was characterized ﬁrst
(and hence the designation classical) and which results in
potent microbicidal functions and inﬂammation (see Fig.
p
g
10.7). Alternatively activated (also called M2) macrophages
produce cytokines that terminate inﬂammation and initiate
repair after diverse types of tissue injury. These
macrophages, as well as Th2 cells themselves, induce scar
formation by secreting growth factors that stimulate
ﬁbroblast proliferation (platelet-derived growth factor),
collagen synthesis (IL-13, transforming growth factor-β
[TGF-β]), and new blood vessel formation or angiogenesis
(ﬁbroblast growth factor). Th2 cytokines also suppress
classical macrophage activation and interfere with
protective Th1-mediated immune responses to intracellular
infections (see Chapter 16). Although the separation of
classical and alternative macrophage activation provides a
useful context for understanding macrophage
heterogeneity, numerous other subpopulations have been
described and M1 and M2 macrophages are likely not ﬁxed
subsets.
The Th17 Subset
The Th17 subset is primarily involved in recruiting neutrophils and,
to a lesser extent, monocytes to sites of infection and inﬂammation.
Some cytokines made by Th17 cells serve to maintain the integrity
of epithelial barriers. These actions are critical for destroying
bacteria and fungi, microbes that are killed by the phagocytes, and
reparing injured epithelial layers, but they also contribute
signiﬁcantly to chronic inﬂammatory diseases.
Development of Th17 Cells
The development of Th17 cells is stimulated by proinﬂammatory
cytokines produced in response to bacteria and fungi (Fig. 10.11) .
Various bacteria and fungi act on DCs and macrophages and
stimulate the production of cytokines, including IL-6, IL-1, and IL-
23, all of which promote diﬀerentiation of CD4+ T cells to the Th17
subset. Engagement of the lectin Dectin-1 on dendritic cells by
fungal glucans is a signal for the production of these cytokines. The
combination of cytokines that drive Th17 cell development may be
produced not only in response to particular microbes, such as
fungi, but also when cells infected with various bacteria and fungi
undergo apoptosis and are ingested by DCs. Whereas IL-6 and IL-1
stimulate the early steps in Th17 diﬀerentiation, IL-23 may be more
important for the proliferation and maintenance of diﬀerentiated
Th17 cells. A surprising aspect of Th17 diﬀerentiation is that TGF-β,
which is produced by many cell types and is an antiinﬂammatory
cytokine (see Chapter 15), promotes the development of
proinﬂammatory Th17 cells when other mediators of inﬂammation,
such as IL-6 or IL-1, are present. Th17 diﬀerentiation is inhibited by
IFN-γ and IL-4; therefore, strong Th1 and Th2 responses tend to
suppress Th17 development.
FIGURE 10.10  Classical and alternative macrophage
activation.Different stimuli activate tissue
macrophages to develop into functionally distinct
populations. Classically activated macrophages
are induced by microbial products and cytokines,
particularly interferon-γ (IFN-γ), and are
microbicidal and involved in potentially harmful
inflammation. Alternatively activated macrophages
are induced by interleukin-4 (IL-4) and IL-13
produced by Th2 cells and other leukocytes and
function to control inflammation and to promote
tissue repair and fibrosis. Some evidence
suggests that M2 macrophages comprise
subpopulations, some of which are mainly
antiinflammatory and others are responsible for
tissue repair. NO, Nitric oxide; ROS, reactive
oxygen species; TGF-β, transforming growth
factor-β; TLR, Toll-like receptor.
The development of Th17 cells is dependent on the transcription
factors RORγt and STAT3 (see Fig. 10.11) . TGF-β and the
inﬂammatory cytokines, mainly IL-6 and IL-1, work cooperatively to
induce the production of RORγt, a transcription factor that is a
member of the retinoic acid receptor family. RORγt is a T cell–
restricted protein encoded by the RORC gene, so sometimes the
protein may be called RORc. Inﬂammatory cytokines, notably IL-6,
activate the transcription factor STAT3, which functions with RORγt
to drive the Th17 response.
Th17 cells appear to be abundant in mucosal tissues, particularly
of the gastrointestinal tract, suggesting that the tissue environment
inﬂuences the generation of this subset, perhaps by providing high
local concentrations of TGF-β and inﬂammatory cytokines. This
observation also suggests that Th17 cells may be especially
important 
in 
combating 
intestinal 
infections 
and 
in 
the
development 
of 
pathologic 
intestinal 
inﬂammation. 
The
development of Th17 cells in the gastrointestinal tract is dependent
on the gut microbiome; in mice, commensal bacteria related to
Clostridium species are potent inducers of Th17 cells.
Functions of Th17 Cells
Th17 cells combat microbes by recruiting leukocytes, mainly
neutrophils, to sites of infection (Fig. 10.12) . Phagocytosis by
neutrophils is a major defense mechanism against many common
bacteria and fungi that can survive outside cells but are killed in the
phagolysosomes of neutrophils. Th17 cells play an important role in
defense against these infections by bringing neutrophils to the
microbes. Most of the functions of Th17 cells in host defense are
mediated by IL-17, but other cytokines produced by this subset
may also contribute.
Interleukin-17
IL-17 is an unusual cytokine because neither it nor its receptor is
homologous to any other known cytokine-receptor pair. The IL-17
family includes six structurally related proteins, of which IL-17A
and IL-17F are the most similar, and the immunologic functions of
this cytokine family are mediated primarily by IL-17A. IL-17A is
produced by Th17 cells as well as ILC3s and some γδ and CD8+ T
cells. IL-17 receptors are multimeric and expressed on a wide range
of cells (see Chapter 7). They activate NF-κB and other transcription
factors.
FIGURE 10.11  Development of Th17
cells.Interleukin-1 (IL-1) and IL-6 produced by
antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and transforming
growth factor-β (TGF-β) produced by various
cells activate the transcription factors RORγt and
STAT3, which stimulate the differentiation of naive
CD4+ T cells to the Th17 subset. IL-23, which is
also produced by APCs, especially in response to
fungi, stabilizes the Th17 cells. TGF-β may
promote Th17 responses indirectly by
suppressing Th1 and Th2 cells, both of which
inhibit Th17 differentiation (not shown). IL-21
produced by the Th17 cells amplifies this
response.
IL-17 is an important link between T cell–mediated adaptive
immunity and the acute inﬂammatory response, which we
discussed in Chapter 4 as one of the major reactions of innate
immunity. When Th17 cells are activated, these reactions are more
severe and prolonged than what is seen in innate immunity, when T
cells are not involved.
FIGURE 10.12  Functions of Th17 cells.Cytokines
produced by Th17 cells stimulate local production
of chemokines that recruit neutrophils and other
leukocytes, increase production of antimicrobial
peptides (defensins), and promote epithelial
barrier functions. APC, Antigen-presenting cell;
CSF, colony-stimulating factor; TNF, tumor
necrosing factor.
IL-17 has several important functions in host defense.
• IL-17 induces neutrophil-rich inﬂammation. It stimulates the
production of chemokines such as IL-8 and other cytokines
such as TNF that recruit neutrophils and, to a lesser extent,
monocytes to the site of T cell activation. It also enhances
neutrophil generation by increasing the production of
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and the
expression of its receptors. Recruited neutrophils ingest
and destroy bacteria and fungi.
• IL-17 stimulates the production of antimicrobial substances,
including defensins, from numerous cell types (see Chapter
4).
Other Th17 Cytokines
IL-22 is a member of the type II cytokine family. It is produced by
activated T cells, particularly Th17 cells, and by some NK cells and
ILCs. The IL-22 receptor is a heterodimer in which one of the chains
is also a component of the IL-10 receptor. It signals via JAK1, TYK2,
and STAT3. IL-22 is produced by Th17 cells in epithelial tissues,
especially of the skin and gastrointestinal tract, and serves to
maintain epithelial integrity, mainly by promoting the barrier
function of epithelia, by stimulating repair reactions, and by
inducing production of antimicrobial peptides. IL-22 also
contributes to inﬂammation, in part by stimulating epithelial
production of chemokines, and may therefore be involved in tissue
injury in inﬂammatory diseases.
IL-21 is produced by activated CD4+ T cells, including Th17 cells
and TĢ cells. It has a wide variety of eﬀects on B and T cells and NK
cells. The IL-21 receptor belongs to the type I cytokine receptor
family, consists of a ligand-binding chain and the γc subunit, and
activates a JAK-STAT signaling pathway in which STAT3 is
especially prominent. An important function of IL-21 is in antibody
responses, especially the reactions that occur in germinal centers
(see Chapter 12). IL-21 stimulates the generation of TĢ cells and
activates B cells in germinal centers. Some of the other reported
actions of IL-21 include increasing the proliferation, diﬀerentiation,
and eﬀector function of CD8+ T cells and NK cells.
Roles of Th17 Cells in Host Defense
The principal function of Th17 cells is to destroy extracellular
bacteria and fungi, mainly by inducing neutrophilic inﬂammation
(see Fig. 10.12) . The recruited neutrophils ingest and kill
extracellular microbes. The importance of this role of Th17 cells is
illustrated by the inherited disease called Job’s syndrome (or
hyper-IgE syndrome), which is caused by mutations in STAT3
resulting in defective Th17 development, and is characterized by
increased susceptibility to cutaneous fungal and bacterial
infections. Patients present with multiple bacterial and fungal
abscesses of the skin, resembling the biblical accounts of the
punishments visited on Job. Defective Th17 function is also
associated with chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. Patients with
the autoimmune disease autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome
produce autoantibodies against their own IL-17 and also develop
candidiasis (see Chapter 15). Surprisingly, patients with mutations
in the RORC gene, which encodes RORγt, the canonical
transcription factor for Th17 cells, show defects not only in IL-17
production but also in the production of IFN-γ, the classical Th1
cytokine.
Th17 cells contribute to the pathogenesis of many inﬂammatory
diseases. Th17 responses have been associated with psoriasis,
inﬂammatory bowel disease, rheumatoid arthritis, and multiple
sclerosis. Agents that block the development or functions of Th17
cells are very eﬀective for the treatment of psoriasis and are being
tested in other diseases. These antagonists are not beneﬁcial in
Crohn’s disease, an inﬂammatory bowel disease, so despite the
abundance of Th17 cells in the intestines, the role of these cells in
Crohn’s disease is uncertain. In some chronic inﬂammatory
diseases, both IL-17 and IFN-γ contribute to the disease. These two
cytokines may be produced by a subset of Th17 cells that are
thought to be highly pathogenic or by a mixture of Th17 and Th1
cells in the lesions.
Th17 cells help to maintain the integrity of epithelial barriers, such
as in the intestinal tract. This function is partly because these T
cells limit the entry of infectious microbes through the barriers by
stimulating local production of antimicrobial peptides and partly
because IL-22 promotes the regeneration of epithelia. It is possible
that diﬀerent populations of Th17 cells are involved in this
protective function and in the pathologic reactions caused by this
subset.
Functions of Other HELPER T Cell Subsets
Although Th1, Th2, and Th17 subsets are the best deﬁned eﬀector
cells of the CD4+ lineage, several other populations of cytokine-
producing T cells have been described. Some of these are CD4+ T
cells, and others do not belong to either the CD4 or the CD8
lineage.
Other Subsets of CD4+ Effector T Cells
Other subsets of CD4+ T cells that produce various cytokines have
been described, but their importance is less clear than that of Th1,
Th2, and Th17 cells.
• Th9 cells. Activation of CD4+ T cells in the presence of the
cytokines TGF-β and IL-4 generates a population of eﬀector
cells that produce mainly IL-9 and are therefore called Th9
cells. Th9 cells are abundant in the skin and mucosal
tissues. IL-9 activates mast cells and has many other
reported activities. Th9 cells have been implicated in
allergic diseases, including atopic dermatitis and asthma, in
defense against parasites, and in numerous other reactions.
• Th22 cells. Th22 cells were deﬁned as CD4+ T cells that
produce IL-22 (a known cytokine of Th17 cells) but not IL-
17. The functions of IL-22 were discussed earlier.
The roles of these subsets in host defense or immunologic
diseases are not established, in part because it has not been
possible to selectively eliminate any of these subsets or their
products. Furthermore, a unique transcriptional signature of these
cells has not been as well deﬁned, and the possibility exists that
that they are transient states in the diﬀerentiation of the more
established subsets.
Other Cytokine-Producing T Cells
In addition to CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, there are smaller populations
of T cells that have distinct features and may serve specialized
functions in host defense. The best deﬁned of these lymphocytes
are γδ T cells, natural killer T (NKT) cells, and mucosa-associated
invariant T (MAIT) cells. All three of these cell types have common
characteristics that distinguish them from CD4+ and CD8+ T cells.
They recognize a limited number but a wide variety of antigens,
many of which are not peptides, and these antigens are not
displayed by class I and class II MHC molecules on APCs. The
antigen receptors of γδ T cells, NKT cells, and MAIT cells have
limited diversity, suggesting that all three cell types may have
evolved to recognize a small group of microbial antigens. It is also
possible that these cells mainly respond not to particular antigens
but to cytokines produced at sites of infection and tissue damage.
Because of these features, these T cell populations are often said to
be at the crossroads of innate and adaptive immunity. All three cell
types are abundant in epithelial tissues, such as the gastrointestinal
tract. Their functions may include the following:
• Early defense against microbes encountered at epithelia,
before adaptive immune responses have developed
• Surveillance against stressed cells, such as cells that have
undergone DNA damage or are infected, and elimination of
these cells
• Production of cytokines that inﬂuence later adaptive
immune responses
γδ T Cells
The antigen receptor of MHC-restricted CD4+ and CD8+ T
lymphocytes is a heterodimer composed of α and β chains (see
Chapter 7). There is a second type of clonally distributed receptor
composed of heterodimers of γ and δ chains, which are
homologous to the α and β chains of the TCRs found on CD4+ and
CD8+ T lymphocytes. T cells expressing the γδ TCR represent a
lineage distinct from the more numerous αβ-expressing T cells. The
percentages of γδ T cells vary widely in diﬀerent tissues and
species, but overall, less than 5% of all T cells express this form of
TCR. The γδ heterodimer associates with the CD3 and ζ proteins in
the same way as TCR αβ heterodimers do, and TCR-induced
signaling events typical of αβ-expressing T cells are also observed
in γδ T cells. Although in theory the potential diversity of the γδ
TCR is even greater than the diversity of the αβ TCR, in reality only
a limited number of γ and δ V regions are expressed, and there is
liĴle or no junctional diversity.
Diﬀerent populations of γδ T cells may develop at distinct times
during ontogeny, contain diﬀerent V regions in their antigen
receptors, reside in diﬀerent tissues, and have a limited capacity to
recirculate among these tissues. In mice, many skin γδ T cells
develop in neonatal life and express one particular TCR with
essentially no variability in the V region, whereas many of the γδ T
cells in the vagina, uterus, and tongue appear later and express
another TCR with a diﬀerent V region. The limited diversity of the
γδ TCRs in many tissues suggests that the antigens recognized by
these receptors may be conserved among cell types or microbes
that are commonly encountered in these tissues. One intriguing
feature of γδ T cells is their abundance in epithelial tissues of
certain species. For example, more than 50% of lymphocytes in the
small bowel mucosa of mice and chickens, called intraepithelial
lymphocytes, are γδ T cells. In mouse skin, many of the
intraepidermal T cells express the γδ receptor. Equivalent cell
populations are not as abundant in humans; only approximately
10% of human intestinal intraepithelial T cells express the γδ TCR.
γδ T cells in lymphoid organs express more diverse TCRs than the
epithelial γδ cells.
γδ T cells do not recognize MHC-associated peptide antigens and
are not MHC restricted. Some γδ T cell clones recognize small
phosphorylated molecules, alkyl amines, or lipids that are
commonly found in mycobacteria and other microbes and that may
be presented by nonclassical class I MHC–like molecules. Other γδ
T cells recognize protein or nonprotein antigens that do not require
processing or any particular type of APCs for their presentation.
Many γδ T cells are triggered by microbial heat shock proteins. A
working hypothesis for the speciﬁcity of γδ T cells is that they may
recognize antigens that are frequently encountered at epithelial
boundaries between the host and the external environment.
A number of biologic activities have been ascribed to γδ T cells,
including secretion of cytokines and killing of infected cells, but the
function of these cells and their contribution to normal immune
responses remain poorly understood. It has been postulated that
this subset of T cells may provide protection against microbes at
epithelia before the recruitment and activation of antigen-speciﬁc
αβ T cells. However, mice lacking γδ T cells, created by deletion of
the γ or δ TCR gene, have liĴle or no immunodeﬁciency and only a
modest increase in susceptibility to infections by some intracellular
bacteria. These cells also may be involved in inﬂammatory diseases.
For instance, in the inﬂammatory skin disease psoriasis, γδ T cells
y
p
γ
appear to be among the earliest IL-17–producing cells in lesions. It
is not known if this is the case in other inﬂammatory disorders or
what the γδ cells are recognizing or how much they are
contributing to the development of the disease.
Natural Killer T (NKT) Cells
A small population of T cells, called NKT cells, expresses markers
such as CD56 that are found on NK cells. The TCR α chains
expressed by a subset of NKT cells have limited diversity, and in
humans these cells are characterized by a TCR α chain with a V
region that is encoded by a rearranged Vα24-Jα18 gene segment,
with liĴle or no junctional diversity, associated with a TCR β chain
that uses one of three Vβ gene segments. Because of this limited
diversity, these cells are also called invariant NKT (iNKT) cells.
Other NKT cells exist that have quite diverse antigen receptors. All
NKT cell TCRs recognize lipids that are bound to class I MHC–like
molecules called CD1 molecules. NKT cells and other lipid antigen–
speciﬁc T cells are capable of rapidly producing cytokines, such as
IL-4 and IFN-γ, after activation, and they may help marginal zone B
cells to produce antibodies against lipid antigens. NKT cells may
mediate protective innate immune responses against some
pathogens, such as mycobacteria (which have lipid-rich cell walls),
and iNKT cells may even regulate adaptive immune responses
primarily by secreting cytokines. However, the roles of these cells in
protective immunity or disease are unclear.
Mucosa-Associated Invariant T (MAIT) Cells
MAIT cells are another subset of T cells that express an invariant
αβ TCR that uses a rearranged Vα7.2-Jα33 gene segment. MAIT
cells recognize fungal and bacterial metabolites of the riboﬂavin
synthesis pathway, presented by a nonpolymorphic class I MHC–
like molecule called MR1 (MHC class I–related protein 1). Most
MAIT cells are CD8+ and can be activated either by MR1-restricted
presentation of microbial riboﬂavin derivatives or directly by
cytokines, including IL-12 and IL-18. The eﬀector functions of
MAIT cells include secretion of inﬂammatory cytokine such as IFN-
γ and TNF and cytotoxicity against infected cells. MAIT cells are
found in the blood, the gastrointestinal tract, and the liver; they
account for about 50% of all T cells in the human liver. Given their
abundance in the liver, it is possible that they represent an
important barrier to gut ﬂora that have breached the intestinal
epithelial barrier and entered the blood, because blood draining
the gut ﬁrst enters the liver through the portal circulation.
Having concluded our discussion of the functions of CD4+
eﬀector T cells and some less common T cell populations, in
Chapter 11 we will consider eﬀector cells of the CD8+ lineage,
whose major roles are in defense against viral infections.
Summary
• Cell-mediated immunity is the adaptive immune response
stimulated by microbes inside host cells. It is mediated by T
lymphocytes and can be transferred from immunized to
naive individuals by T cells and not by antibodies.
• Naive CD4+ T lymphocytes may diﬀerentiate into diﬀerent
types of specialized eﬀector T cells, including: Th1 cells that
secrete interferon-γ (IFN-γ), which mediate defense against
intracellular microbes; Th2 cells that secrete interleukin-4
(IL-4) and IL-5, which favor IgE- and eosinophil/mast cell–
mediated immune reactions against helminths; or Th17
cells, which promote inﬂammation and mediate defense
against extracellular fungi and bacteria.
• The diﬀerentiation of naive CD4+ T cells into subsets of
helper T cells is induced by cytokines produced by antigen-
presenting cells, by the T cells themselves, and by other
cells. The diﬀerentiation program is governed by
transcription factors that promote cytokine gene expression
in the T cells and epigenetic changes in cytokine gene loci,
which may be associated with stable commitment to a
particular subset. Each subset produces cytokines that
p
p
y
increase its own development and inhibit the development
of the other subsets, thus leading to increasing polarization
of the response.
• Th1 cells recognize antigens of microbes that have been
ingested by phagocytes and activate the phagocytes to kill
the microbes. The activation of macrophages by Th1 cells is
mediated by IFN-γ and CD40L-CD40 interactions.
Activated macrophages kill phagocytosed microbes
ingested into phagolysosomes by the actions of reactive
oxygen and nitrogen species and enzymes (called classical
macrophage activation). Activated macrophages also
stimulate inﬂammation and can damage tissues.
• Th2 cells recognize antigens produced by helminths and
other microbes, as well as environmental antigens
associated with allergies. IL-4 promotes B cell isotype
switching and production of IgE, which may cause mast cell
degranulation and inﬂammation. IL-5 secreted by activated
Th2 cells activates eosinophils to release granule contents
that destroy helminths but may also damage host tissues.
IL-4 and IL-13 together provide protection at epithelial
barriers and induce an alternative form of macrophage
activation that generates macrophages that control
inﬂammation and mediate tissue repair and ﬁbrosis.
• Th17 cells stimulate neutrophil-rich inﬂammatory responses
that eradicate extracellular bacteria and fungi and maintain
the integrity of epithelia. Th17 cells also may be important
in mediating tissue damage in autoimmune diseases.
• γδ T cells, natural killer T cells, and mucosa-associated
invariant T cells are T cells that express receptors of limited
diversity and recognize various antigens without a
requirement for major histocompatibility complex–
associated presentation. These cells produce cytokines and
may contribute to host defense and inﬂammatory diseases.
Selected Readings
∗Indicates publications of historical interest, generally reporting
the discovery of a phenomenon or process that was later shown to
be of fundamental importance in the immune system. Many (but
not all) of these discoveries led to Nobel Prizes for the
discoverer(s). The nature of the discovery is summarized brieﬂy in
each reference.
Differentiation of CD4+ T Cells Into Subsets of Effector Cells:
Th1, Th2, and Th17
Baumjohann D, Ansel K.M. MicroRNA-mediated regulation of T helper cell diﬀerentiation
and plasticity.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2013;13:666–678.
∗Cua D.J, Sherlock J, Chen Y, et al. Interleukin-23 rather than interleukin-12 is the critical
cytokine for autoimmune inﬂammation of the brain.  Nature . 2003;421:744–748 (The
discovery of IL-23-dependent Th17 cells as the pathogenic cell population in a mouse model of
multiple sclerosis.).
∗Ivanov II, McKenzie B.S, Zhou L, et al. The orphan nuclear receptor RORgammat directs
the diﬀerentiation program of proinﬂammatory IL-17+ T helper cells.  Cell
. 2006;126:1121–1133 (The discovery of RORγt as the master transcription factor of Th17
cells.).
Kanno Y, Vahedi G, Hirahara K, et al. Transcriptional and epigenetic control of T helper cell
speciﬁcation: molecular mechanisms underlying commitment and plasticity.  Annu Rev
Immunol . 2012;30:707–731.
Mazzoni A, Maggi L, LioĴa F, et al. Biological and clinical signiﬁcance of T helper 17 cell
plasticity.  Immunology . 2019;158:287–295.
McGeachy M.J, Cua D.J, Gaﬀen S.L. The IL-17 family of cytokines in health and disease. 
Immunity . 2019;50:892–906.
∗Mosmann T.R, Cherwinski H, Bond M.W, et al. Two types of murine helper T cell clone. I.
Deﬁnition according to proﬁles of lymphokine activities and secreted proteins.  J
Immunol . 1986;136:2348–2357 (The discovery of Th1 and Th2 populations of CD4 +  T cells
that could be distinguished by proﬁles of cytokine production.).
Murphy K.M, Stockinger B. Eﬀector T cell plasticity: ﬂexibility in the face of changing
circumstances.  Nat Immunol . 2010;11:674–680.
Nakayama T, Hirahara K, Onodera A, et al. Th2 cells in health and disease.  Annu Rev
Immunol . 2017:53–84.
Patel D.D, Kuchroo V.K. Th17 cell pathway in human immunity: lessons from genetics and
therapeutic interventions.  Immunity . 2015;43:1040–1051.
Pritchard G.H, Kedl R.M, Hunter C.A. The evolving role of T-bet in resistance to infection. 
Nat Rev Immunol . 2019;19:398–410.
Pulendran B, Artis D. New paradigms in type 2 immunity.  Science . 2012;337:431–435.
Sallusto F. Heterogeneity of human CD4(+) T cells against microbes.  Annu Rev Immunol
. 2016;34:317–334.
SchmiĴ N, Ueno H. Regulation of human helper T cell subset diﬀerentiation by cytokines. 
Curr Opin Immunol . 2015:130–136 201534.
Schorer M, Kuchroo V.K, Joller N. Role of Co-stimulatory molecules in T helper cell
diﬀerentiation.  Adv Exp Med Biol . 2019;1189:153–177.
Stockinger B, OmeneĴi S. The dichotomous nature of T helper 17 cells.  Nat Rev Immunol
. 2017;17:535–544.
Sungnak W, Wang C, Kuchroo V.K. Multilayer regulation of CD4 T cell subset
diﬀerentiation in the era of single cell genomics.  Adv Immunol . 2019;141:1–31.
∗Szabo S.J, Kim S.T, Costa G.L, et al. A novel transcription factor, T-bet, directs Th1 lineage
commitment.  Cell . 2000;100:655–669 (The discovery of T-bet as the master transcription
factor for the Th1 subset.).
Tubo N.J, Jenkins M.K. TCR signal quantity and quality in CD4+ T cell diﬀerentiation. 
Trends Immunol . 2014;35:591–596.
Walker J.A, McKenzie A.N.J. TH2 cell development and function.  Nat Rev Immunol
. 2018;18:121–133.
Wynn T.A. Type 2 cytokines: mechanisms and therapeutic strategies.  Nat Rev Immunol
. 2015;15:271–282.
∗Zheng W, Flavell R.A. The transcription factor GATA-3 is necessary and suﬃcient for Th2
cytokine gene expression in CD4 T cells.  Cell . 1997;89:587–596 (The discovery of GATA-
3 as the master transcription factor for the Th2 subset.).
Cell-Mediated Immunity: Activation of Macrophages
Ivashkiv L.B. IFNgamma: signalling, epigenetics and roles in immunity, metabolism, disease
and cancer immunotherapy.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2018;18:545–558.
∗Mackaness G.B. Cellular resistance to infection.  J Exp Med . 1962;116:381–406 (The
demonstration of cell-mediated immunity against an intracellular bacterium and the roles of
T lymphocytes and macrophages.).
Sica A, Mantovani A. Macrophage plasticity and polarization: in vivo veritas.  J Clin Invest
. 2012;122:787–795.
Van Dyken S.J, Locksley R.M. Interleukin-4- and interleukin-13-mediated alternatively
activated macrophages: roles in homeostasis and disease.  Annu Rev Immunol
. 2013;31:317–343.
Wynn T.A, Chawla A, Pollard J.W. Macrophage biology in development, homeostasis and
disease.  Nature . 2013;496:445–455.
Other T Cell Populations
Godfrey D.I, Uldrich A.P, McCluskey J, et al. The burgeoning family of unconventional T
cells.  Nat Immunol . 2015;16:1114–1123.
Mori L, Lepore M, De Libero G. The immunology of CD1- and MR1-restricted T cells. 
Annu Rev Immunol . 2016;34:479–510.
Nielsen M.M, Witherden D.A, Havran W.L. γδ T cells in homeostasis and host defence of
epithelial barrier tissues.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2017;17:733–745.
Provine N.M, Klenerman P. MAIT cells in health and disease.  Annu Rev Immunol
. 2020;38:203–228.
Vantourout P, Hayday A. Six-of-the-best: unique contributions of γδ T cells to
immunology.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2013;13:88–100.
Chapter 11: Diﬀerentiation and
Functions of CD8+ Eﬀector T
Cells 
Differentiation of CD8+ T Cells Into Cytotoxic T
Lymphocytes,
Nature of Antigen and Antigen-Presenting Cells
for Activation of CD8+ T Lymphocytes,
Role of Costimulation and Helper T Cells,
Role of Cytokines and Transcription Factors,
Inhibition of CD8+ T Cell Responses: T Cell
Exhaustion,
Effector Functions of CD8+ Cytotoxic T Lymphocytes,
Mechanisms of CTL-Mediated Cytotoxicity,
CD8+ T Cell Memory,
Cytokine Production by CD8+ Effector T Cells,
Roles Of CD8+ Cytotoxic T Lymphocytes In Host Defense,
Summary,
Viruses have evolved to use various cell surface molecules to gain
entry into host cells and to use the host cell’s genetic and protein
synthetic machinery to replicate and to disseminate from one cell to
another. Viruses can infect and replicate in a wide variety of cell
types. If the infected cells are incapable of destroying the
pathogens, one way to eradicate the infection is to kill the infected
cell. Viruses are obligate intracellular microbes; therefore, killing
the infected cells cripples the ability of the virus to survive in the
host. In the adaptive immune system, this function of killing cells
harboring viruses is mediated by cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs),
the eﬀector cells of the CD8+ lineage (see Fig. 10.1B). The same
mechanism is used to eliminate phagocytes containing ingested
bacteria that escape from phagosomes into the cytosol and are no
longer susceptible to the killing activity of the phagocytes. In innate
immune reactions, the same function of killing infected cells is
mediated by natural killer (NK) cells (see Chapter 4).
In addition to their role in defense against microbes, another
important function of CD8+ CTLs is the eradication of tumors. CTLs
also play critical roles in the acute rejection of organ allografts.
CTLs not only kill infected and tumor cells, but they also produce
the cytokine interferon-γ (IFN-γ), which activates macrophages to
destroy ingested microbes and promotes immune defense against
many cancers. This activity of CD8+ T cells complements
production of the same cytokine by Th1 cells (see Chapter 10).
Much of the focus of this chapter is on the specialized cytotoxic
function of CD8+ T cells.
In Chapter 6, we discussed the nature of the antigens that are
recognized by CD8+ T cells. CD8+ T cells recognize peptides
displayed by class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
molecules, and are said to be class I MHC-restricted. We discussed
the early steps of activation of T cells in Chapter 9. There we
mentioned some of the features of the responses of CD8+ cells,
including their remarkable clonal expansion following activation by
antigen and other signals. In this chapter, we will describe how
naive CD8+ cells, which lack killing ability, diﬀerentiate into
functional CTLs and how they kill other cells, then discuss the roles
of CTLs in host defense.
Differentiation of CD8+ T Cells Into Cytotoxic
T Lymphocytes
Diﬀerentiation of CD8 +   T cells into eﬀector CTLs involves
acquisition of the machinery to kill infected or tumor cells. The cell
that is killed by CTLs is commonly called the target cell. Naive
CD8+ cells recognize antigens but are incapable of killing target
cells and need to proliferate and diﬀerentiate to generate a
suﬃciently large pool of functional CTLs to destroy the source of
the antigen. Within the cytoplasm of diﬀerentiated CTLs are
numerous modiﬁed lysosomes (called granules) that contain
proteins, including perforin and granzymes, whose function is to
kill target cells (described later).
The activation of naive CD8+ T cells requires antigen recognition
and second signals and proceeds in steps similar to those for CD4+
T cell responses (Fig. 11.1). However, the activation of naive CD8+ T
cells has two unique features: it is often dependent on the cross-
presentation pathway of antigen presentation by a specialized
subset of dendritic cells (DCs), and it may also require help from
CD4+ T cells.
FIGURE 11.1  Induction and effector phases of CD8+
T cell responses.Naive CD8+ T cells recognize
antigens presented by dendritic cells in secondary
lymphoid organs and are stimulated to proliferate
and differentiate into effector cells (cytotoxic T
lymphocytes [CTLs]) and memory cells. The CTLs
migrate to tissues at sites of infection, tumor
growth, or graft rejection, where they recognize
the antigen and respond by killing the cells where
the antigen is produced.
Nature of Antigen and Antigen-Presenting
Cells for Activation of CD8+ T Lymphocytes
The activation of naive CD8+ T cells, like that of naive CD4+ T cells,
is best initiated by antigens presented by DCs. This is primarily
because naive T and B cells home to secondary lymphoid organs
(and not to nonlymphoid sites of infection, injury, or tumor
formation) and tissue-resident DCs capture the antigens of
microbes (or tumors) in nonlymphoid tissues and take the antigens
to the secondary lymphoid organs through which naive T cells
circulate. The antigens that are presented to CD8+ T cells have to be
located in the cytosol of the antigen-presenting cells (APCs)
because only cytosolic proteins are processed into peptides by
proteasomes and delivered to the endoplasmic reticulum to be
displayed by class I MHC molecules (see Chapter 6). However,
viruses infect speciﬁc cell types, and tumors arise from various cell
types, and in both instances the cells producing the viral or tumor
antigen are usually not DCs. Specialized DCs (especially the
classical DC1 [cDC1] subset) ingest infected cells, tumor cells, or
proteins produced in these cells, transfer the protein antigens into
the cytosol, and process the antigens to enter the class I MHC
antigen presentation pathway for recognition by CD8+ T cells. This
process of cross-presentation is the essential ﬁrst step in the
activation of naive CD8+ T cells.
Role of Costimulation and Helper T Cells
The activation of naive CD8+ T cells, like that of CD4+ cells, requires
stimuli in addition to antigen. In viral infections in which the virus
induces 
strong 
innate 
immune 
responses, 
APCs 
express
costimulators such as B7 molecules, which engage CD28 on the
naive T cells and provide the necessary second signals (see Chapter
9). However, in many viral infections, such as those by latent
viruses, and in many tumors and organ transplants, the innate
response is relatively weak because these viruses, tumors, and
transplanted tissues produce few or none of the molecules that
activate innate immune receptors. In these situations, the second
signals may be provided by CD4+ helper T cells.
CD4+ helper T cells promote naive CD8+ T cell activation by
several mechanisms (Fig. 11.2). Helper T cells can secrete cytokines
that stimulate the diﬀerentiation of CD8+ T cells. The nature of
these cytokines is discussed in the section that follows. Activated
helper T cells express CD40 ligand (CD40L), which may bind to
CD40 on antigen-loaded DCs. This interaction activates the APCs to
make them more eﬃcient at stimulating the diﬀerentiation of CD8+
T cells, in part by increasing the expression of costimulators. This
process has been termed licensing of the APCs.
FIGURE 11.2  Role of helper T cells in the
differentiation of CD8+ T lymphocytes.CD4+ helper
T cells promote the development of CD8+
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) and memory cells
by secreting cytokines that act directly on the
CD8+ cells (A) or by activating antigen-presenting
cells (APCs) to become more effective at
stimulating the differentiation of the CD8+ T cells,
for example, by increasing the expression of
costimulators on the APCs (B). CD40L, CD40
ligand.
The varying importance of CD4+ T cells in the development of
CTL responses is illustrated by studies with mice that lack CD4+ T
cells. In these mice, some viral infections fail to generate eﬀective
CTLs or CD8+ memory cells and are not eradicated, whereas other
viruses do stimulate eﬀective CTL responses. A lack of CD4+ T cell
helper function accounts for the defects in CTL generation seen in
individuals infected with human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV),
which infects and eliminates only CD4+ T cells. There is also
evidence that CD4+ helper cells are more important for the
generation of CD8+ memory T cells than for the diﬀerentiation of
naive CD8+ T cells into eﬀector CTLs.
As we discuss later, once eﬀector cells (diﬀerentiated CTLs with
the machinery to kill other cells) are produced, they can be
activated without any need for costimulation and kill any cell that
expresses an antigenic protein in the cytosol and presents a relevant
peptide on class I MHC molecules.
Role of Cytokines and Transcription Factors
Several cytokines contribute to the diﬀerentiation of CD8+ T cells
and the maintenance of eﬀector and memory cells of this lineage.
• Interleukin-2 (IL-2) produced by the CD8+ T cells
themselves or by CD4+ helper cells promotes proliferation
of the CD8+ T cells and their diﬀerentiation into CTLs and
memory cells. CD8+ cells express the β and γ chains of the
IL-2 receptor and may express high levels of the α chain
transiently after activation (see Chapter 9).
• IL-12 and type I IFNs have both been shown to stimulate
the diﬀerentiation of naive CD8+ T cells into eﬀector CTLs.
These cytokines may be produced by diﬀerent DC
populations during the innate immune response to viral
and some bacterial infections. Recall that the same
cytokines are involved in the diﬀerentiation of CD4+ T cells
into Th1 cells. The cytokines promote development of these
two eﬀector populations by stimulating expression of the
related transcription factors T-BET (for both Th1 cells and
CTLs) and eomesodermin (for CTLs).
• IL-15 is important for the survival of memory CD8+ T cells.
It may be produced by many cell types, including DCs. Mice
lacking IL-15 show a signiﬁcant loss of memory CD8+ T
cells.
Three transcription factors that are required for the program of
gene expression that occurs during CTL diﬀerentiation are T-BET
(which we discussed in relationship to Th1 diﬀerentiation in
Chapter 10); eomesodermin, which is structurally related to T-BET;
and BLIMP-1. The optimal expression of these transcription factors
depends on IL-2, IL-12 and type I interferons and the JAK-STAT
signaling pathways they activate. The cytokines work together to
promote the transcriptional program of CTL diﬀerentiation. For
example, IL-2–induced STAT5 together with IL-12-induced STAT4
are required for high expression of T-BET and BLIMP-1, which
stimulate the expression of perforin, granzymes, and some
cytokines, especially IFN-γ.
Inhibition of CD8+ T Cell Responses: T Cell
Exhaustion
In some chronic viral infections and cancers, CTL eﬀector responses
are generated, but they are then gradually extinguished, a
phenomenon that is called exhaustion (Fig. 11.3) . The term
exhaustion has been used to imply that the eﬀector response starts
but is shut down (unlike in tolerance, in which lymphocytes fail to
develop into eﬀector cells). This phenomenon of exhaustion was
ﬁrst described in a chronic viral infection in mice and was
implicated in the prolonged persistence of the virus. Strong and
persistent immune responses to chronic infections have the risk of
causing signiﬁcant collateral tissue damage. T cell exhaustion may
have evolved as a mechanism to limit the immunopathology
associated with chronic infection. The same mechanism likely
down-regulates the host response to any chronic or persistent
antigenic stimulus.
FIGURE 11.3  T cell exhaustion.In acute infections,
CD8+ T cells differentiate into cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTLs) that eliminate the infected
cells. In situations of persistent or chronic antigen
exposure, the response of CD8+ T cells is
suppressed by the expression and engagement of
PD-1 (programmed cell death protein-1) and other
inhibitory receptors.
Repeated stimulation leads to numerous functional defects in the
T cells, including decreased proliferative capacity, reduced
production of IFN-γ, and poor cytotoxic activity, and the CD8+ cells
are thus unable to clear infections or tumors. These defects result
from a block in T cell diﬀerentiation associated with increased
expression of multiple inhibitory receptors in repeatedly stimulated
T cells. These inhibitory receptors include PD-1 (programmed cell
death protein-1) (see Chapter 9) as well as CTLA-4, TIM-3, LAG-3,
and others. An important role for PD-1 as a mediator of exhaustion
is shown by the reversal of the exhausted phenotype by anti–PD-1
monoclonal antibodies. Studies in mice show that antigen
recognition by memory CD8+ T cells with concurrent PD-1 signaling
drives the cells into a permanently disabled (exhausted) phenotype,
and PD-1 blockade induces eﬀective responses by allowing
activation of the memory cells into functional (non-exhausted)
eﬀectors. T cell exhaustion may contribute to the chronicity of some
viral infections in humans, such as HIV and hepatitis C virus
(HCV), and to the ability of some tumors to evade the immune
response (see Chapter 18).
Effector Functions of CD8+ Cytotoxic T
Lymphocytes
CD8 +   CTLs eliminate intracellular microbes mainly by killing
infected cells (see Fig. 10.1B) . By secreting IFN-γ, CD8+ T cells also
contribute to classical macrophage activation in host defense and in
hypersensitivity reactions (see Chapter 10). Here we discuss the
mechanisms by which diﬀerentiated CTLs kill cells harboring
microbes; CTLs use the same mechanisms to kill tumors (see
Chapter 18).
Mechanisms of CTL-Mediated Cytotoxicity
CTL-mediated killing involves speciﬁc recognition of target cells and
delivery of proteins into the target that induce cell death. CTLs kill
targets that display the same peptide–class I MHC antigen that
triggered the proliferation and diﬀerentiation of naive CD8+ T cells
into functional CTLs. CTL killing is highly antigen-speciﬁc, and
adjacent uninfected cells that do not present that peptide-MHC
antigen are not harmed. Killing speciﬁcity is achieved because a
close region of contact between the CTL and the antigen-expressing
target cell, called an immune synapse (see Chapter 7), is
established, and the molecules that actually perform the killing are
secreted into the synapse and do not diﬀuse to other nearby cells.
The target cells are killed by apoptosis, which is a pathway of cell
death that does not induce harmful inﬂammation (unlike necrosis,
which does induce inﬂammation). Thus, there is no collateral
damage of adjacent normal tissues during CTL-mediated killing.
The process of CTL-mediated killing of targets consists of antigen
recognition, activation of the CTLs, delivery of the lethal hit that
kills the target cells, and release of the CTLs (Fig. 11.4). Each of
these steps is controlled by speciﬁc molecular interactions.
Recognition of Antigen and Activation of CTLs
The CTL binds and reacts to the target cell by using its antigen
receptor, CD8 coreceptor, and adhesion molecules. To be eﬃciently
recognized by CTLs, target cells must express class I MHC
molecules displaying a peptide. The MHC molecule with bound
peptide serves as the ligand for the T cell receptor (TCR), and the
MHC molecule is the ligand for CD8. Signaling by the TCR
promotes formation of the specialized immune synapse, with a
central region containing TCRs and other signaling molecules and
an outer ring of integrins, notably LFA-1 (leukocyte function–
associated antigen 1) on the CTL binding to its ligand ICAM-1
(intercellular adhesion molecule 1) on the target cell (Fig. 11.5). An
enclosed gap is present within the ring between the membranes of
the two cells. Distinct regions of the CTL membrane can be
observed by immunoﬂuorescence microscopy within the ring,
including a signaling patch, which includes the TCR, CD8, and
signaling proteins (such as protein kinase C-θ and the tyrosine
kinase LCK); and a secretory region, which appears as a gap on one
side of the signaling patch. TCR engagement by antigen results in
the initiation of biochemical signals that activate the CTL, leading
to the process of cell killing, described in the following section.
Cytokines and costimulators provided by DCs, as well as T cell
help, which are required for the diﬀerentiation of naive CD8+ T cells
into CTLs, are not necessary for triggering the eﬀector function of
CTLs (i.e., target cell killing).
FIGURE 11.4  Steps in cytotoxic T lymphocyte–
mediated lysis of target cells.A cytotoxic T
lymphocyte (CTL) recognizes the antigen-
expressing target cell and is activated. Activation
results in the release of granule contents from the
CTL into the target cell through the area of
contact (the immunologic synapse). Granule
contents deliver a lethal hit to the target. The CTL
may detach and kill other target cells. The
formation of conjugates between a CTL and its
target and activation of the CTL also require
interactions between accessory molecules
(leukocyte function–associated antigen 1 [LFA-1],
CD8) on the CTL and their specific ligands
(intercellular adhesion molecule 1 [ICAM-1] and
class I major histocompatibility complex,
respectively) on the target cell (not shown).
In addition to the TCR, CD8+ CTLs express receptors that are also
expressed by NK cells, which contribute to both regulation and
activation of CTLs. Some of these receptors belong to the KIR (killer
immunoglobulin receptor) family, discussed in Chapter 4, and
recognize class I MHC molecules on target cells but are not speciﬁc
for a particular peptide-MHC complex. These KIRs transduce
inhibitory signals that may serve to prevent CTLs from killing
normal cells. In addition, CTLs express the NKG2D receptor, which
recognizes the class I MHC–like molecules MIC-A, MIC-B, and
ULBP, which are expressed on stressed (infected or transformed)
cells. NKG2D may deliver signals that act together with TCR
recognition of antigen to enhance killing activity.
Killing of Target Cells by CTLs
The principal mechanism of CTL-mediated target cell killing is the
delivery of cytotoxic proteins stored within cytoplasmic granules
(also called secretory lysosomes) to the target cell, thereby triggering
apoptosis of the target cell (Fig. 11.6) . Within a few minutes after a
CTL’s antigen receptor and coreceptor recognize a peptide-MHC
complex on the target cell, the CTL granule proteins enter the
target cell, and death occurs during the following 2 to 6 hours, even
if the CTL detaches. Thus, the CTL is said to deliver a lethal hit to
the target cell. When the CTL recognizes antigen, TCR signals lead
to actin cytoskeleton reorganization. In this process, the
microtubule organizing center of the CTL moves to the area of the
cytoplasm near the contact with the target cell. The cytoplasmic
granules of the CTL are transported along microtubules and
become concentrated in the region of the synapse, and the granule
membrane fuses with the plasma membrane at the region of the
synapse. Membrane fusion results in exocytosis of the CTL’s
granule contents into the conﬁned space within the synaptic ring,
between the plasma membranes of the CTL and target cell.
The major proteins in the granules of CTLs (and NK cells) that are
required for cytotoxicity are granzymes and perforin. In human T
cells, there are ﬁve diﬀerent granzymes, namely A, B, H, K, and M;
of these, granzymes A, B, H and K are expressed at high levels in
CD8+ CTLs. All granzymes are serine proteases; granzyme B cleaves
proteins after aspartate residues. It can cleave and thereby activate
caspases, which induce apoptosis. The granules also contain a
sulfated proteoglycan, serglycin, which holds granzymes and
perforin in the granules in an inactive state.
Perforin is a membrane-perturbing molecule that is homologous
to the C9 complement protein. Its main function is to facilitate
delivery of the granzymes into the cytosol of the target cell. How
this is accomplished is still not well understood. Perforin can
polymerize and form aqueous pores in the cholesterol-containing
target cell plasma membrane, but these pores may not be of
suﬃcient size to allow granzymes to enter. According to one model,
complexes of granzyme B, perforin, and serglycin are discharged
from the CTL onto the target cell, and perforin insertion into the
target cell membrane elicits a membrane repair process, which
leads to internalization of both the perforin and granzymes into
endosomes. Perforin may then act on the endosomal membrane to
facilitate the release of the granzymes into the target cell cytosol.
Once in the cytosol, the granzymes cleave various substrates,
including caspases, and initiate apoptotic death of the cell. For
example, granzyme B cleaves and activates caspase-3 as well as the
BCL-2 family member BID, which triggers the mitochondrial
pathway of apoptosis (see Fig. 15.10). Another protein found in
human CTL (and NK cell) granules, called granulysin, can damage
cholesterol-poor 
membranes, 
typical 
of 
bacteria 
but 
not
mammalian cells. This leads to delivery of granzymes into the
microbes and induction of reactive oxygen species, resulting in
killing of intracellular microbes.
FIGURE 11.5  Formation of conjugates between
cytotoxic T lymphocytes and a target cell. A,
Electron micrograph of three cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTLs) from a cloned cell line
specific for the human major histocompatibility
complex molecule human leukocyte antigen-A2
(HLA-A2) binding to an HLA-A2–expressing target
cell (TC) within 1 minute after the CTLs and
targets are mixed. Note that in the CTL on the
upper left, the granules have been redistributed
toward the target cell. B, Electron micrograph of
the point of membrane contact between a CTL
(left) and target cell (right). Two CTL granules
(secretory granules [SG]) are near the synapse.
Several mitochondria are also visible. C, Confocal
fluorescence micrograph of an immune synapse
between a CTL (left) and target cell (right)
stained with antibodies against cathepsins in a
secretory granule (blue), leukocyte function–
associated antigen 1 (LFA-1) (green), and the
cytoskeletal protein talin (red). The image
demonstrates the central location of the secretory
granule and the peripheral location of the
adhesion molecule LFA-1 and associated
cytoskeletal protein talin. 
A, courtesy Dr. P. Peters, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam;
B, from Stinchcombe JC, Bossi G, Booth S, Griffiths GM. The
immunological synapse of CTL contains a secretory domain and
membrane bridges. Immunity. 2001;8:751–761; Copyright Cell
Press, with permission from Elsevier; C, from Stinchcombe JC,
Griffiths GM. The role of the secretory immunological synapse in
killing by CD8+ CTL. Semin Immunol. 2003;15:301–205. Copyright
2003 Elsevier Science Ltd.
CTLs also use a granule-independent mechanism of killing that is
mediated by interactions of membrane molecules on the CTLs and
target cells. On activation, CTLs express a membrane protein called
FAS ligand (FAS-L) that binds to the death receptor FAS, which is
expressed on many cell types. This interaction also results in
activation of caspases and apoptosis of FAS-expressing targets (see
Fig. 15.10). Studies with knockout mice lacking perforin, granzyme
B, or FAS-L indicate that perforin and granzyme B are the principal
mediators of killing by CD8+ CTLs.
After delivering the lethal hit, the CTL is released from its target
cell, which usually occurs even before the target cell dies. CTLs
themselves are not injured during target cell killing, and two
mechanisms have been proposed for CTL protection. First, CTLs
express a serine protease inhibitor in the cytosol called Spi6 that
can antagonize granzymes, including granzyme B. Second, CTL
granules contain a proteolytic enzyme called cathepsin B that is
delivered to the CTL surface on granule exocytosis, where it
degrades errant perforin molecules that come into the vicinity of
the CTL membrane. How cathepsin B is presumably preferentially
delivered to the surface of CTLs and not of target cells is not
known.
FIGURE 11.6  Mechanisms of cytotoxic T
lymphocyte–mediated killing of target
cells.Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) kill target
cells by two main mechanisms. A, Complexes of
perforin and granzymes are released from the
CTL by granule exocytosis and enter target cells.
The granzymes are delivered into the cytoplasm
of the target cells by a perforin-dependent
mechanism, and they induce apoptosis. B, FasL is
expressed on activated CTLs, engages Fas on
the surface of target cells, and induces apoptosis.
CD8+ T Cell Memory
Following activation, naive CD8+ T cells diﬀerentiate not only into
functional CTLs but also into long-lived memory cells. Help from
CD4+ T cells may be especially important for the generation of
these memory cells. The memory CD8+ T cells are functionally
inactive and have to be restimulated by antigen to develop into
active eﬀector CTLs. The general principles of CD8+ T cell memory
generation are similar to those for all T cells, discussed in Chapter
9. Tissue-resident memory T (TRM) cells, which remain in
nonlymphoid tissues such as the skin for long periods without
recirculating, were described in Chapter 9. Many of these TRM cells
are CD8+ T cells.
Cytokine Production by CD8+ Effector T Cells
CD8 +   T cells produce the macrophage-activating cytokine IFN-γ.
In fact, the secretion of IFN-γ in response to speciﬁc peptides is a
sensitive assay for the frequency of antigen-speciﬁc CD8+ T cells in
a population of lymphocytes. It is likely that both CD4+ Th1 cells
and CD8+ T cells contribute to IFN-γ–induced phagocytic clearance
of ingested microbes. CD8+ cells may also play a role in some
cytokine-induced 
inﬂammatory 
reactions, 
such 
as 
contact
sensitivity skin reactions induced by environmental chemicals,
where IFN-γ–producing CD8+ T cells often arrive earlier than and
outnumber CD4+ T cells. IL-17 producing CD8+ T cells are
abundant in some chronic inﬂammatory diseases of the skin, such
as psoriasis.
Roles of CD8+ Cytotoxic T Lymphocytes in
Host Defense
In infections by intracellular microbes, the killing activity of CTLs is
important for eradication of the reservoir of infection (see Fig. 10.1B)
. This is particularly important in two types of situations when cells
cannot destroy microbes that infect them. First, most viruses live
and replicate in cells that lack the phagosome/lysosome machinery
for destroying microbes (such as hepatitis viruses in liver cells).
Second, even in phagocytes, some microbes escape from vesicles
and live in the cytosol, where microbicidal mechanisms are
ineﬀective because these mechanisms are largely restricted to
vesicles (to protect the host cells from damage). Bacteria such as
Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Listeria monocytogenes are examples
of microbes that escape from vesicles and enter the cytosol of
infected cells. Such viral and bacterial infections can be eliminated
only by destroying the infected cells, and in adaptive immune
responses, CD8+ CTLs are the principal mechanism for killing
infected cells (see Chapter 16). In addition, the caspases that are
activated in target cells by granzymes and FAS-L cleave many
substrates and activate enzymes that degrade DNA, but they do not
distinguish between host and microbial molecules. Therefore, by
activating nucleases in target cells, CTLs can initiate the destruction
of microbial DNA as well as the target cell genome, thereby
eliminating potentially infectious DNA. The massive expansion of
CD8+ T cells that follows infections (see Fig. 9.12) provides a large
pool of CTLs to combat these infections. Defects in the
development and activity of CTLs result in increased susceptibility
to viral and some bacterial infections and reactivation of latent
virus infections (such as infection by the Epstein-Barr virus) that
are normally kept in check by virus-speciﬁc CTLs.
Destruction of infected cells by CTLs is a cause of tissue injury in
some infectious diseases. For instance, in infection by hepatitis B
and C viruses, the infected liver cells are killed by the host CTL
(and NK cell) response and not by the viruses. These viruses are not
highly cytopathic, but the host senses and reacts against the
infectious microbe and is not able to distinguish microbes that are
intrinsically harmful or relatively harmless (see Chapter 19). CTLs
may contribute to the immunopathology associated with many
other common viral infections, such as inﬂuenza.
CTLs are also important mediators of tumor immunity, as
discussed in Chapter 18. In addition to their protective roles, CD8+
CTLs contribute to tissue destruction in some autoimmune
diseases (see Chapter 19) and to the rejection of tissue grafts (see
Chapter 17).
Inherited mutations that interfere with CTL function, such as
mutations in perforin and in genes encoding proteins involved in
granule exocytosis, are associated with the rare familial form of a
disease called hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH), one of
a group of disorders called macrophage activation syndromes. In
these disorders, CTLs that are activated by viral antigen secrete
IFN-γ, but they do not kill the virus-infected cells because they
cannot deliver the lethal hit. Thus, there is persistence of viral
antigen, chronic IFN-γ production from the CD8+ T cells, and
excessive macrophage activation by the IFN-γ. The severe and
prolonged macrophage activation underlies the manifestations of
the disease, including enlargement of the spleen caused by
increased numbers of activated macrophages (lymphohistiocytosis)
that 
phagocytose 
and 
destroy 
normal 
red 
blood 
cells
(hemophagocytosis) (see Chapter 21). An antibody that blocks IFN-
γ has been approved for the treatment of macrophage activation
syndrome.
Summary
• T cells of the CD8+ subset proliferate and diﬀerentiate into
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), which express cytotoxic
granules and can kill infected cells.
• The diﬀerentiation of CD8+ T cells into functional CTLs and
memory cells requires recognition of antigen presented by
dendritic cells, signals from CD4+ helper T cells in some
situations, costimulation, and cytokines. Diﬀerentiation to
CTLs involves the acquisition of the machinery to kill target
cells and is driven by various transcription factors.
• In some situations of chronic antigen exposure (such as
tumors and chronic viral infections), CD8+ T cells initiate a
response but begin to express inhibitory receptors that
suppress the response, a process called exhaustion.
• CD8+ CTLs kill cells that express peptides derived from
cytosolic antigens (e.g., viral antigens) that are presented in
association with class I MHC molecules. CTL-mediated
killing is mainly the result of exocytosis of secretory
granules that contain granzymes and perforin. Perforin
facilitates granzyme entry into the cytoplasm of target cells,
and granzymes initiate the process of apoptosis. Another
granule protein, granulysin, destroys some intracellular
bacteria and fungi.
• CD8+ T cells also secrete interferon-γ and thus may
participate in defense against phagocytosed microbes and
in delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions.
Selected Readings
∗Indicates publications of historical interest, generally reporting
the discovery of a phenomenon or process that was later shown to
be of fundamental importance in the immune system. Many (but
not all) of these discoveries led to Nobel Prizes for the
discoverer(s). The nature of the discovery is summarized brieﬂy in
each reference.
Activation and Exhaustion of CD8+ T Lymphocytes
∗Barber D.L, Wherry E.J, Masopust D, et al. Restoring function in exhausted CD8 T cells
during chronic viral infection.  Nature . 2006;439:682–687 (The demonstration that in
chronic infection, CD8+ T cells become “exhausted” and this process can be reversed by
blocking the inhibitory receptor PD-1.).
Blank C.U, Haining W.N, Held W, et al. Deﬁning “T cell exhaustion.  Nat Rev Immunol.
 2019;19:665–674.
∗Buĵ E.A, Bevan M.J. Massive expansion of antigen-speciﬁc CD8+ T cells during an acute
virus infection.  Immunity . 1998;8:167–175; and Murali-
Krishna K, Altman J.D, Suresh M, et al. Counting antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells: a
reevaluation of bystander activation during viral infection.  Immunity . 1998;8:177–
187 (The demonstration of massive expansion of viral antigen-speciﬁc CD8+ T cell clones
following exposure to the virus.).
Halle S, Halle O, Forster R. Mechanisms and dynamics of T cell-mediated cytotoxicity
in vivo.  Trends Immunol . 2017;38:432–443.
Hashimoto M, Kamphorst A.O, Im S.J, et al. CD8 T cell exhaustion in chronic infection and
cancer: opportunities for interventions.  Annu Rev Med . 2018;69:301–318.
Henning A.N, Roychoudhuri R, Restifo N.P. Epigenetic control of CD8+ T cell
diﬀerentiation.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2018;18:340–356.
Laidlaw B.J, Craft J.E, Kaech S.M. The multifaceted role of CD4(+) T cells in CD8(+) T cell
memory.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2016;16:102–111.
McLane L.M, Abdel-Hakeem M.S, Wherry E.J. CD8 T cell exhaustion during chronic viral
infection and cancer.  Annu Rev Immunol . 2019;37:457–495.
Tscharke D.C, Croft N.P, Doherty P.C, La Gruta N.L. Sizing up the key determinants of the
CD8(+) T cell response.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2015;15:705–716.
Zhang N, Bevan M.J. CD8(+) T cells: foot soldiers of the immune system.  Immunity
. 2011;35:161–168.
Mechanisms of CTL-Mediated Cytotoxicity
Dieckmann N.M, Frazer G.L, Asano Y, et al. The cytotoxic T lymphocyte immune synapse
at a glance.  J Cell Sci . 2016;129:2881–2886.
Dotiwala F, Lieberman J. Granulysin: killer lymphocyte safeguard against microbes.  Curr
Opin Immunol . 2019;60:19–29.
Golstein P, Griﬃths G.M. An early history of T cell-mediated cytotoxicity.  Nat Rev Immunol
. 2018;18:527–535.
Liu X, Lieberman J. Knockin’ em dead: pore-forming proteins in immune defense.  Annu
Rev Immunol . 2020;38:455–485.
Voskoboinik I, Whisstock J.C, Trapani J.A. Perforin and granzymes: function, dysfunction
and human pathology.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2015;15:388–400.
Chapter 12: B Cell Activation and
Antibody Production
Overview Of Humoral Immune Responses,
Antigen Recognition and Antigen-Induced B Cell Activation,
Antigen Capture and Delivery to B Cells,
Activation of B Cells by Antigens and Other
Signals,
Helper T Cell–Dependent Antibody Responses to Protein
Antigens,
The Sequence of Events During T Cell–
Dependent Antibody Responses,
Initial Activation and Migration of Helper B Cells
and T Cells,
Antigen Presentation by B Cells and the
Hapten-Carrier Effect,
Role of CD40L:CD40 Interaction in T-
Dependent B Cell Activation,
Extrafollicular B Cell Activation,
T Follicular Helper (Tfh) Cells,
The Germinal Center Reaction,
Heavy Chain Isotype (Class) Switching,
Affinity Maturation: Somatic Mutation of
Immunoglobulin Genes and Selection of High-
Affinity B Cells,
B Cell Differentiation Into Antibody-Secreting
Plasma Cells,
Generation of Memory B Cells,
Role of Transcriptional Regulators in
Determining the Fate of Activated B Cells,
Antibody Responses to T-Independent Antigens,
Subsets of B Cells That Respond to T-
Independent Antigens,
Mechanisms of T-Independent Antibody
Responses,
Protection Mediated by T-Independent
Antibodies,
Antibody Feedback: Regulation of Humoral Immune
Responses by Fc Receptors,
Summary,
Humoral immunity is mediated by secreted antibodies, which are
produced by cells of the B lymphocyte lineage. This chapter
describes the molecular and cellular events of the humoral immune
response, in particular the stimuli that induce B cell proliferation
and diﬀerentiation and how these stimuli inﬂuence the type of
antibody that is produced. The mechanisms by which antibodies
eliminate microbes are described in Chapter 13.
Overview of Humoral Immune Responses
The activation of B cells results in their proliferation and their
eventual diﬀerentiation into antibody-secreting plasma cells and
memory cells (Fig. 12.1) . Humoral immune responses are initiated
by speciﬁc B cell recognition of antigen in secondary lymphoid
organs. Antigen binds to membrane immunoglobulin M (IgM) and
IgD on mature, naive B cells, generating signals required for their
proliferation and diﬀerentiation into plasma cells. The antibody
that is secreted by the plasma cell has essentially the same
speciﬁcity as the original antibody that served as the antigen
receptor on the surface of the naive B cell. A single B cell may,
within a week, give rise to as many as 5000 antibody-secreting cells,
each of which can secrete about 2000 antibody molecules every
second. This cell expansion and the remarkable rate of antibody
secretion are needed to keep pace with rapidly dividing microbes.
Antibody responses are T-dependent or T-independent, depending
on the nature of the antigen and the involvement of helper T cells
(Fig. 12.2) . Most responses to protein antigens require T cell help,
so these antigens are called T-dependent. The term helper T
lymphocyte came from the realization that T cells stimulate, or
help, B lymphocytes to produce antibodies. In T-dependent
responses, some activated B cells begin to produce antibodies other
than IgM; this process is called heavy chain isotype (class)
switching (see Fig. 12.1). As the response develops, activated B cells
produce antibodies that bind to antigens with increasing aﬃnity,
and these B cells progressively dominate the response; this process
is called aﬃnity maturation. In addition to isotype switching and
aﬃnity maturation, helper T cells stimulate the production of long-
lived plasma cells and the generation of memory B cells.
Multivalent antigens with repeating determinants, such as
polysaccharides, can activate B cells without T cell help. These
antigens are called T-independent. T-independent responses are
rapid but relatively simple, consisting mostly of low-aﬃnity IgM
antibodies, whereas T-dependent responses are slower to develop
but result in more durable, high-aﬃnity antibodies that are
typically of the IgG, IgA, or IgE isotypes.
Primary and secondary antibody responses to protein antigens
diﬀer qualitatively and quantitatively (Fig. 12.3) . Primary
responses result from the activation of previously unstimulated
naive B cells, whereas secondary responses are due to the
stimulation of expanded clones of memory B cells. Therefore, the
secondary response develops more rapidly than does the primary
response, and larger amounts of antibodies are produced in the
secondary response. Furthermore, because the memory cells have
already undergone isotype switching and some aﬃnity maturation,
there is more IgG and other isotypes compared to IgM and the
aﬃnity of the antibody is higher in secondary responses.
FIGURE 12.1  Phases of the humoral immune
response.The activation of B cells is initiated by
specific recognition of antigens by the surface
immunoglobulin (Ig) receptors of the cells. Antigen
and other stimuli, including helper T cells,
stimulate the proliferation and differentiation of the
specific B cell clone. Progeny of the clone may
differentiate into plasma cells that produce IgM or
other Ig isotypes (e.g., IgG), may undergo affinity
maturation, or may persist as memory cells (that
have also typically undergone class switching and
affinity maturation).
Distinct subsets of B cells respond preferentially to diﬀerent types
of antigens (see Fig. 12.2) . Follicular B cells in secondary
(peripheral) lymphoid organs make mostly antibody responses to
protein antigens, and these B cell responses require collaboration
with helper T cells. Marginal zone B cells in the spleen (and other
lymphoid tissues in humans) and B-1 cells in mucosal tissues and
the peritoneum recognize multivalent antigens, such as blood-
borne polysaccharides, and mount primarily T-independent
antibody responses. These preferences are not absolute. Some
marginal zone B cells participate in T-dependent responses, and
some follicular B cells may make T-independent responses.
FIGURE 12.2  T-dependent and T-independent
antibody responses.T-dependent antibody
responses to protein antigens mainly involve
follicular B cells. T-independent responses to
multivalent antigens are mediated mainly by
marginal zone B cells in the spleen and B-1 cells
in mucosal sites. Ig, Immunoglobulin.
FIGURE 12.3  Primary and secondary humoral
immune responses.In a primary immune
response, naive B cells are stimulated by antigen,
become activated, and differentiate into antibody-
secreting cells that produce antibodies specific for
the eliciting antigen. A secondary immune
response is elicited when the same antigen
stimulates memory B cells, leading to production
of greater quantities of specific antibody than are
produced in the primary response. Note that the
characteristics of secondary antibody responses
summarized in the table are typical of T-
dependent antibody responses to protein
antigens. Ig, Immunoglobulin.
With this background, we proceed to a discussion of B cell
activation, starting with the interaction of antigen with B cells. We
will then describe the role of helper T cells in B cell responses to
protein antigens and the mechanisms of isotype switching and
aﬃnity maturation. We conclude with a discussion of T-
independent antibody responses.
Antigen Recognition and Antigen-Induced B
Cell Activation
To initiate antibody responses, antigens have to be captured and
transported to the B cell areas of secondary lymphoid organs. The
antigens then initiate the process of B cell activation, often working
in concert with other signals that are generated during innate
immune responses triggered by microbes or by adjuvants in
vaccines. We will next describe these early events in B cell
activation.
Antigen Capture and Delivery to B Cells
Antigen may be delivered to naive B cells in lymphoid organs by
multiple routes (Fig. 12.4) . Antigens that elicit antibody responses
may vary in size and composition (they may be small, soluble, large,
or particulate) and may be free or bound to antibodies. The major
pathways of antigen delivery for diﬀerent types of antigens include
the following.
FIGURE 12.4  Pathways of antigen delivery to
follicular B cells.Small antigens are delivered to B
cells in follicles through afferent lymphatics and via
conduits and larger antigens by subcapsular sinus
macrophages or by dendritic cells in the medulla.
• Most antigens from tissue sites are transported to lymph
nodes by aﬀerent lymphatic vessels that drain into the
subcapsular sinus of the nodes. Soluble antigens, generally
smaller than 70 kD, may then reach the B cell zone through
conduits that extend between the subcapsular sinus and the
underlying follicles (see Chapter 2). In some cases, small
antigens may gain access to the follicles by diﬀusion.
• Subcapsular sinus macrophages capture large microbes and
antigen-antibody complexes and deliver these to follicles.
• Antigens in immune complexes entering the spleen may
bind to complement receptors (in particular, the
complement receptor type 2 [CR2, CD21]) on marginal zone
B cells, and these cells can transfer the immune complex–
containing antigens to follicular B cells. Recirculating
follicular B cells may also capture antigens via CR2 and
deliver them into follicles. Immune complexes that are
delivered into lymphoid follicles may bind to CR2 or Fc
receptors for IgG on the surface of follicular dendritic cells
(FDCs), and the antigens in these complexes are then
presented to antigen-speciﬁc B cells in a sustained manner
(over days to weeks).
• Polysaccharide antigens can be captured by macrophages in
the marginal zone of splenic lymphoid follicles and
displayed or transferred to B cells in this area.
In all of these cases, the antigen that is presented to B cells is
generally in its intact, native conformation and is not processed by
antigen-presenting cells. This, of course, is one of the important
diﬀerences between the forms of antigens recognized by B and T
lymphocytes (see Chapter 6). Although the presentation of antigen
to B cells by subcapsular sinus macrophages, macrophages in the
splenic marginal zone, and dendritic cells (DCs) in the medulla of
lymph nodes has been described in experimental models, how
these cells prevent the protein antigens they capture from being
engulfed and degraded remains unclear.
Activation of B Cells by Antigens and Other
Signals
The B cell receptor (BCR)   complex of mature B cells is composed of
membrane Ig molecules that bind antigens and associated Igα and
Igβ proteins that deliver signals for B cell activation. The BCR
complex plays two key roles in B cell responses. First, binding of
antigen to the receptor delivers biochemical signals to the B cells
that initiate the process of activation. As discussed later, signaling
is more robust with multivalent T-independent antigens than with
T-dependent 
protein 
antigens. 
Antigen-induced 
biochemical
signals 
are 
initiated 
by 
SRC 
family 
kinase–mediated
phosphorylation of the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation
motif (ITAM) tyrosines of Igα and Igβ, followed by the recruitment
and activation of SYK (see Chapter 7). Second, the BCR internalizes
the bound antigen into endosomal vesicles, and if the antigen is a
protein, it is processed into peptides that may be presented by class
II MHC molecules on the B cell surface for recognition by helper T
cells. This antigen-presenting function of B cells will be considered
later in the context of T-dependent B cell activation.
Although antigen recognition can initiate B cell responses, by
itself it is usually inadequate to stimulate signiﬁcant B cell
proliferation and diﬀerentiation, even for T-independent antigens.
For full responses to be induced, other stimuli cooperate with BCR
engagement, including complement proteins, paĴern recognition
receptors, and, in the case of protein antigens, helper T cells
(discussed later).
FIGURE 12.5  Role of complement receptor type 2
and Toll-like receptors in B cell activation.In
immune responses to microbes, activation of B
cells through the B cell receptor (BCR) may be
enhanced by complement-coated antigen that can
ligate both the BCR and complement receptor 2
(CR2) (A), and also by the simultaneous activation
of Toll-like receptors (TLRs) on B cells by
molecules (pathogen-associated molecular
patterns [PAMPs]) derived from the microbe (B).
B cell activation is facilitated by the CR2 coreceptor on B cells,
which recognizes complement fragments that are covalently aĴached
to the antigen or are part of immune complexes containing the
antigen (Fig. 12.5A) . Follicular B cells and marginal zone B cells
express the complement receptor CR2; the levels of CR2 on
marginal zone B cells are much higher. Microbes activate the
complement system in the absence of antibodies by the alternative
and lectin pathways and in the presence of antibodies by the
classical pathway (see Chapters 4 and 13). In all of these situations,
complement fragments are generated that bind to the microbes.
One of these fragments, called C3d, is recognized by CR2, which
enhances the strength of BCR signaling and thus functions as a
coreceptor for B cells (see Chapter 7). Some nonmicrobial
polysaccharides also activate complement by the alternative or
lectin pathway, and this is one reason that such antigens are able to
induce antibody responses without T cell help.
Microbial products engage Toll-like receptors (TLRs) on B cells,
which also enhances B cell activation (Fig. 12.5B) . Human B cells
express several TLRs, including TLR5, which recognizes bacterial
ﬂagellin; endosomal TLR7, which recognizes single-stranded RNA;
and TLR9, which is speciﬁc for unmethylated CpG-rich DNA in
endosomes (see Chapter 4). Murine B cells (but not human B cells)
also express TLR4 on the cell surface, which recognizes
lipopolysaccharide (LPS). These paĴern recognition receptors
provide signals that enhance or cooperate with those from the BCR
complex during B cell activation. In addition, the activation of
myeloid cells through paĴern recognition receptors can promote B
cell activation indirectly in two ways. DCs activated through TLRs
contribute signiﬁcantly to helper T cell activation, and the helper
cells stimulate B cells in response to protein antigens. Myeloid cells
activated by TLRs may secrete APRIL (a proliferation-inducing
ligand) and BAFF (B cell–activating factor), cytokines that can
promote T-independent B cell responses.
The interaction of diﬀerent types of antigens (multivalent
structures or proteins) with the BCR initiates B cell proliferation
and diﬀerentiation in diﬀerent ways. Signals from the BCR may be
suﬃcient to keep the B cells alive, induce changes in chemokine
receptor expression, and promote antigen endocytosis (Table 12.1).
The importance of signaling by the BCR complex for the
subsequent responses of the cells varies with the nature of the
antigen. Most T-independent antigens, such as polysaccharides,
contain multiple identical epitopes on each molecule. Such
multivalent antigens can eﬀectively cross-link many B cell antigen
g
y
y
g
receptors and initiate responses even though they are not
recognized by helper T lymphocytes. In contrast, many naturally
occurring globular protein antigens possess only one copy of each
epitope per molecule. Therefore, such protein antigens, in their
functionally monovalent form, cannot simultaneously bind to and
cross-link multiple Ig molecules, and their ability to directly
activate B cells is limited; they do not typically induce signals that
can drive B cell proliferation and diﬀerentiation. Some protein
antigens may be displayed as multivalent arrays on the surfaces of
microbes or cells, or they may be multivalent because they are in
aggregates; in these cases, protein antigens can induce B cell
proliferation and diﬀerentiation.
TABLE 12.1
Effects of B Cell Antigen Receptor Engagement on B Cells a
Phenotypic Change
Functional Consequence
Increased expression of CCR7
Migration toward T cell zone
Increased expression of B7
costimulators
Enhanced ability to activate
helper T cells
Increased expression of
receptors for T-cell
cytokines
Increased responsiveness to
signals from helper T cells
Increased expression of anti-
apoptotic proteins
Increased survival of B cells
a  These changes may be induced by binding of protein antigens to the B cell receptor, and
they prepare B cells to respond to T cell help. Protein antigens are also internalized,
processed, and presented to helper T cells.
After speciﬁc B cells recognize antigens, the subsequent steps in
humoral immune responses are very diﬀerent in T-dependent and
T-independent responses. We will next describe the activation of B
cells by protein antigens and helper T cells.
Helper T Cell–Dependent Antibody
Responses to Protein Antigens
The helper function of T lymphocytes was discovered by
experiments performed in the late 1960s, which showed that
antibody responses required cooperation between B cells and T
cells. These classic experimental studies were among the ﬁrst to
demonstrate the importance of interactions between two diﬀerent
cell populations in the immune system. It was later established that
most helper T cells are CD4+CD8 − lymphocytes that recognize
peptide antigens presented by class II major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) molecules. One of the important accomplishments
of immunology has been the elucidation of the mechanisms of T
cell–B cell interactions and the actions of helper T cells in antibody
responses.
The Sequence of Events During T Cell–
Dependent Antibody Responses
Protein antigens are independently recognized by speciﬁc B and T
lymphocytes in secondary lymphoid organs, and the two activated
cell types interact with each other to initiate humoral immune
responses (Fig. 12.6) . Naive CD4+ T cells are activated in the T cell
zones by antigen (in the form of processed, MHC-associated
peptides) presented by DCs. Naive B cells in the follicles are
activated by the same antigen (in its native conformation) that is
transported there. The activated helper T cells and activated B cells
migrate toward one another and interact at the edges of the
follicles, where the initial antibody response develops. Some of the
activated T and B cells migrate into follicles to form germinal
centers, where more specialized antibody responses are induced.
Next we will describe each of these steps in detail.
Initial Activation and Migration of Helper B
Cells and T Cells
The contemporaneous activation of speciﬁc B and T cells by a protein
antigen induces changes that bring them into proximity to enhance
the likelihood of the antigen-speciﬁc B and T cells colocalizing and
interacting with one another (Fig. 12.7) . The frequency of naive B
cells or T cells speciﬁc for a given epitope of an antigen is as low as
1 in 105 to 1 in 106 lymphocytes, and the speciﬁc B and T cells have
to ﬁnd each other and physically interact to generate strong
antibody responses. This is accomplished in part by regulated
movement of the cells following antigen recognition. Before antigen
encounter, naive T cells reside in the T cell zone because they
express the chemokine receptor CCR7, which binds to the
chemokines CCL19 and CCL21 produced in these zones, and naive
B cells remain in the follicles because they express CXCR5, which
recognizes CXCL13 produced by FDCs and other cells in the
follicles (see Chapter 2). Upon activation, helper T cells
downregulate CCR7 and increase the expression of CXCR5 and, as a
result, leave the T cell zone and migrate toward the follicle in
response to CXCL13 in the follicle. B cells respond to antigen-
mediated BCR triggering by reducing cell surface expression of the
chemokine receptor CXCR5 and increasing expression of CCR7.
These cells also upregulate EBI2, a chemoaĴractant receptor that
responds to oxysterol ligands made along the follicle–T zone
interface. (EBI2 is so named because it was discovered as an
Epstein-Barr virus-induced gene.) Activated B cells thus migrate
toward the T cell zone drawn by a gradient of CCL21, the major
ligand for CCR7, and oxysterols. The net result of these changes is
that antigen-activated T and B lymphocytes are drawn toward each
other.
Protein antigens are internalized by the B cell and presented in a
form that can be recognized by helper T cells, and this represents
the next step in the process of T-dependent B cell activation.
Antigen Presentation by B Cells and the
Hapten-Carrier Effect
Protein antigens that are recognized by speciﬁc BCRs are
endocytosed and processed to generate peptides that bind to class II
MHC molecules and are presented to CD4 +   T cells (Fig. 12.8) . This
class II MHC pathway of antigen presentation was described in
detail in Chapter 6. The peptides that are presented by the B cell to
a helper T cell are the same peptides that initially activated the
naive CD4+ T cells when they were presented by DCs in the T cell
zone. Because the BCR recognizes an epitope of the native protein
with high aﬃnity, speciﬁc B cells bind this antigen much more
eﬃciently (i.e., at much lower concentrations) than do other B cells
not speciﬁc for the antigen. Therefore, the antigen-speciﬁc B cells
are also much more eﬃcient at presenting peptides derived from
that antigen than are other B cells that do not express membrane
receptors for the antigen. This is why B cells speciﬁc for an antigen
are best able to interact with helper T cells speciﬁc for that antigen
and receive helper signals, whereas B cells with other BCRs remain
in a quiescent state.
FIGURE 12.6  Sequence of events in humoral
immune responses to T cell–dependent protein
antigens. A, Immune responses are initiated by
the recognition of antigens by B cells and CD4+ T
cells. The activated lymphocytes migrate toward
one another and interact at the interface of T and
B cell zones. B, The initial T-dependent B cell
proliferation and differentiation result in the
formation of an extrafollicular focus, in which B
cells proliferate, can undergo isotype switching,
and differentiate into plasma cells (mostly short-
lived). Some of the T cells that are activated in the
extracellular focus develop into follicular helper T
cells and migrate back into the follicles, together
with some activated B cells, to form a germinal
center. The late events in B cell responses occur
in germinal centers and include somatic mutation
and the selection of high-affinity cells (affinity
maturation), additional isotype switching, memory
B cell generation, and the generation of long-lived
plasma cells, described in later figures.
FIGURE 12.7  Migration of B cells and helper T cells
and T cell–B cell interaction.Antigen-activated
helper T cells and B cells move toward one
another in response to chemokine signals and
make contact adjacent to the edge of primary
follicles. CD40L, CD40 ligand.
FIGURE 12.8  Antigen presentation on B cells to
helper T cells.Protein antigens recognized by
membrane immunoglobulin are endocytosed and
processed, and peptide fragments are presented
in association with class II major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) molecules. Helper T cells
recognize MHC-peptide complexes on the B cells
and then stimulate B cell responses.
In a T cell–dependent B cell response to a speciﬁc protein
antigen, at least two diﬀerent epitopes of the protein participate in
the process: a surface epitope on the native protein is recognized
with high speciﬁcity by a B cell; and a linear peptide epitope, which
may be in any part of the intact protein, is subsequently released by
proteolysis, binds to class II MHC molecules, and is recognized by
helper T cells (see Fig 12.8). The antibodies that are eventually
secreted are usually speciﬁc for conformational determinants of the
native antigen, because membrane Ig on B cells is capable of
binding conformational epitopes of proteins, and the same Ig is
secreted by plasma cells derived from those B cells. This feature of
B cell antigen recognition determines the ﬁne speciﬁcity of the
antibody response and is independent of the fact that helper T cells
recognize only linear epitopes of processed peptides. In fact, a
single B lymphocyte speciﬁc for a native epitope may bind and
endocytose a protein and present multiple diﬀerent peptides
complexed with class II MHC molecules to diﬀerent helper T cells,
but the resultant antibody response remains speciﬁc for the native
protein.
The principles outlined here for T cell–B cell collaboration help to
explain a phenomenon that is known as the hapten-carrier eﬀect.
Haptens, such as dinitrophenol, are small chemicals that can be
recognized by speciﬁc antibodies but are not immunogenic by
themselves. If, however, haptens are coupled to proteins, which
serve as carriers, the conjugates are able to induce antibody
responses against the haptens. The haptens are equivalent to the
conformational epitopes that are recognized by B cells in a T-
dependent response to any protein antigen. Analysis of antibody
responses to hapten-carrier conjugates provided among the earliest
demonstrations of how antigen presentation by B lymphocytes
contributes to the development of humoral immune responses.
There are three important characteristics of anti-hapten antibody
responses to hapten-protein conjugates. First, such responses
require both hapten-speciﬁc B cells and protein (carrier)-speciﬁc
helper T cells. Second, to stimulate a response, the hapten and
carrier portions have to be physically linked and cannot be
administered separately. Third, the interaction is class II MHC
restricted; that is, the helper T cells cooperate only with B
lymphocytes that express class II MHC molecules that are identical
to those that were involved in the initial activation of naive T cells
by DCs. All of these features of antibody responses to hapten-
protein conjugates can be explained by the antigen-presenting
functions of B lymphocytes. Hapten-speciﬁc B cells bind the antigen
through the hapten determinant, endocytose the hapten-carrier
conjugate, digest the protein component, and present peptides
derived from the carrier protein to carrier-speciﬁc helper T
lymphocytes (see Fig. 12.8). Thus, the two cooperating lymphocytes
recognize diﬀerent epitopes of the same antigen. The hapten is
responsible for eﬃcient internalization of the carrier protein into
the B cell, which explains why hapten and carrier must be
physically linked. Because the T cells recognize self MHC-
associated peptides, their interaction with the B cells is MHC-
restricted.
The characteristics of humoral responses elucidated for hapten-
carrier conjugates apply to all protein antigens in which one
intrinsic determinant, usually a native conformational determinant,
is recognized by B cells (and is therefore analogous to the hapten),
and another determinant, in the form of a class II MHC–associated
linear peptide, is recognized by helper T cells (and is analogous to a
peptide derived from the carrier protein). The hapten-carrier eﬀect
is the basis for the development of conjugate vaccines against
encapsulated 
bacteria; 
these 
vaccines 
contain 
carbohydrate
p
y
epitopes recognized by B cells aĴached to proteins recognized by T
cells, discussed later in this chapter.
Role of CD40L:CD40 Interaction in T-
Dependent B Cell Activation
Upon activation, helper T cells express CD40 ligand (CD40L), which
engages its receptor, CD40, on antigen-stimulated B cells and
induces B cell proliferation and diﬀerentiation, initially in
extrafollicular foci and later in germinal centers (Fig. 12.9) . CD40 is
a member of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor superfamily
(see Chapter 10). Its ligand, CD40L (CD154), is a trimeric
membrane protein that is homologous to TNF. CD40 is
constitutively expressed on B cells, and CD40L is expressed on the
surface of helper T cells that have been recently activated by
antigen and costimulators. When these activated helper T cells
interact physically with antigen-presenting B cells, CD40L binds to
CD40 on the B cell surface. This results in conformational alteration
of preformed CD40 trimers, which induces the association of
cytosolic proteins called TNF receptor–associated factors (TRAFs)
with the cytoplasmic domain of CD40. The TRAFs recruited to
CD40 initiate enzyme cascades that lead to the activation and
nuclear translocation of transcription factors, including NF-κB
(nuclear factor κB) and AP1 (activator protein 1), which collectively
stimulate B cell proliferation and increased synthesis and secretion
of Ig. Similar signaling pathways are activated by TNF receptors
(see Chapter 7). CD40-induced signals are also crucial for
subsequent germinal center reactions, as we will discuss later. In
addition, T cell–mediated DC and macrophage activation involves
the interaction of CD40L on activated helper T cells with CD40 on
DCs and macrophages (see Chapters 6 and 10).
Mutations in the CD40L gene result in a disease called the X-
linked hyper-IgM syndrome, which is characterized by defects in
antibody production, notably in isotype switching and aﬃnity
maturation, and deﬁcient cell-mediated immunity (see Chapter 21).
Similar abnormalities are seen in CD40 or CD40L gene knockout
mice. Interestingly, a DNA virus called the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
infects human B cells and induces their proliferation. This may lead
to immortalization of the cells and the development of lymphomas.
The cytoplasmic tail of the EBV protein latent membrane protein 1
(LMP1) associates with the same TRAF molecules as does the
cytoplasmic domain of CD40, and this apparently triggers B cell
proliferation. Thus, EBV LMP1 is functionally homologous to a
physiologic B cell signaling molecule, and EBV has apparently co-
opted a normal pathway of B lymphocyte activation for its own
purpose, which is to promote survival and proliferation of cells in
which the virus can replicate.
In addition to CD40L on helper T cells activating B cells, helper T
cells also secrete cytokines that contribute to B cell responses. T
cell–derived cytokines are essential for germinal center reactions,
described later. Several cytokines also have been implicated in the
early steps of B cell proliferation and diﬀerentiation, but it is not
clear if any are actually essential for these responses.
After the initial interaction of B cells with helper T cells at the
interface between the follicle and the T cell zone, subsequent
activation of B cells by helper T cells can occur at two diﬀerent
locations, one outside the follicles in an extrafollicular focus and
the other in the germinal centers of follicles. The nature of the B
cell response diﬀers in these locations (Table 12.2).
FIGURE 12.9  Mechanisms of helper T cell–
mediated B cell activation.Helper T cells that are
activated by recognizing antigens presented by B
cells express CD40 ligand (CD40L), which binds
to CD40 on B cells and stimulates B cell
proliferation and differentiation. Cytokines
produced by the helper T cells also contribute to
B cell responses.
Extrafollicular B Cell Activation
B cell activation in the extrafollicular focus results in an early
antibody response to protein antigens and sets up the subsequent
germinal center reaction. Extrafollicular foci of T-dependent B cell
activation generate low-aﬃnity antibodies that can circulate and
limit the spread of an infection. Each such focus may produce 100
to 200 antibody-secreting plasma cells. In the spleen, extrafollicular
foci develop in the outer portions of the T cell–rich periarteriolar
lymphoid sheath (PALS) or between the T cell zone and the red
pulp, and these collections of cells are also called PALS foci. Similar
T-dependent foci are observed in the medullary cords of lymph
nodes.
B cells that are activated by helper T cells through CD40L in the
extrafollicular foci undergo isotype switching. In fact, extracellular
foci are the site at which most isotype switching occurs during
antibody responses to protein antigens. The antibody-secreting
cells 
that 
are 
generated 
in 
extrafollicular 
foci, 
including
plasmablasts and tissue plasma cells, are mostly short-lived, and
these cells do not acquire the ability to migrate to distant sites, such
as the bone marrow. In secondary lymphoid organs, plasmablasts
downregulate CXCR5 and CCR7, upregulate CXCR4, and migrate
into the red pulp (in the spleen) or medullary cords (in lymph
nodes) in response to the CXCR4 ligand CXCL12. Rather than
taking on plasmablast properties, some of the B cells activated at
the follicle–T zone interface become precursors of germinal center
B cells. FDCs release CXCL13, which draws in small numbers (a few
to 100) of such cells. These precursor cells downregulate EBI2 and
upregulate receptors that promote their conﬁnement to the follicle
center and initiate the germinal center reaction. The extrafollicular
response also helps to generate T follicular helper (TĢ) cells that
migrate into the follicle and are required for germinal center
formation.
T Follicular Helper (Tfh) Cells
Within 4 to 7 days after antigen exposure, activated antigen-speciﬁc
B cells outside the follicle induce some previously activated T cells to
diﬀerentiate into TĢ cells, which express high levels of the
chemokine receptor CXCR5, are drawn into lymphoid follicles by
CXCL13, the ligand for CXCR5, and play critical roles in germinal
center formation and function. In addition to CXCR5, TĢ cells
express ICOS (inducible costimulator), PD-1 (programmed cell
death protein-1), the cytokine interleukin-21 (IL-21), and the
transcription factor BCL-6. TĢ cells have a phenotype that makes
them distinct from the Th1, Th2, and Th17 subsets of eﬀector T cells
described in Chapter 10.
Diﬀerentiation of TĢ cells from naive CD4+ T cells requires two
steps: initial activation by antigen-presenting DCs and subsequent
activation by B cells (Fig. 12.10). The choice between a Th1, Th2, or
Th17 fate on the one hand or a TĢ fate on the other depends partly
on the strength of the initial interaction between peptide–class II
MHC complexes on DCs and the T cell receptor (TCR) on naive
CD4+ T cells. Strong TCR activation by DCs induces TĢ cells by
promoting expression of the BCL-6 transcriptional repressor and
reducing the levels of the α chain of the IL-2 receptor (IL-2R). This
initial expression of BCL-6 combined with weak IL-2R signaling
inhibits the acquisition of a Th1, Th2, or Th17 cell fate. Some of
these activated T cells begin to express CXCR5, and their ﬁnal
diﬀerentiation into TĢ cells requires interacting with activated B
cells. A number of molecules on B cells and helper T cells are
known to play key roles in the generation of TĢ cells. The binding
of the costimulatory molecule ICOS ligand on activated B cells to its
receptor ICOS, a member of the CD28 family, on T cells promotes
the diﬀerentiation of the T cells into TĢ cells. TĢ cell generation
also depends on interactions between activated B cells and helper T
cells mediated by members of the SLAM family. A signaling
molecule that associates with these SLAM family proteins in TĢ
cells is called SLAM-associated protein (SAP), and SAP signaling
stabilizes the expression of transcriptional regulators, particularly
BCL-6, that are required for TĢ cell development. SAP is mutated
in patients with X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome (XLP),
which is associated with defects in antibody and cytotoxic T cell
responses (see Chapter 21).
TABLE 12.2
Extrafollicular and Germinal Center B Cell Responses
Feature
Extrafollicular Response Germinal Center
Response
Localization
Medullary cords of
lymph nodes and at
junctions between T
cell zone and red
pulp of spleen
Germinal centers
of secondary
follicles
CD40 signals
Required
Required
Specialized T cell
help
Extrafollicular helper T
cells
TĢ cells in
germinal center
AID expression
Yes
Yes
Isotype switching
Yes
Yes
Somatic
hypermutation
Low rate
High rate
Aﬃnity
maturation of
antibody
Low
High
Terminally
diﬀerentiated
B cells
Short-lived plasma cells
(life span of ∼3
days)
Long-lived plasma
cells, which
migrate to bone
marrow, and
memory cells
Transcription
factors
activated in B
cells
BLIMP-1
BCL-6
AID, Activation-induced cytidine deaminase; BCL-6, B cell lymphoma 6; BLIMP-1, B
lymphocyte–induced maturation protein 1; Tfh, T follicular helper cell.
Data from Vinuesa CG, Sanz I, Cook MC. Dysregulation of
germinal centres in autoimmune disease. Nat Rev Immunol.
2009;9:845–885.
FIGURE 12.10  The generation of T follicular helper
cells.The generation of T follicular helper (Tfh)
cells requires sequential activation of T cells, first
by dendritic cells and then by activated B cells.
Inducible costimulator (ICOS) ligand (ICOS-L)-
ICOS interactions are essential for Tfh cell
differentiation. The differentiated Tfh cells migrate
into germinal centers, where they activate B cells.
IL, Interleukin.
The deﬁning cytokine produced by TĢ cells is IL-21. This
cytokine is required for germinal center development and
contributes to the generation of plasma cells in the germinal center
reaction. IL-21 secreted by TĢ cells also facilitates germinal center
B cell selection events and the diﬀerentiation of activated B cells
into plasmablasts. In addition to IL-21, TĢ cells secrete other
cytokines, including IL-4 and IL-13 and likely low levels of IFN-γ as
well; some of these cytokines are known to participate in isotype
switching, as discussed later. Some extrafollicular TĢ cells may
express cytokines such as IL-4 and IL-21, which stimulate isotype
switching outside the germinal center, as described shortly.
The Germinal Center Reaction
The characteristic events of helper T cell–dependent antibody
responses, including aﬃnity maturation, generation of long-lived
plasma cells and memory B cells, and continuing isotype switching,
occur in organized structures called germinal centers that are created
within lymphoid follicles during T-dependent immune responses. The
complex process of B cell diﬀerentiation and selection of cells with
the highest aﬃnity antigen receptors that occurs in these sites is
called the germinal center reaction.
Germinal centers develop in secondary lymphoid organs
approximately 4 to 7 days after the initiation of a T-dependent B cell
response. Long before the functional signiﬁcance of this anatomic
structure was understood it was named the germinal center by
morphologists because the presence of many mitotic ﬁgures in the
region suggested that new cells were generated or “germinated”
there. Germinal centers consist of two distinct regions: a dark zone
that is densely packed with rapidly proliferating B cells and appears
dark in histologic sections stained with hematoxylin; and a light
zone, where high-aﬃnity B cells are selected to survive and
diﬀerentiate further but many cells die, that stains weakly with the
same dye (Fig. 12.11). The cellular composition of these zones is
diﬀerent. TĢ cells are present only in the light zone. The light zone
also contains a type of stromal cell called a follicular dendritic cell
(FDC). FDCs are not derived from bone marrow precursors and are
developmentally related to ﬁbroblastic reticular cells. They are
found only in lymphoid follicles and express complement receptors
(CR1, CR2, and CR3) and Fc receptors. These molecules are
involved in displaying antigens for the selection of germinal center
B cells, as described later. FDCs do not express class II MHC
molecules and, in spite of their name, they are distinct from the
class II MHC–expressing DCs that present peptides to T
lymphocytes. The long cytoplasmic processes of FDCs form a
meshwork around which germinal centers are formed. B cells in the
dark zone and light zone are sometimes called centroblasts and
centrocytes, respectively. These zones are not ﬁxed, because B cells
move between the dark zone and the light zone. The rim of naive B
cells in the follicle surrounding the germinal center makes up the
mantle zone.
The germinal center reaction consists of a number of sequential
steps (Fig. 12.12).
1. Initiation of the germinal center by TĢ cells: The germinal
center reaction begins with the migration of TĢ cells into
the follicle, guided by the chemokine CXCL13 blinding to
CXCR5 on the T cells.
2. Entry of B cells into the GC: Antigen-stimulated B cells that
have been activated in extrafollicular foci cells through
CD40L-CD40 interactions downregulate EBI2 and move into
the follicle to form the germinal center. Each germinal
center contains B cells derived from as liĴle as a few to up to
about a hundred antigen-speciﬁc clones. Diﬀerent antigen-
speciﬁc B cell clones may give rise to memory B cells and
long-lived plasma cells.
3. B cell proliferation: B cells that have been triggered by TĢ
cells via CD40L-CD40 interactions repeatedly proliferate,
forming the dark zone of the germinal center. The doubling
time of these proliferating germinal center B cells is
estimated to be 6 to 12 hours, so that within 5 days, a single
lymphocyte may give rise to as many as 5000 progeny.
4. Somatic mutations in Ig genes: Proliferating dark zone B cells
mutate their Ig V genes as part of a process called somatic
hypermutation. This process is initiated by the enzyme
activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID), which is
highly expressed by dark zone B cells. The mechanism of
somatic mutation is described later.
5. B cell migration within the GC: After multiple divisions, dark
zone B cells stop dividing and shut oﬀ expression of the
CXCR4 chemokine receptor. The CXCR4 ligand, CXCL12, is
more abundant in the dark zone than in the light zone. The
loss of CXCR4 expression results in the migration of these
heavily mutated nondividing B cells to the adjacent light
zone that contains TĢ cells and FDCs. These nondividing
dark zone B cells still express CXCR5 and are drawn toward
the higher concentration of CXCL13 in the light zone.
6. Selection of high-aﬃnity B cells: In the light zone, B cells that
have undergone somatic hypermutation are tested for their
ability to recognize antigen displayed by FDCs and free
antigen in the GC. B cells that have acquired high-aﬃnity
BCRs are more likely to capture antigen, display the antigen
to TĢ cells, and receive CD40- and cytokine-mediated
signals from the T cells. As a result, these B cells are
selected to survive and diﬀerentiate further. B cells may fail
selection and undergo apoptotic death in the light zone.
This selection process is also described in more detail later.
7. Repetitive mutation and selection: B cells positively selected in
the light zone express the transcription factor MYC,
reexpress the CXCR4 chemokine receptor and thus return to
the dark zone. Germinal center B cells can undergo repeated
rounds of mutation and selection, migrating back and forth
from light to dark zone if they are positively selected. This
process contributes to the aﬃnity maturation of the
antibody response.
8. Diﬀerentiation into long-lived plasma cells: After some rounds
of selection, high-aﬃnity B cells exit the germinal center as
plasmablasts that will home to the bone marrow and
diﬀerentiate into long-lived plasma cells. How the decision
is made for selected high-aﬃnity light zone B cells to not
return to the dark zone but to instead exit the germinal
center is not known. What is known is that once this
decision is made, high-aﬃnity light zone B cells reexpress
EBI2 and leave the germinal center.
9. Memory B cell formation: From the germinal center, B cells that
undergo limited somatic hypermutation and remain
relatively low-aﬃnity exit early as memory B cells. Memory
y
y
y
y
y
cells have the ability to recirculate and migrate from one
secondary lymphoid organ to another.
FIGURE 12.11  Germinal centers in secondary
lymphoid organs. A, The germinal center is within
the follicle and includes a basal dark zone (DZ)
and an adjacent light zone (LZ). B, Germinal
center B cells express BCL-6 (B cell lymphoma 6)
(as do T follicular helper cells); ICOS (inducible
costimulator) expressing helper T cells reside
mainly in the light zone and in the extrafollicular
area; and AID (activation-induced cytidine
deaminase) is expressed at its highest levels in
germinal center B cells in the dark zone. 
A, Courtesy of Dr. James Gulizia, Department of Pathology,
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. B,
Courtesy of Dr. Naoki Kaneko, Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and
Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Germinal center formation is defective in humans and in mice
with genetic defects in T cell development or activation or with
mutations of either CD40 or its ligand, discussed earlier. Now that
we have described the basic features and steps of the germinal
center reaction, we will discuss some of the individual cellular and
molecular events that occur during this process.
Heavy Chain Isotype (Class) Switching
In T-dependent responses, some of the progeny of activated IgM- and
IgD-expressing B cells undergo heavy chain isotype (class) switching
and produce antibodies with heavy chains of diﬀerent classes, such
as γ, α, and ε (Fig. 12.13) . Isotype switching outside the follicle is
driven by extrafollicular pre-germinal center TĢ cells, and the
process continues to occur in germinal centers, driven by TĢ cells
in the light zone. The capacity of B cells to produce diﬀerent
antibody isotypes provides a remarkable specialization of humoral
immune responses by generating antibodies that perform distinct
eﬀector functions and are involved in defense against diﬀerent
types of infectious agents. B cells change the isotypes of the
antibodies they produce by changing the constant regions of the
heavy chains, but the speciﬁcity of the antibodies (which is
determined by the variable regions) remains unaltered. The
molecular mechanisms responsible for the change in heavy chain
constant regions are described later.
FIGURE 12.12  Sequential events in the germinal
center.Activated B cells migrate into the follicle
and proliferate, forming the dark zone of the
germinal center. These B cells undergo somatic
hypermutation of immunoglobulin (Ig) V genes and
migrate into the light zone, where they encounter
follicular dendritic cells displaying antigen and T
follicular helper (Tfh) cells. B cells with the
highest-affinity Ig receptors are selected to
survive, and cycle back to the dark zone where
they undergo more somatic hypermutation.
Selected cells go back and forth multiple times
and are repeatedly mutated and selected until
they finally differentiate into antibody-secreting
cells. Memory B cells are derived from B cells
that go through fewer rounds of somatic
hypermutation and selection and emerge earlier
from the germinal center than antibody-secreting
cells. The antibody-secreting cells leave and
reside in the bone marrow as long-lived plasma
cells, and the memory B cells enter the
recirculating lymphocyte pool.
Isotype switching in response to diﬀerent types of pathogens is
regulated by cytokines produced by the helper T cells that are
activated by these pathogens.
• Switching from IgM to IgG is a prominent aspect of T-
dependent antibody responses against many bacteria and
viruses. IgG antibodies not only promote phagocytosis of
opsonized microbes and activate complement but are also
transferred through the placenta to protect newborns, and
they have longer half-lives in the blood than other isotypes,
so the production of IgG contributes in many ways to the
protective capacity of humoral immunity. In mice,
switching to IgG subclasses is induced by the cytokine IFN-
γ, which may be produced by TĢ cells activated by these
microbes. However, there is no evidence that in humans,
isotype switching to IgG involves IFN-γ. Human TĢ cells
that express higher levels of IL-21 relative to IL-4 drive the
IgM to IgG class switch but the details of which cytokines
drive switching diﬀerentially to IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, and IgG4
remain to be ascertained.
• The humoral response to many helminthic parasites is
dominated by IgE antibodies, which participate in
elimination of the helminths (see Chapters 13 and 16); IgE
antibodies also mediate immediate hypersensitivity
(allergic) reactions (see Chapter 20). Helminths likely
inﬂuence TĢ cell diﬀerentiation and induce these helper T
cells to produce Th2-type cytokines IL-4 and IL-13, which
drive isotype switching from IgM to IgE.
• In addition, B cells in diﬀerent anatomic sites switch to
diﬀerent isotypes, in part because of the cytokines
produced at these sites. Speciﬁcally, B cells in mucosal
tissues switch to IgA, which is the antibody class that is
most eﬃciently transported through epithelia into mucosal
secretions, where it prevents microbes from entering
through the epithelia (see Chapter 14). Switching to IgA is
stimulated by transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), which
is produced by many cell types, including helper T cells, in
mucosal and other tissues. Cytokines of the TNF family,
BAFF and APRIL, also stimulate switching to IgA. Because
these cytokines are produced by myeloid cells, they can
stimulate IgA responses in the absence of T cell help. Some
individuals who inherit mutant versions of the TACI gene,
which encodes a receptor for these cytokines, have a
selective deﬁciency of IgA production (see Chapter 21).
FIGURE 12.13  Immunoglobulin heavy chain isotype
switching.B cells activated by helper T cell signals
(CD40, cytokines) undergo switching to different
immunoglobulin isotypes, which mediate distinct
effector functions. Selected examples of switched
isotypes are shown. All isotypes are capable of
neutralizing microbes and toxins. APRIL, A
proliferation-inducing ligand; BAFF, B cell–
activating factor; Ig, immunoglobulin; IL,
interleukin; TGF-β, transforming growth factor-β.
CD40 signals work together with cytokines to induce isotype
switching. CD40 engagement induces the expression of the enzyme
AID, which, as we will see later, is crucial for both isotype
switching and aﬃnity maturation. The requirement for CD40
signaling and AID to promote isotype switching in B cells is well
documented by analysis of mice and humans lacking CD40, CD40L,
or AID. In all of these cases, the antibody response to protein
antigens is dominated by IgM antibodies, and there is limited
switching to other isotypes.
The molecular mechanism of isotype switching is a process called
switch recombination, in which the Ig heavy chain DNA in B cells is
cut and recombined such that a previously formed VDJ exon that
encodes the V domain is placed adjacent to a downstream C region,
and the intervening DNA is deleted (Fig. 12.14) . These DNA
recombination events involve nucleotide sequences called switch
regions, which are located in the introns between the J and C
segments at the 5′ ends of each CH locus, other than the δ gene.
Switch regions are 1 to 10 kilobases long, contain numerous tandem
repeats of GC-rich DNA sequences, and are found upstream of
heavy chain genes. Upstream of each switch region is a small I exon
(for initiator of transcription) preceded by an I region promoter.
Signals from cytokines induce transcription from a particular I
region promoter reading through the I exon, switch region, and
adjacent CH exons. These transcripts are known as germline
transcripts because they are not translated into proteins, but they
are required for isotype switching to proceed. Germline transcripts
are found at both the µ locus and the downstream heavy chain
locus to which an activated B cell is being induced to switch. At
each participating switch region, the germline transcript facilitates
the generation of DNA double-strand breaks, as described later.
The DNA break in the upstream (µ) switch region is joined to the
break in the downstream selected switch region. As a result, the
rearranged VDJ exon just upstream of the µ switch region in the
IgM-producing B cell recombines with the Ig heavy chain gene
located immediately after the transcriptionally active downstream
switch region.
FIGURE 12.14  Mechanisms of heavy chain isotype
switching.When antigen-activated B cells
encounter helper T cell signals (CD40L and, in this
example, interleukin-4), the B cells undergo
switching to immunoglobulin (Ig) isotypes other
than IgM (in this example, IgE). These stimuli
initiate germline transcription through the Iε-Sε-Cε
locus, and the proximal CH genes are deleted,
leading to recombination of the VDJ exon
upstream of the μ locus with the Cε gene. Switch
regions are indicated by circles labeled Sμ, Sγ,
and Sε. Iμ, Iγ, and Iε represent the initiation sites
for germline transcription. 
Note that there are multiple Cγ genes located between Cδ and Cε
and Cα genes downstream of Cε, but these are not shown.
Cytokines determine which CH region will undergo germline
transcription. For instance, IL-4 induces germline transcription
through the Iε-Sε-Cε locus (see Fig. 12.14). This leads ﬁrst to the
production of germline ε transcripts in an IgM-expressing B cell
and then to recombination of the Sµ switch region with the Sε
switch region. The intervening DNA is lost, and the VDJ exon is
thus brought adjacent to Cε. The end result is the production of IgE
with the same V domain as that of the original IgM produced by
that B cell.
The key enzyme required for isotype switching (and somatic
hypermutation, described later) is AID. As we mentioned earlier,
AID expression is induced in activated B cells mainly by CD40
signals from TĢ cells. The enzyme removes an amino group from
cytosines in single-stranded DNA templates, converting cytosine
(C) residues to deaminated uracil (U) residues (Fig. 12.15). How
AID is targeted to switch regions is poorly understood. This
enzyme has a propensity for certain GC-containing tetranucleotide
motifs. Switch regions are rich in these motifs, and cytokine-
induced transcription through these regions makes them accessible
to AID. The relative speciﬁcity of AID for switch regions, compared
with other regions of the genome also containing similar motifs,
can be partially explained by the fact that these GC-rich regions
contribute to increased stalling of RNA polymerase II, which, when
stalled, eﬃciently recruits AID. Switch region transcripts tend to
form stable DNA-RNA hybrids involving the template strand of
DNA, thus freeing up the non-template strand, which forms an
open single-stranded DNA loop called an R-loop. The generation of
single-stranded DNA by R-loop formation is critical because AID
can target only single-stranded DNA. The R-loop is therefore a
region where a large number of C residues in the switch DNA
sequence are converted to U residues by AID. An enzyme called
uracil N-glycosylase (UNG) removes the U residues, leaving abasic
sites. An endonuclease called APE1 cleaves these abasic sites,
generating a nick at each position. Whereas R loops facilitate the
formation of discontinuities in the non-template strand of DNA, a
break in double-stranded DNA requires that nicks also be
generated on the opposite template strand of DNA. The GC-rich
switch region RNA that remains tightly bound to the template
strand DNA is degraded by a protein complex called the RNA
exosome, thus exposing C residues transiently on the template
strand and allowing AID, UNG, and APE1 to generate some nicks
on this strand as well. Nicks that are generated on both strands
contribute to double-strand breaks both in the Sµ “donor” switch
region and in the downstream “acceptor” switch region that is
involved in a particular isotype switch event. The double-strand
breaks in the two switch regions are joined together (ligated) by use
of the machinery involved in double-strand DNA break repair by
nonhomologous end joining. In this process, the DNA between the
two switch regions is deleted, and the net result is that the original
rearranged V region DNA is fused to a new constant region.
FIGURE 12.15  Mechanism by which activation-
induced deaminase generates double-stranded
breaks at switch regions.Germline transcripts
form DNA-RNA hybrids in the switch region and
activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID)
deaminates C residues to generate U residues in
single-stranded DNA. Uracil N-glycosylase (UNG)
removes U residues to generate abasic sites
where the APEI endonuclease creates nicks that
lead to a double-stranded break. Whereas this
figure illustrates only the generation of a double-
strand break in the μ switch region, a similar
double-strand break occurs around the same time
in the switch region for a downstream isotype,
thus facilitating switch recombination and isotype
switching.
Affinity Maturation: Somatic Mutation of
Immunoglobulin Genes and Selection of
High-Affinity B Cells
Aﬃnity maturation is the process that leads to increased aﬃnity of
antibodies for a particular antigen as a T-dependent humoral
response progresses, and it is the result of somatic mutation of Ig
genes followed by selective survival of the B cells that produce
antibodies with the highest aﬃnities. The process of aﬃnity
maturation generates antibodies with an increased ability to bind
antigens and thus to more eﬃciently neutralize and eliminate
microbes and their toxins (Fig. 12.16). Helper T cells and CD40-
CD40L interactions are required for somatic mutation to be
initiated, and, as a result, aﬃnity maturation is observed only in
antibody responses to T-dependent protein antigens.
FIGURE 12.16  An overview of affinity
maturation.Early in the immune response, low-
affinity antibodies are produced. During the
germinal center reaction, somatic mutation of
immunoglobulin (Ig) V genes and selection of B
cells with high-affinity antigen receptors result in
the production of antibodies with high affinity for
antigen.
In proliferating germinal center B cells in the dark zone,
rearranged Ig V genes undergo point mutations at an extremely high
rate. This rate is estimated to be 1 in 103 V gene base pairs per cell
division, which is approximately 1000 times higher than the
spontaneous rate of mutation in other mammalian genes. For this
reason, mutation in rearranged Ig V genes is also called somatic
hypermutation. The V genes of expressed heavy and light chains in
each B cell contain a total of approximately 700 nucleotides; thus,
mutations will accumulate in expressed V regions at an average rate
of almost one per cell division. Ig V gene mutations continue to
occur in the progeny of individual B cells. As a result, any B cell
clone can accumulate more and more mutations during its life in
the germinal center. It is estimated that as a consequence of
somatic mutations, the nucleotide sequences of IgG antibodies
derived from one clone of B cells can diverge as much as 5% from
the original germline sequence. This usually translates to up to 10
amino acid substitutions. The mutations are clustered in the V
regions, 
mostly 
in 
the 
antigen-binding 
complementarity-
determining regions (CDRs) (Fig. 12.17), and the presence of
mutations correlates with increasing aﬃnities of the antibodies for
the antigen that induced the response.
The enzyme AID, discussed earlier in the context of isotype
switching, also plays an essential role in aﬃnity maturation. The
DNA deaminase activity of AID converts C residues to U residues
at speciﬁc tetranucleotide (AGCT) hotspots that are found all over
the genome but are targeted primarily in rearranged V regions (or
in switch regions as discussed above). AID may recognize
sequences in the location of the rearranged VDJ exon, which
explains at least partially why rearranged V regions are highly
susceptible to mutations. However, the mechanism by which these
rearranged VDJ exons are speciﬁcally targeted is still unclear. The
Us that are generated from Cs may be changed to Ts when DNA
replication occurs, thus generating a common type of C to T
mutation, or the U may be excised by UNG, and the abasic site thus
generated is repaired by an error-prone DNA repair process,
eventually generating substitutions with any of the four DNA
nucleotides at each site of AID-induced cytidine deamination. Two
enzymes, MSH2 and MSH6, involved normally in the process of
DNA mismatch repair, are important participants in somatic
hypermutation. MSH2 and MSH6 can recruit nucleases that remove
not only uridine nucleotides (which are normally present in RNA)
but also adjacent nucleotides. This mutated stretch is then repaired
by an error-prone DNA polymerase, thus extending mutations to
y
p
p
y
g
residues beyond the C residues that are targeted by AID. It is
unclear how two well-known DNA repair mechanisms, base
excision repair and mismatch repair, which are normally high-
ﬁdelity processes, recruit error prone DNA polymerases in
germinal center B cells in the context of somatic hypermutation.
Repeated stimulation by T cell–dependent protein antigens (in
the light zone, as described later) leads to the migration of B cells
into the dark zone and an increasing numbers of mutations in the
Ig genes of antigen-speciﬁc germinal center B cells. Some of these
mutations are likely to be useful because they will generate high-
aﬃnity antibodies. However, many of the mutations may result in a
decline or even a loss of antigen binding. Therefore, the next and
crucial step in the process of aﬃnity maturation is the selection of
the most useful, high-aﬃnity B cells, a type of Darwinian natural
selection that ensures survival of the best B cells (ﬁĴest in terms of
antigen binding), and this occurs in the light zone.
B cells that bind antigens in germinal centers with high aﬃnity are
selected to survive (Fig. 12.18) . The early response to antigen
results in the production of antibodies, some of which form
complexes with residual antigen and may activate complement.
FDCs express receptors for the Fc portions of antibodies and for
products of complement activation, including C3b and C3d. These
receptors bind and display antigens that are complexed with
antibodies and complement products. Antigen also may be
displayed in free form in the germinal center. Meanwhile, germinal
center B cells that have undergone somatic mutation migrate into
the FDC-rich light zone of the germinal center. These B cells die by
apoptosis unless they are rescued by recognition of antigen. Only B
cells with high-aﬃnity receptors for the antigen are able to bind the
antigen when it is present at low concentrations, and these B cells
survive preferentially because of several mechanisms. First, antigen
recognition by itself induces expression of anti-apoptotic proteins
of the BCL-2 family. Second, high-aﬃnity B cells will preferentially
endocytose and present the antigen and interact with the limiting
numbers of TĢ cells in the germinal center. These TĢ cells may
signal via CD40L and cytokines to promote the survival of the B
cells with which they interact.
FIGURE 12.17  Somatic mutations in immunoglobulin
V genes.Hybridomas were produced from spleen
cells of mice immunized 7 or 14 days previously
with a hapten, oxazolone, coupled to a protein and
from spleen cells obtained after secondary and
tertiary immunizations with the same antigen.
Hybridomas producing oxazolone-specific
monoclonal antibodies were produced, and the
nucleotide sequences of the V genes encoding the
immunoglobulin (Ig) heavy and light chains were
determined. Mutations in V genes increase with
time after immunization and with repeated
immunizations and are clustered in the
complementarity-determining regions (CDRs). The
location of CDR3 in the heavy chains is
approximate. The affinities of the antibodies
produced also tend to increase with more
mutations, as indicated by the lower dissociation
constants (K d) for hapten binding. 
Modified from Berek C, Milstein C. Mutation drift and repertoire shift
in maturation of the immune response. Immunol Rev. 1987;96:23–
41.
As more antibody is produced, more of the antigen is eliminated
and less is available in the germinal centers. Therefore, the B cells
that will be able to speciﬁcally bind this antigen and to be rescued
from death need to express antigen receptors with higher and
higher aﬃnity for the antigen. As a result, as the antibody response
to an antigen progresses, the B cells that are selected to survive in
germinal centers produce Ig of increasing aﬃnity for the antigen.
This selection process results in aﬃnity maturation of the antibody
response. Because somatic mutation also generates many B cells
that do not express high-aﬃnity receptors for antigen and cannot
therefore be selected to survive, the germinal centers are sites of
tremendous apoptotic death of B cells.
The DNA breaks associated with somatic hypermutation and
isotype switching predispose to chromosomal translocations of
various oncogenes into Ig gene loci, producing tumors of B cells
(lymphomas). This explains why many lymphomas develop from
germinal center B cells. Germinal centers may also contribute to the
pathogenesis of autoimmunity if somatic mutation drives a B cell
clone in the germinal center to become strongly self-reactive. The
response of somatically mutated B cells to self antigens is
controlled by regulatory T cells, some of which express CXCR5,
enter follicles, and are known as T follicular regulatory cells. It is
possible that a deﬁciency of these regulatory T cells leads to
increased TĢ cell numbers and survival of self-reactive B cells,
resulting in autoimmunity.
B Cell Differentiation Into Antibody-Secreting
Plasma Cells
Plasma cells are morphologically distinct, terminally diﬀerentiated B
cells commiĴed to abundant antibody production (see Chapter 2) .
They are generated after the activation of B cells through signals
from the BCR, CD40, TLRs, and other receptors including cytokine
receptors.
There are two types of plasma cells.
• Short-lived plasma cells are generated during T-
independent responses and early during T-dependent
responses in extrafollicular B cell foci, described earlier.
These cells are generally found in secondary lymphoid
organs and in peripheral nonlymphoid tissues.
• Long-lived plasma cells are generated in T-dependent
germinal center responses to protein antigens. Signals from
the B cell antigen receptor and IL-21 cooperate in the
generation of plasma cells and their precursors, called
plasmablasts. Plasmablasts are the earliest cells in the
lineage of antibody-secreting cells. They continue to
proliferate (like activated B cells) but express liĴle or no
CD20, the marker of mature B cells. Plasmablasts generated
in germinal centers enter the circulation and home to the
bone marrow, where they stop dividing and diﬀerentiate
into long-lived plasma cells. These plasma cells are
maintained by cytokines of the BAFF family that bind to a
plasma cell membrane receptor called BCMA, which
provides signals that allow the cells to survive for long
periods. Typically 2 to 3 weeks after immunization with a T
cell–dependent protein antigen, the bone marrow becomes
a major site of antibody production. Plasma cells in the
bone marrow may continue to secrete antibodies for
decades after the antigen is no longer present. These
antibodies can provide immediate protection if the antigen
is encountered later. It is estimated that almost half the
antibody in the blood of a healthy adult is produced by
long-lived plasma cells and is speciﬁc for antigens that were
encountered in the past. Secreted antibodies enter the
circulation and mucosal secretions, but mature plasma cells
do not recirculate.
FIGURE 12.18  B cell selection in germinal
centers.Somatic mutation of V genes in
germinal center B cells generates antibodies
with different affinities for antigen. Binding of
the B cells to antigen displayed on follicular
dendritic cells is necessary to rescue the B
cells from programmed cell death. B cells
may also present antigen to germinal center
T follicular helper (Tfh) cells, which promote
B cell survival. The B cells with the highest
affinity for antigen thus have a selective
advantage for survival as the amount of
available antigen decreases during an
immune response. This leads to an average
increase in the affinity of antibodies for
antigen as the humoral immune response
progresses.
The diﬀerentiation of B cells into antibody-secreting plasma cells
involves major structural alterations in components of the
endoplasmic reticulum and secretory pathway and increased Ig
production as well as a change in Ig heavy chains from the
membrane to the secreted form. The cell enlarges dramatically, the
endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi complex become prominent (see
Fig. 2.11), and the cell is transformed into a secretory cell that bears
liĴle or no resemblance to a B lymphocyte.
Ig production changes from the membrane form (characteristic
of B cells) to the secreted form (in plasma cells) because of a change
in the carboxy terminal of the Ig heavy chain protein (Fig. 12.19).
For instance, in membrane µ, Cµ4 is followed by a short spacer, 26
hydrophobic residues, and a cytoplasmic tail of three amino acids
(lysine, valine, and lysine). In secreted IgM, on the other hand, the
Cµ4 domain is followed by a tail piece containing polar amino
acids. This transition from membrane to secreted Ig is caused by
alternative RNA processing of the heavy chain messenger RNA
(mRNA). The primary RNA transcript in all IgM-producing B cells
contains the rearranged VDJ casseĴe, the four Cµ exons coding for
the constant (C) region domains, and the two exons encoding the
transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains. Alternative processing
of this transcript, which is regulated by RNA cleavage and the
choice of polyadenylation sites, determines whether or not the
transmembrane and cytoplasmic exons are included in the mature
mRNA. If they are included, the µ chain produced contains the
amino acids that make up the transmembrane and cytoplasmic
segments and is therefore anchored in the lipid bilayer of the
plasma membrane. If, on the other hand, the transmembrane
segment is excluded from the µ chain, the carboxy terminus
consists of approximately 20 amino acids constituting the tail piece.
Because this protein does not have a stretch of hydrophobic amino
acids or a positively charged cytoplasmic tail, it cannot remain
anchored in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane and is secreted.
Thus, each B cell can synthesize both membrane and secreted Ig.
Most of the Ig heavy chain mRNA in a plasma cell is cleaved at the
upstream polyadenylation site, so most of this mRNA is of the
secretory form. It is not known why diﬀerentiation of B cells to
plasma cells is associated with altered splicing of the Ig RNA. All
CH genes contain similar transmembrane exons, and all heavy
chains can be potentially expressed in membrane-bound and
secreted forms.
FIGURE 12.19  Production of membrane and
secreted μ chains in B lymphocytes.Alternative
processing of a primary RNA transcript results in
the formation of mRNA for the membrane or
secreted form of the μ heavy chain. B cell
differentiation results in an increasing fraction of
the μ protein produced as the secreted form. TP,
TM, and CY refer to tail piece, transmembrane,
and cytoplasmic segments, respectively, and AAA
refers to polyadenylation. Cμ1, Cμ2, Cμ3, and
Cμ4 are four exons of the Cμ gene. IgM,
Immunoglobulin M.
Generation of Memory B Cells
Memory B cells are generated during the germinal center reaction
and are capable of making rapid responses to subsequent
introduction of antigen. Because memory cells develop mainly in
germinal centers, they are primarily generated during T-dependent
immune responses. Although the majority of memory B cells
develop in germinal centers in a T-dependent manner, some IgM-
expressing memory B cells are generated without T cell help and
with liĴle or no somatic hypermutation in a T-independent manner.
Memory cells survive for long periods, apparently without
continuing antigenic stimulation, because they express high levels
of the anti-apoptotic protein BCL-2. Some memory B cells may
remain in the lymphoid organ where they were generated, whereas
others exit germinal centers and recirculate between the blood and
lymphoid organs. Memory cells develop from lower aﬃnity antigen-
speciﬁc B cells that emerge from the germinal center relatively early
after limited rounds of somatic hypermutation and selection. The
production of large quantities of isotype-switched, high-aﬃnity
antibodies is greatly accelerated after secondary exposure to
antigens, and this can be aĴributed to the activation of memory
cells. Many of the features of secondary antibody responses to
protein antigens, and their diﬀerences from primary responses (see
Fig. 12.3), reﬂect the diﬀerences between responses of memory cells
and naive B cells, respectively.
Eﬀective vaccines against microbes and microbial toxins must
induce both long-lived plasma cells producing high-aﬃnity
antibodies and memory B cells, and these will occur only if the
vaccines are able to activate helper T cells. This concept has been
applied to the design of vaccines for some bacterial infections in
which the target antigen is a capsular polysaccharide, which is
incapable of stimulating T cells. In these cases, the polysaccharide
is covalently linked to a foreign protein to form the equivalent of a
hapten-carrier conjugate, which does activate helper T cells. Such
vaccines, which are called conjugate vaccines, more readily induce
high-aﬃnity antibodies and memory cells than do polysaccharide
vaccines without linked proteins (see Fig. 16.13). Conjugate vaccines
have proved particularly eﬀective at inducing protective immunity
in infants and young children, who are less able to make strong T-
independent responses to polysaccharides than are adults.
TABLE 12.3
Role of Transcriptional Regulators in
Determining the Fate of Activated B Cells
The outcome of B cell diﬀerentiation is regulated by the induction
and activation of diﬀerent transcription factors. It is clear from the
discussion so far that activated B cells can follow several fates. They
can develop into short-lived or long-lived plasma cells, which
secrete large amounts of antibodies, or into long-lived memory
cells, which do not secrete antibodies but survive for prolonged
periods and respond rapidly to antigen challenge. In Chapter 10, we
discussed the concept that T cell fates are determined in large part
by the expression of various transcriptional activators and
repressors. The same general principle applies to the fates of
activated B cells. The major transcription factors involved in
determining the fate of germinal center B cells are the following:
• BCL-6. In germinal center B cells, signals delivered through
CD40 and the IL-21 receptor induce the expression of BCL-
6, which functions as a transcriptional repressor to maintain
the germinal center reaction, particularly the massive
proliferation of germinal center B cells. BCL-6 represses the
expression of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors and thus
cooperates with transcriptional activators, such as c-MYB, to
orchestrate rapid cell cycle entry of germinal center B cells.
BCL-6 also represses p53, a transcription factor that
mediates cell cycle arrest and apoptotic cell death after
DNA damage. As a result, dark zone B cells can tolerate the
DNA breaks that accompany isotype switching and somatic
hypermutation and are relatively resistant to apoptosis.
BCL-6 antagonizes another transcriptional repressor called
B lymphocyte–induced maturation protein 1 (BLIMP1),
which is required for plasma cell development (see later),
and thus prevents cells in the germinal center from
prematurely diﬀerentiating into plasma cells during the
germinal center reaction.
• BLIMP1 and IRF4. BLIMP1, a transcriptional repressor, and
IRF4, a transcriptional activator, are induced in some of the
activated B cells and commit these cells to a plasma cell
fate. In addition to suppressing BCL-6, the repressor that
maintains the germinal center B cell reaction, BLIMP1
suppresses a second transcription factor, PAX5, which is
required for the maintenance of mature B cells. Thus,
BLIMP1 is permissive for plasma cell development. IRF4
contributes to the expression of XBP1, a transcription factor
that plays a critical role in the unfolded protein response.
XBP1 protects developing plasma cells from the injurious
consequences of unfolded proteins (which are produced as
a consequence of the massive increase in protein synthesis)
and contributes to the maturation of plasma cells and the
enhanced synthesis of Ig seen in these cells.
• HHEX. Relatively low-aﬃnity B cells that receive limited T
cell help in the light zone downregulate BCL-6, fail to
induce MYC, have reduced mTORC activation, and
diﬀerentiate into memory B cells. Memory B cells require
the HHEX transcription factor that is induced in the
absence of BCL-6, and it in turn induces and maintains the
level of the anti-apoptotic protein BCL-2, which is required
for the survival of memory B cells.
• Other transcription factors. Numerous other transcription
factors are known to contribute to germinal center B cell
induction and maintenance. An important regulator of the
germinal center B cell program that represses other fates is
BACH2. The transcription factor FOXO1 is required for the
p
q
development of dark zone germinal center B cells. It
induces the expression of CXCR4, which is required for
migration to the dark zone. In the light zone, PI-3 kinase
signaling downregulates FOXO1. When B cells are
positively selected in the light zone, they express MYC and
FOXO1 and migrate to the dark zone.
Antibody Responses to T-Independent
Antigens
Many nonprotein antigens, such as polysaccharides, lipids, and
nucleic acids, stimulate antibody production in the absence of helper
T cells, and these antigens and the responses they elicit are termed
thymus independent (TI). These antibody responses diﬀer in several
respects from responses to T cell–dependent protein antigens
(Table 12.3). The antibodies that are produced in the absence of T
cell help are generally of low aﬃnity and consist mainly of IgM,
with limited isotype switching to some IgG subtypes and also to
IgA.
Subsets of B Cells That Respond to T-
Independent Antigens
The marginal zone and B-1 subsets of B cells are especially
important for antibody responses to TI antigens. Whereas responses
to T-dependent protein antigens are largely mediated by follicular B
cells, other B cell subsets may be the primary responders to TI
antigens (see Fig. 12.3). Marginal zone B cells are a distinct
population of B cells that mainly respond to polysaccharides. After
activation, these cells diﬀerentiate into short-lived plasma cells that
produce mainly IgM. B-1 cells represent another lineage of B cells
that responds readily to TI antigens mainly in the peritoneum and
in mucosal sites.
T-independent antibody responses are initiated mainly in the
spleen, peritoneal cavity, and mucosal sites. Macrophages located
in the marginal zones surrounding lymphoid follicles in the spleen
are particularly eﬃcient at trapping polysaccharides when these
antigens are injected intravenously. TI antigens may persist for
prolonged periods on the surfaces of marginal zone macrophages,
where they are recognized by speciﬁc B cells.
Mechanisms of T-Independent Antibody
Responses
T-independent 
antigens 
are 
capable 
of 
stimulating 
B 
cell
proliferation and diﬀerentiation in the absence of T cell help. The
most important TI antigens, polysaccharides, glycolipids, and
nucleic acids, cannot be processed and presented in association
with MHC molecules, and therefore they cannot be recognized by
CD4+ helper T cells. Most TI antigens are multivalent, being
composed 
of 
repeated 
identical 
antigenic 
epitopes. 
Such
multivalent antigens may cross-link many BCR molecules on
speciﬁc B cells, leading to activation without a requirement for
cognate T cell help. In addition, many polysaccharides activate the
complement system by the alternative or lectin pathway, generating
C3d, which binds to the antigen and is recognized by CR2, thus
augmenting B cell activation (see Fig. 12.5). As mentioned earlier,
TI responses also may be facilitated by additional signals derived
from microbial products that activate TLRs on B cells.
Although TI responses typically exhibit liĴle isotype switching,
some T-independent nonprotein antigens do induce Ig isotypes
other than IgM. In humans, the dominant antibody class induced
by pneumococcal capsular polysaccharide is IgG2. In mice
engineered to lack CD40, IgE and many IgG subclasses are barely
detectable in the serum, but low levels of IgG3 (which resembles
human IgG2) and IgA in the serum were preserved. Cytokines
produced by non-T cells may stimulate isotype switching in T-
independent responses. As described earlier, in the absence of T
cells, BAFF and APRIL produced by cells of myeloid origin, such as
DCs and macrophages, can induce the synthesis of AID in antigen-
activated B cells through a receptor of the BAFF receptor family
called TACI. This may be further facilitated by the activation of
TLRs on these B cells. In addition, cytokines such as TGF-β that
help to mediate the IgA switch in B cells are secreted by many
nonlymphoid cells at mucosal sites and may contribute to the
generation of IgA antibodies directed against nonprotein antigens
(see Chapter 14).
Protection Mediated by T-Independent
Antibodies
The practical signiﬁcance of TI antigens is that many bacterial cell
wall polysaccharides belong to this category, and humoral
immunity is the major mechanism of host defense against
infections by such encapsulated bacteria. For this reason,
individuals with congenital or acquired deﬁciencies of humoral
immunity are especially susceptible to life-threatening infections
with encapsulated bacteria, such as pneumococcus, meningococcus,
and Haemophilus.
T-independent antigens also contribute to the generation of
natural antibodies, which are present in the circulation of normal
individuals and are apparently produced without overt exposure to
pathogens. 
Most 
natural 
antibodies 
are 
low-aﬃnity 
anti-
carbohydrate antibodies, postulated to be produced by peritoneal
B-1 cells responding to antigens from bacteria that colonize the
gastrointestinal tract and by marginal zone B cells in the spleen. A
large proportion of the natural antibodies in humans and mice are
speciﬁc for oxidized lipids, such as lysophosphatidylcholine and
phosphorylcholine. These lipids are found on bacterial membranes
and on apoptotic cells but are not exposed on the surface of healthy
host cells. Some experimental evidence indicates that the natural
antibodies speciﬁc for these phospholipids provide protection
against bacterial infections and facilitate the phagocytosis of
apoptotic cells. The anti-ABO blood group antibodies, another
example of natural antibodies, recognize certain glycolipids (blood
group antigens) expressed on the surface of many cell types,
including blood cells (see Chapter 17). Natural antibodies speciﬁc
for blood group antigens are important barriers to blood
transfusion and transplantation but are not important for host
defense.
Antibody Feedback: Regulation of Humoral
Immune Responses By Fc Receptors
Secreted antibodies inhibit continuing B cell activation by forming
antigen-antibody complexes that simultaneously bind to antigen
receptors and inhibitory Fcγ receptors on antigen-speciﬁc B cells
(Fig. 12.20) . This is the explanation for a phenomenon called
antibody feedback, which refers to the downregulation of antibody
production by secreted IgG antibodies. IgG antibodies inhibit B cell
activation by forming complexes with the antigen, and these
complexes bind to a B cell receptor for the Fc portions of the IgG,
called the Fcγ receptor II (FcγRIIB, or CD32). (We will discuss Fc
receptors in Chapter 13.) The cytoplasmic tail of FcγRIIB contains
an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibition motif (ITIM) (see
Chapter 7). When this Fcγ receptor is engaged, the ITIM on the
cytosolic tail of the receptor is phosphorylated on tyrosine residues,
and it forms a docking site for the phosphatase SHIP (SH2 domain-
containing inositol phosphatase). The recruited SHIP hydrolyses a
phosphate on the signaling intermediate phosphatidylinositol
triphosphate (PIP3) and inactivates this molecule. By this
mechanism, engagement of FcγRIIB terminates the B cell response
to antigen. The antigen-antibody complexes simultaneously interact
with the antigen receptor (through the antigen) and with FcγRIIB
(through the antibody), and this brings the inhibitory phosphatases
close to the antigen receptors whose signaling is blocked.
FIGURE 12.20  Regulation of B cell activation by
FcγRIIB. A, Antigen-antibody complexes can
simultaneously bind to membrane immunoglobulin
(through antigen) and the FcγRIIB receptor
through the Fc portion of the antibody. B, As a
consequence of this simultaneous ligation of
receptors, phosphatases associated with the
cytoplasmic tail of the FcγRIIB inhibit signaling by
the B cell receptor (BCR) complex and block B
cell activation. ITIM, Immunoreceptor tyrosine-
based inhibition motif; PIP2, phosphatidylinositol
bisphosphate; PIP3, phosphatidylinositol
trisphosphate; SHIP, SH2 domain–containing
inositol phosphatase.
Fc receptor–mediated antibody feedback is a physiologic control
mechanism in humoral immune responses because it is triggered
by secreted antibody and blocks further antibody production. The
importance of FcγRIIB-mediated inhibition is demonstrated by the
uncontrolled antibody production seen in mice in which the gene
encoding this receptor has been knocked out. A polymorphism in
the FcγRIIB gene has been linked to susceptibility to the
autoimmune disease systemic lupus erythematosus in humans.
B cells express another inhibitory receptor called CD22, which is
a sialic acid–binding lectin; its natural ligand is not known, nor is it
known exactly how CD22 is engaged during B cell responses.
However, knockout mice lacking CD22 show greatly enhanced B
cell activation. The cytoplasmic tail of this molecule contains ITIM
tyrosine residues, which, when phosphorylated by the SRC family
kinase LYN, bind the SH2 domain of the tyrosine phosphatase
SHP1. SHP1 removes phosphates from the tyrosine residues of
several enzymes and adaptor proteins involved in BCR signaling
and thus abrogates B cell activation. A mouse strain called
motheaten, which develops severe autoimmunity with uncontrolled
B cell activation and autoantibody production, has a naturally
occurring mutation in SHP1. Conditional deletion of SHP1, as well
as the engineered loss of LYN in B cells, leads to a breakdown of
peripheral B cell tolerance and the development of autoimmunity.
Summary
• In humoral immune responses, B lymphocytes are activated
by antigen and secrete antibodies that act to eliminate the
antigen. Both protein and nonprotein antigens can
stimulate antibody responses. B cell responses to protein
antigens require the contribution of CD4+ helper T cells
speciﬁc for the antigen.
• Helper T cell–dependent B cell responses to protein
antigens require initial independent activation of naive T
cells in the T cell zones and of B cells in lymphoid follicles
in lymphoid organs, each speciﬁc for a diﬀerent part of the
same protein antigen.
• A B cell that recognizes a conformational epitope of a native
protein antigen internalizes the protein, processes it, and
displays a peptide derived from the protein on its class II
major histocompatibility (MHC) molecules for recognition
by helper T cells.
• The activated lymphocytes migrate toward one another and
interact at the edges of follicles, where the B cells present
the peptide antigen to antigen-speciﬁc helper T cells.
• Activated helper T cells express CD40 ligand (CD40L), which
engages CD40 on the B cells, and the T cells secrete
cytokines that bind to cytokine receptors on the B cells. The
combination of CD40 and cytokine signals stimulates B cell
proliferation and diﬀerentiation.
• Stimulation of activated B cells at extrafollicular sites by
helper T cells leads to the formation of extrafollicular foci
where isotype switching occurs and short-lived plasma cells
are generated.
• Some activated helper T cells diﬀerentiate into specialized T
follicular helper (TĢ) cells that express high levels of
inducible costimulator (ICOS) and CXCR5 and secrete
interleukin-21 (IL-21). TĢ cells and antigen-activated B cells
migrate into the follicle, and TĢ cells activate these speciﬁc
B cells to initiate the formation of germinal centers. The late
events in T cell–dependent antibody responses, including
additional isotype switching, somatic mutation, aﬃnity
maturation, generation of memory B cells, and induction of
long-lived plasma cells, take place within germinal centers.
• Helper T cell–derived signals, including CD40L and
cytokines, induce isotype switching in B cells by a process
of switch recombination, leading to the production of
various immunoglobulin (Ig) isotypes. Isotype switching
requires the induction of activation-induced deaminase
(AID), a cytidine deaminase that converts cytosine to uracil
in single-stranded DNA, and diﬀerent cytokines allow AID
to access distinct downstream heavy chain loci.
• Aﬃnity maturation occurs in germinal centers and leads to
increased aﬃnity of antibodies during the course of a T
cell–dependent humoral response. Aﬃnity maturation is a
result of somatic mutation of Ig heavy and light chain genes
induced by AID, followed by selective survival of the B cells
that produce high-aﬃnity antibodies and bind to antigen
displayed by follicular dendritic cells in the germinal
centers. The high-aﬃnity B cells are best able to present
antigens to TĢ cells, which promote survival of the B cells.
• Some of the progeny of germinal center B cells diﬀerentiate
into antibody-secreting plasma cells that migrate to the
bone marrow. Other progeny become memory B cells that
live for long periods, recirculate between lymphoid organs
and peripheral tissues, and respond rapidly to subsequent
exposures to antigen by diﬀerentiating into high-aﬃnity
antibody secretors. The expression of various transcription
factors controls the diﬀerentiation of activated B cells into
plasma cells or memory cells.
• T-independent (TI) antigens are generally nonprotein
antigens that induce humoral immune responses without
the involvement of helper T cells. Many TI antigens,
including polysaccharides, membrane glycolipids, and
nucleic acids, are multivalent, can cross-link multiple
membrane Ig molecules on a B cell, and activate
complement, thereby activating the B cells without T cell
help. Toll-like receptor (TLR) activation on B cells by
microbial products may facilitate T-independent B cell
activation.
• TI antigens stimulate antibody responses in which there is
limited heavy chain class switching, aﬃnity maturation, or
memory B cell generation because these features are largely
dependent on helper T cells, which are not activated by
nonprotein antigens. However, some T-independent isotype
switching can be induced by TLR stimulation by microbes,
g
y
y
which may lead to the production of cytokines of the TNF
family that activate B cells to induce AID.
• Antibody feedback is a mechanism by which humoral
immune responses are downregulated when enough
antibody has been produced and soluble antibody–antigen
complexes are present. B cell membrane Ig and the receptor
on B cells for the Fc portions of IgG, called FcγRIIB, are
clustered together by antibody-antigen complexes. This
activates an inhibitory signaling cascade through the
cytoplasmic tail of FcγRIIB that terminates the activation of
the B cell.
Selected Readings
∗Indicates publications of historical interest, generally reporting
the discovery of a phenomenon or process that was later shown to
be of fundamental importance in the immune system. Many (but
not all) of these discoveries led to Nobel Prizes for the
discoverer(s). The nature of the discovery is summarized brieﬂy in
each reference.
B Cell Subsets and B Cell Activation
∗Claman H.N, Chaperon E.A, TripleĴ R.F. Thymus-marrow cell combinations. Synergism
in antibody production.  Proc. Soc Exp Bio Med.  1966;122:1167–1171 (The initial
description of collaboration between cells from the two generative lymphoid organs
being required for antibody formation.).
Cyster J.G, Allen C.D.C. B cell responses: cell interaction dynamics and decisions.  Cell
. 2019;177:524–540.
∗Glick B, Chang T.S, Jaap R.G. The bursa of Fabricius and antibody production.  Poult Sci J
. 1956;35:224–225 (The initial description of the contribution of the cells of the bursa of
Fabricus to antibody production—and how B cells got their name.).
Goodnow C.C, Vinuesa C.G, Randall K.L, et al. Control systems and decision making for
antibody production.  Nat Immunol . 2010;11:681–688.
∗Hardy R.R, Hayakawa K, Haaijman J, Herzenberg L.A. B-cell subpopulations identiﬁed by
two-colour ﬂuorescence analysis.  Nature . 1982;297:589–591 (The original demonstration
of peripheral B cell subsets using ﬂow cytometry.).
Heath W.R, Kato Y, Steiner T.M, Caminschi I. Antigen presentation by dendritic cells for B
cell activation.  Curr Opin Immunol . 2019;58:44–52.
Heesters B.A, van der Poel C.E, Das A, Carroll M.C. Antigen presentation to B cells.  Trends
Immunol . 2016;37:844–854.
∗Mitchison N.A, Rajewsky K, Taylor R.B. Cooperation of antigenic determinants and of cells
in the induction of antibodies. In: Sterzl J, Riha I, eds.  Developmental aspects of antibody
formation and structure. Proceedings of a symposium held in Prague and Slopy on June 1-7
. Volume II. New York: Academia/Academic Press; 1969:547–561 (The original
demonstration of the hapten-carrier phenomenon of T-dependent B cell activation.).
NuĴ S.L, Hodgkin P.D, Tarlinton D.M, Corcoran L.M. The generation of antibody-secreting
plasma cells.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2015;15:160–171.
Yuseﬀ M.I, Pierobon P, Reversat A, Lennon-Dumenil A.M. How B cells capture, process and
present antigens: a crucial role for cell polarity.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2013;13:475–486.
T Follicular Helper Cells and the Germinal Center Reaction
Akkaya M, Kwak K, Pierce S.K. B cell memory: building two walls of protection against
pathogens.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2020;20:229–238.
Bannard O, Cyster J.G. Germinal centers: programmed for aﬃnity maturation and antibody
diversiﬁcation.  Curr Opin Immunol . 2017;45:21–30.
Chang H.D, Tokoyoda K, Hoyer B, et al. Pathogenic memory plasma cells in
autoimmunity.  Curr Opin Immunol . 2019;61:86–91.
CroĴy S. T follicular helper cell biology: a decade of discovery and diseases.  Immunity
. 2019;50:1132–1148.
De Silva N.S, Klein U. Dynamics of B cells in germinal centres.  Nat Rev Immunol
. 2015;15:137–148.
Higgins B.W, McHeyzer-Williams L.J, McHeyzer-Williams M.G. Programming isotype-
speciﬁc plasma cell function.  Trends Immunol . 2019;40:345–357.
Huang Q, Xu L, Ye L. T cell immune response within B-cell follicles.  Adv Immunol
. 2019;144:155–171.
Laidlaw B.J, Cyster J.G. Transcriptional regulation of memory B cell diﬀerentiation.  Nat Rev
Immunol . 2020;Oct 6:1–12.
Mesin L, Ersching J, Victora G.D. Germinal center B cell dynamics.  Immunity
. 2016;45:471–482.
Papa I, Vinuesa C.G. Synaptic interactions in germinal centers.  Front Immunol
. 2018;9:1858.
Phan T.G, Tangye S.G. Memory B cells: total recall.  Curr Opin Immunol . 2017;45:132–140.
Seth A, Craft J. Spatial and functional heterogeneity of follicular helper T cells in
autoimmunity.  Curr Opin Immunol . 2019;61:1–9.
Shinnakasu R, Kurosaki T. Regulation of memory B and plasma cell diﬀerentiation.  Curr
Opin Immunol . 2017;45:126–131.
Activation-Induced Deaminase, Class Switching, and Somatic
Mutation
Aiden E.L, Casellas R. Somatic rearrangement in B cells: it’s (mostly) nuclear physics.  Cell
. 2015;162:708–711.
Casellas R, Basu U, Yewdell W.T, et al. Mutations, kataegis and translocations in B cells:
understanding aid promiscuous activity.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2016;16:164–176.
Chen Z, Wang J.H. Signaling control of antibody isotype switching.  Adv Immunol
. 2019;141:105–164.
Hwang J.K, Alt F.W, Yeap L.S. Related mechanisms of antibody somatic hypermutation and
class switch recombination.  Microbiol Spectr . 2015;3 MDNA3-0037-2014.
Kato L, Stanlie A, Begum N.A, et al. An evolutionary view of the mechanism for immune
and genome diversity.  J Immunol . 2012;188:3559–3566.
Methot S.P, Di Noia J.M. Molecular mechanisms of somatic hypermutation and class switch
recombination.  Adv Immunol . 2017;133:37–87.
∗Muramatsu M, Sankaranand V.S, Anant S, et al. Speciﬁc expression of activation-induced
cytidine deaminase (AID), a novel member of the RNA-editing deaminase family in
germinal center B cells.  J Biol Chem . 1999;274:18470–18476 (The discovery of AID.).
∗Peterson-Mahrt S.K, Harris R.S, Neuberger M.S. AID mutates E. coli suggesting a DNA
deamination mechanism for antibody diversiﬁcation.  Nature . 2002;418:99–103 (The
original demonstration that AID deaminates cytidines in DNA, thus providing the
mechanistic explanation for somatic hypermutation and isotype switching.).
Chapter 13: Eﬀector Mechanisms
of Humoral Immunity
Overview of Humoral Immunity,
Neutralization of Microbes and Microbial Toxins,
Antibody-Mediated Opsonization and Phagocytosis,
Leukocyte Fc Receptors,
Antibody-Dependent Cell-Mediated
Cytotoxicity,
Antibody-Mediated Clearance of Helminths,
The Complement System,
Pathways of Complement Activation,
Receptors for Complement Proteins,
Regulation of Complement Activation,
Functions of Complement,
Complement Deficiencies,
Pathologic Effects of the Complement System,
Evasion of Complement by Microbes,
Summary,
Humoral immunity is mediated by secreted antibodies, and its
physiologic function is defense against extracellular microbes and
microbial toxins. This type of immunity contrasts with cell-
mediated immunity, the other eﬀector arm of the adaptive immune
system, which is mediated by T lymphocytes and functions to
eradicate microbes that infect and live inside host cells (see
Chapters 10 and 11). Humoral immunity is the form of adaptive
immunity that can be transferred from immunized to naive
individuals with serum that contains antibodies. The types of
microorganisms that are combated by humoral immunity are
extracellular bacteria, fungi, and even obligate intracellular
microbes, such as viruses, which are targets of antibodies before
they infect cells or when they are released from infected cells.
Defects in antibody production result in increased susceptibility to
infection with many microbes, including bacteria, fungi, and
viruses. Currently used vaccines induce protection primarily by
stimulating the production of antibodies (Table 13.1). Apart from
their crucial protective roles, antibodies can be harmful and
mediate tissue injury in allergic individuals, in certain autoimmune
diseases, in blood transfusion reactions, and in transplant rejection.
In this chapter, we will discuss the eﬀector mechanisms that are
used by antibodies to eliminate microbes and their toxins. The
structure of antibodies is described in Chapter 5 and the process of
antibody production in Chapter 12.
Overview of Humoral Immunity
Before we discuss the mechanisms by which antibodies provide
protection against microbes, we will summarize some of the salient
features of antibody-mediated host defense.Antibody-mediated
elimination of antigens involves a number of eﬀector mechanisms
and requires the participation of various cells and secreted proteins
q
p
p
p
of the immune system, including phagocytes and complement
proteins (Fig. 13.1).
Antibodies are produced by plasma cells in secondary (peripheral)
lymphoid organs, inﬂamed tissues, and bone marrow, and antibodies
can perform their eﬀector functions at sites distant from their
production. Antibodies produced in the lymph nodes, spleen, and
bone marrow may enter the blood and then circulate throughout
the body. In mucosal organs, such as the intestine and the airways,
antibodies are produced in the lamina propria (the cell-rich
connective tissue space that separates the innermost layer of
epithelial cells from an underlying concentric smooth muscle layer)
and transported across epithelia into the lumen, where these
secreted antibodies block the entry of ingested and inhaled
microbes (see Chapter 14). Antibodies are also actively transported
across the placenta into the circulation of the developing fetus (see
Chapter 14). In disease states, antibodies may be produced in
peripheral nonlymphoid tissues, at sites of infection or chronic
inﬂammation that are sometimes called tertiary lymphoid organs.
The antibodies that mediate protective immunity may be derived
from short-lived or long-lived antibody-producing plasma cells.
Long-lived plasma cells reside mainly in the bone marrow. In cell-
mediated immunity, activated T lymphocytes are able to migrate to
peripheral sites of infection and inﬂammation, but they are not
transported into mucosal secretions or across the placenta.
Therefore, antibodies are the only defense mechanism used to
combat microbes in the lumens of mucosal organs and in the fetus
and newborn.
TABLE 13.1
Vaccine-Induced Humoral Immunity a
Infectious Disease
Vaccine
Mechanism of
Protective Immunity
Polio
Injected
inactivated
poliovirus
(Salk) and oral
aĴenuated
poliovirus
(Sabin)
Neutralization of
virus by IgG or by
mucosal IgA
antibody
Tetanus, diphtheria
Toxoids
(inactivated
toxins)
Neutralization of
toxin by systemic
IgG antibody
Hepatitis A or B
Recombinant
viral envelope
proteins
Neutralization of
virus by mucosal
IgA or systemic
IgG antibody
Pneumococcal
pneumonia,
Haemophilus
inﬂuenzae
infections, and
bacterial
meningitis caused
by Neisseria
meningitidis
Conjugate
vaccines
composed of
bacterial
capsular
polysaccharide
aĴached to a
carrier protein
Opsonization and
phagocytosis
mediated by IgM
and IgG
antibodies,
directly or
secondary to
complement
activation
Ig, Immunoglobulin.
a  Selected examples of vaccines that work by stimulating protective humoral immunity are
listed.
Many of the eﬀector functions of antibodies are mediated by Fc
regions of immunoglobulin (Ig) molecules, and diﬀerent Ig heavy
chain isotypes serve distinct eﬀector functions (Table 13.2) . For
instance, some IgG subclasses (IgG1 and IgG3) bind to phagocyte
Fc receptors and promote the phagocytosis of antibody-coated
particles; IgM and some subclasses of IgG (IgG1, IgG2 to a limited
extent, and IgG3 but not IgG4) activate the complement system;
and IgE binds to the Fc receptors of mast cells and triggers their
activation. Each of these eﬀector mechanisms will be discussed
later in this chapter. The humoral immune system is specialized in
such a way that diﬀerent microbes or antigen exposures stimulate B
cell switching to the Ig isotypes that are best suited for combating
these microbes. The major stimuli for isotype switching during the
process of B cell activation are cytokines together with CD40 ligand
expressed by activated helper T cells (see Chapter 12).
Neutralization is the only function of antibodies that is mediated
entirely by binding of antigen and does not require participation of
the Ig constant regions.
FIGURE 13.1  Effector functions of
antibodies.Antibodies against microbes (and their
toxins, not shown) neutralize these agents,
opsonize them for phagocytosis, sensitize them
for antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity, and
activate the complement system. These various
effector functions may be mediated by different
antibody isotypes. NK, Natural killer.
TABLE 13.2
The eﬀector functions of antibodies that are mediated by the Fc
regions are triggered by the binding of antigens to the variable
regions. The binding of antibodies to a multivalent antigen, such as
a polysaccharide or a repeated epitope on a microbial surface,
brings multiple antibody molecules close together, and this
clustering of antibody molecules leads to complement activation
and allows the antibodies to bind to and activate Fc receptors on
phagocytes. The requirement for antigen binding ensures that
antibodies activate various eﬀector mechanisms only when they are
needed, that is, when the antibodies encounter and speciﬁcally
bind antigens, not when the antibodies are circulating in an
antigen-free form.
With this introduction to humoral immunity, we proceed to a
discussion of the various functions of antibodies in host defense.
Neutralization of Microbes and Microbial
Toxins
Antibodies against microbes and microbial toxins block the binding
of these microbes and toxins to cellular receptors (Fig. 13.2) . In this
way, antibodies inhibit, or neutralize, the infectivity of microbes as
well as the potential injurious eﬀects of microbial toxins. Many
microbes enter host cells by the binding of particular microbial
surface molecules to membrane proteins or lipids on the surface of
host cells. For example, inﬂuenza viruses use their envelope
p
p
hemagglutinin to infect respiratory epithelial cells, and gram-
negative bacteria use pili to aĴach to and infect a variety of host
cells. Antibodies that bind to these microbial structures interfere
with the ability of the microbes to interact with cellular receptors
by means of steric hindrance and thus prevent infection. Many
microbial toxins mediate their pathologic eﬀects also by binding to
speciﬁc cellular receptors. For instance, tetanus toxin binds to
receptors in the motor end plate of neuromuscular junctions and
inhibits neuromuscular transmission, which leads to paralysis, and
diphtheria toxin binds to cellular receptors and enters various cells,
where it inhibits protein synthesis. Antibodies against such toxins
sterically hinder the interactions of toxins with host cells and thus
prevent the toxins from causing tissue injury and disease.
Neutralization can occur in multiple ways that go beyond steric
interference. For instance, in the lumen of the gut, aggregation or
agglutination of microbes by IgA antibodies can reduce the
infectivity of the pathogens, trap them in mucus, and facilitate their
clearance by peristalsis. In some cases, antibodies may bind to a
microbe and induce conformational changes in surface molecules
that prevent the microbe from interacting with cellular receptors.
Such interactions have been observed with antibodies against
certain viruses and are examples of the allosteric eﬀects of
antibodies.
Antibody-mediated neutralization of microbes and toxins requires
only the antigen-binding regions of the antibodies. Therefore, such
neutralization may be mediated by antibodies of any isotype in the
circulation and in mucosal secretions and can experimentally or
therapeutically also be mediated by Fab or F(ab)2 fragments of
speciﬁc antibodies, which lack the Fc regions of the heavy chains.
Neutralizing antibodies in the blood are mainly of the IgG isotype,
and mainly IgA antibodies at mucosal sites. The most eﬀective
neutralizing antibodies are those with high aﬃnities for their
antigens. High-aﬃnity antibodies are produced by the process of
aﬃnity maturation (see Chapter 12). Many prophylactic vaccines
work by stimulating the production of high-aﬃnity neutralizing
antibodies (see Table 13.1). A mechanism that microbes have
developed to evade host immunity is to mutate the genes encoding
surface antigens that are the targets of neutralizing antibodies (see
Chapter 16).
The role of antibodies in neutralizing microbes and toxins at
particular anatomic sites, speciﬁcally in mucosal tissues and the
fetus, is discussed in Chapter 14.
Antibody-Mediated Opsonization and
Phagocytosis
IgG antibodies coat (opsonize) microbes and promote their
phagocytosis 
by 
binding 
to 
Fc 
receptors 
on 
phagocytes.
Mononuclear phagocytes and neutrophils ingest microbes as a
prelude to intracellular killing and degradation. These phagocytes
express a variety of surface receptors that directly bind microbes
and ingest them, even without antibodies, which is one mechanism
of innate immunity (see Chapter 4). The eﬃciency of this process is
markedly enhanced if the phagocyte can bind the particle with high
aﬃnity. Mononuclear phagocytes and neutrophils express receptors
for the Fc portions of IgG antibodies that speciﬁcally bind
antibody-coated particles. Microbes may also be coated by a
product of complement activation called C3b and are then
phagocytosed by binding to a leukocyte receptor for C3b (described
later in this chapter). As discussed in Chapter 4, the process of
coating particles to promote their phagocytosis is called
opsonization, and substances that perform this function, including
antibodies, complement proteins and certain plasma lectins, are
called opsonins.
FIGURE 13.2  Neutralization of microbes and toxins
by antibodies. A, Antibodies prevent the binding of
microbes to cells and thus block the ability of the
microbes to infect host cells. B, Antibodies inhibit
the spread of microbes from an infected cell to an
adjacent uninfected cell. C, Antibodies block the
binding of toxins to cells and thus inhibit the
pathologic effects of the toxins.
Leukocyte Fc Receptors
Leukocytes express Fc receptors that bind to the constant regions of
antibodies, and thereby promote the phagocytosis of Ig-coated
particles and deliver signals that regulate the activities of the
leukocytes; other Fc receptors mediate the transport of antibodies to
various sites. Fc receptors for diﬀerent Ig heavy chain isotypes are
expressed on many leukocyte populations and serve diverse
functions in immunity. Of these Fc receptors, the ones that are
most important for phagocytosis of opsonized particles are speciﬁc
for the heavy chains of IgG antibodies, called Fcγ receptors, and
these are the receptors that will be primarily considered in this
chapter. In Chapter 20, we will discuss the Fc receptors that bind
IgE. In Chapter 5, we described the neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn),
which is expressed in the placenta and on vascular endothelium
and other cell types and has unique functions related to IgG
transport across the placenta and the protection of IgG from
turnover. In Chapter 14, we will discuss the poly-Ig receptor, which
is involved in the transport of mainly IgA across mucosal epithelia.
Fcγ receptors have been classiﬁed into three groups, based on
their aﬃnities for heavy chains of diﬀerent IgG subclasses.
Diﬀerent Fc receptors are also expressed on diﬀerent cell types
(Table 13.3). In general, IgG1- and IgG3-containing immune
complexes bind eﬃciently to activating Fc receptors and IgG2-
containing complexes do not bind well. IgG4 has a very low aﬃnity
for activating Fc receptors, and the biologic function of this
antibody isotype is poorly understood. All Fc receptors are
optimally activated by antibodies bound to their antigens and not
by free, circulating antibodies. The binding of immune complexes
to most Fc receptors results in cellular activation, except for
FcγRIIB, which is an inhibitory receptor. All Fcγ receptors contain a
ligand-binding chain, called the α chain, that recognizes IgG heavy
chains (Fig. 13.3). Diﬀerences in speciﬁcities or aﬃnities of each
FcγR for the various IgG isotypes are based on diﬀerences in the
structure of these α chains. In all of the FcRs except FcγRII, the α
chain is associated with one or more additional polypeptide chains
involved in signal transduction. Signaling functions of all forms of
FcγRII are mediated by the cytoplasmic tail of this single chain
receptor.
TABLE 13.3
GPI, Glycophosphatidylinositol; IgG, immunoglobulin G; NK, natural killer.
a  The three groups of Fcγ receptors are numbered I, II, and III, and the isoforms in two of them
are named A, B, and C.
There are three major groups of IgG-speciﬁc Fc receptors, of
which two have multiple isoforms that diﬀer in structure and
function (see Table 13.3); these are described in the following list.
The unique functions of the FcRn are discussed in Chapters 5 and
14.
• FcγRI (CD64) is the major phagocyte Fcγ receptor. It is
expressed on macrophages and neutrophils and binds IgG1
and IgG3 with high aﬃnity (dissociation constant [K d] of 10
−8 to 10 −9 M). The large extracellular amino-terminal region
of the Fc-binding α chain folds into three tandem Ig-like
domains. The α chain of FcγRI is associated with a
disulﬁde-linked homodimer of a signaling protein called
the FcR γ chain. This γ chain is also found in the signaling
complexes associated with FcγRIII, FcαR, and FcεRI. The γ
chain has only a short extracellular amino terminus but a
large cytoplasmic carboxyl terminus, which is structurally
homologous to the ζ chain of the T cell receptor (TCR)
complex. Like the TCR ζ chain, the FcR γ chain contains an
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM)
that couples receptor clustering to activation of protein
tyrosine kinases. Cross-linking of several Fc receptor-bound
IgG molecules by multivalent antigens results in cell
activation.
• Fc γ RII (CD32) binds IgG1 and IgG3 with a low aﬃnity (K d
10 −6 M). Gene duplication and diversiﬁcation have resulted
in the generation of three forms of this receptor, called
FcγRII A, B, and C. These isoforms have similar
extracellular domains and ligand speciﬁcities but diﬀer in
cytoplasmic tail structure, cell distribution, and functions.
FcγRIIA is expressed by neutrophils, mononuclear
phagocytes, and dendritic cells (DCs) and participates in
the phagocytosis of opsonized particles, whereas FcγRIIC is
expressed in mononuclear phagocytes, neutrophils, and
natural killer (NK) cells. The cytoplasmic tails of FcγRIIA
and FcγRIIC contain ITAMs which, on clustering by IgG1-
or IgG3-coated particles or cells, can deliver an activation
signal to phagocytes. On DCs, this receptor can contribute
to capture of antigen in immune complexes and
consequently T cell activation. FcγRIIB is an inhibitory
receptor expressed on myeloid cells and B cells and is the
only Fc receptor on B cells. Its role in antibody feedback is
described in Chapter 12.
• FcγRIII (CD16) is also a low-aﬃnity receptor for IgG. The
extracellular ligand-binding portion of FcγRIII is similar to
FcγRII in structure, aﬃnity, and speciﬁcity for IgG. This
receptor exists in two forms, encoded by separate genes.
The FcγRIIIA isoform is a transmembrane protein
expressed mainly on NK cells and also on macrophages and
DCs. FcγRIIIA associates with homodimers of the FcR γ
chain, homodimers of the TCR ζ chain, or heterodimers
composed of an FcR γ chain and a ζ chain. These associated
chains contain ITAMs that deliver activating signals upon
antibody binding to the Fc receptors and are thus necessary
for the functions of the receptors. The FcγRIIIB isoform is a
glycophosphatidylinositol (GPI)-linked protein expressed
on neutrophils; it does not mediate phagocytosis or trigger
neutrophil activation, and its function is poorly understood.
In addition to these Fcγ receptors, there are receptors for the
heavy chains of IgE and IgA (see Table 13.3). We will describe FcεRI
in Chapter 20. The function of FcαR is not well established.
FIGURE 13.3  Subunit composition of Fcγ
receptors.Schematic models of the different
human Fc receptors illustrate the Fc-binding α
chains and the signaling subunits. FcγRIIIB is a
glycophosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored
membrane protein with no known signaling
functions. FcγRIIA and IIC are structurally similar
low-affinity activating receptors with slightly
different patterns of expression. Note that
although FcγRIIA/C and FcγRIIB are both
designated CD32, they are different proteins with
distinct functions (see text). The neonatal FcR
(FcRn) resembles class I major histocompatibility
complex molecules structurally but does not have
a peptide-binding cleft. Ig, Immunoglobulin; ITAM,
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif;
ITIM, immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibition
motif.
Role of Fcγ Receptors in Phagocytosis and Activation of
Phagocytes
Binding of Fc receptors on phagocytes to particles coated with
antibody molecules leads to engulfment of the particles and
activation of the phagocytes (Fig. 13.4) . The IgG subtypes that bind
best to Fcγ receptors (IgG1 and IgG3) are the most eﬃcient
opsonins for promoting phagocytosis. As discussed earlier, FcγRI is
the high-aﬃnity Fcγ receptor on phagocytic cells, and it is the most
important receptor for phagocytosis of opsonized particles.
Opsonized particles are internalized into vesicles known as
phagosomes, which fuse with lysosomes, and the phagocytosed
particles are destroyed in these phagolysosomes. Activation
requires cross-linking of the FcRs by several adjacent Ig molecules
(e.g., on antibody-coated microbes or in immune complexes). Cross-
linking of the ligand-binding α chains of an FcR results in signal
transduction events that are similar to those that occur after
antigen receptor cross-linking in lymphocytes (see Chapter 7).
These include SRC kinase–mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of
the ITAMs in the signaling chains of the FcRs; SH2 domain–
mediated recruitment of SYK family kinases to the ITAMs;
activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; recruitment of adaptor
molecules, including SLP76 and BLNK; and recruitment of
enzymes, such as phospholipase Cγ and TEC family kinases. These
events 
lead 
to 
generation 
of 
inositol 
trisphosphate 
and
diacylglycerol and sustained increase in cytosolic calcium.
The signaling pathways downstream of Fcγ receptors induce a
number of responses in leukocytes, including transcription of
genes 
encoding 
cytokines, 
inﬂammatory 
mediators, 
and
microbicidal enzymes; and mobilization of the cytoskeleton,
leading to phagocytosis, granule exocytosis, and cell migration. The
major 
microbicidal 
substances 
produced 
in 
the 
activated
phagocytes are reactive oxygen species, nitric oxide, and hydrolytic
enzymes. These are the same substances produced by phagocytes
activated in innate immune responses, discussed in Chapter 4.
These microbicidal substances may also damage tissues; this
mechanism of antibody-mediated tissue injury is important in
hypersensitivity diseases (see Chapter 19). Knockout mice lacking
the ligand-binding α chain of FcγRI or the signal-transducing FcR γ
chain are defective in antibody-mediated defense against microbes
and do not develop some forms of IgG antibody–mediated tissue
injury, thus demonstrating the essential role of Fc receptors in
these processes.
FIGURE 13.4  Antibody-mediated opsonization and
phagocytosis of microbes.Antibodies of certain
immunoglobulin G (IgG) subclasses bind to
microbes and are then recognized by Fc
receptors on phagocytes. Signals from the Fc
receptors promote the phagocytosis of the
opsonized microbes and activate the phagocytes
to destroy these microbes. The microbicidal
mechanisms of phagocytes are described in
Chapters 4 (see Fig. 4.17) and 10 (see Fig.
10.7).
Inhibitory Signaling by the FcγRIIB Receptor
The FcγRIIB receptor is an inhibitory Fc receptor that was
described earlier in the context of inhibitory signaling in B cells and
the phenomenon of antibody feedback (see Chapter 12). FcγRIIB is
also expressed on DCs, neutrophils, macrophages, and mast cells
and may play a role in regulating the responses of these cells to
activating Fc receptors and other stimuli. A somewhat empirical
but 
often 
useful 
treatment 
of 
several 
autoimmune 
and
inﬂammatory diseases is the intravenous administration of pooled
human IgG, called intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG). IVIG may
bind to FcγRIIB and deliver inhibitory signals to B lymphocytes and
myeloid cells, thus reducing antibody production and dampening
inﬂammation. However, numerous other mechanisms have been
proposed to explain how IVIG works.
Antibody-Dependent Cell-Mediated
Cytotoxicity
NK cells and other leukocytes bind to antibody-coated cells by Fc
receptors and destroy these cells. This process is called antibody-
dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) (Fig. 13.5). It was ﬁrst
described as a function of NK cells, which use their Fc receptor,
FcγRIIIA (CD16), to bind to antibody-coated cells. FcγRIIIA is a
low-aﬃnity receptor that binds clustered IgG molecules displayed
on cell surfaces but does not bind circulating monomeric IgG.
Therefore, ADCC occurs only when the target cell is coated with
antibody molecules, and free IgG in plasma neither activates NK
cells nor competes eﬀectively with cell-bound IgG for binding to
FcγRIII. Engagement of FcγRIII by antibody-coated target cells
activates the NK cells to synthesize and secrete cytokines, such as
IFN-γ, as well as to discharge the contents of their granules, which
mediate the killing functions of this cell type (see Chapter 4).
ADCC also can be mediated by macrophages.
ADCC can be readily demonstrated in vitro, but its role in host
defense against microbes is not established. It may be a mechanism
for the elimination of cells that are coated by certain therapeutic
monoclonal antibodies, such as B cells and B cell–derived tumor
cells that are targeted by anti-CD20 antibody.
Antibody-Mediated Clearance of Helminths
Antibodies, eosinophils, and mast cells function together to mediate
the killing and expulsion of some helminthic parasites. Helminths
(worms) are too large to be engulfed by phagocytes, and their
integuments are relatively resistant to the microbicidal products of
neutrophils and macrophages. They can, however, be killed by a
toxic cationic protein, known as the major basic protein, present in
the granules of eosinophils. The immune response to helminthic
parasites is dominated by Th2 cell activation, IgE antibody
production, and eosinophila, suggesting that all may cooperate in
defense. Antibodies that coat helminths, especially IgG, can bind to
Fc receptors on eosinophils and cause the degranulation of the
eosinophils, releasing cationic granule proteins and other
mediators that kill the parasites. Neither human nor mouse
eosinophils express appreciable levels of high aﬃnity IgE receptors,
and in human eosinophils this receptor lacks the signaling β chain,
so a direct role of IgE in activating these cells seems unlikely.
Human eosinophils can express the low-aﬃnity IgE receptor
(CD23), but the function of CD23 on these cells remains poorly
understood. IgE antibodies that recognize antigens on the surface
of the helminths may also initiate local mast cell or basophil
degranulation through the high-aﬃnity IgE receptor (see Chapter
20). Mast cell mediators can induce bronchoconstriction and
increased intestinal motility, contributing to the expulsion of
worms from sites such as the airways and the lumen of the
gastrointestinal tract.
FIGURE 13.5  Antibody-dependent cell-mediated
cytotoxicity.Antibodies of certain immunoglobulin
G (IgG) subclasses bind to cells (e.g., infected
cells), and the Fc regions of the bound antibodies
are recognized by an Fcγ receptor on natural killer
(NK) cells. The NK cells are activated and kill the
antibody-coated cells.
The Complement System
The complement system is one of the major eﬀector mechanisms of
humoral immunity and is also an important eﬀector mechanism of
innate immunity. We brieﬂy discussed the role of complement in
innate immunity in Chapter 4. Here we will describe the activation
and regulation of complement in more detail.
The name complement is derived from experiments performed by
Jules Bordet shortly after the discovery of antibodies. He
demonstrated that if fresh serum containing an antibacterial
antibody is added to the bacteria at physiologic temperature (37°C),
the bacteria are lysed. If, however, the serum is heated to 56°C or
more, it loses its lytic capacity. This loss of lytic capacity is not due
to decay of antibody activity, because antibodies are relatively heat
stable, and even heated serum is capable of agglutinating the
bacteria. The lytic capacity of the serum could be restored by
adding fresh serum, even from animals that had not been
immunized. Bordet concluded that in order to lyse bacteria, serum
must contain another heat-labile component that is present in all
individuals and assists, or complements, the lytic function of
antibodies. This component was later given the name complement.
The complement system consists of serum and cell surface proteins
that interact with one another and with other molecules of the
immune system in a highly regulated manner to generate products
that function to eliminate microbes. Complement proteins are
plasma proteins that are normally inactive; they are activated only
under particular conditions to generate products that mediate
various eﬀector functions. Several features of complement
activation are essential for its normal function.
• The complement system is activated by microbes and by
antibodies and lectins that are bound to microbes and other
antigens. Thus, complement focuses immune aĴack on
microbial surfaces. The mechanisms of initial activation are
described later.
• Activation of complement involves the sequential proteolysis
of proteins to generate enzyme complexes with proteolytic
activity. Proteins that acquire proteolytic enzymatic activity
by the action of other proteases are called zymogens. The
process of sequential zymogen activation, a deﬁning feature
of a proteolytic enzyme cascade, is also characteristic of the
coagulation and kinin systems. Proteolytic cascades allow
tremendous and rapid ampliﬁcation because each active
enzyme molecule produced at one step can generate
multiple activated enzyme molecules at the next step.
• Several of the biologically active cleavage products of
complement activation become covalently aĴached to
microbial cell surfaces, to antibodies bound to microbes and
other antigens, and to apoptotic bodies. In the ﬂuid phase,
complement proteins are inactive or only transiently active
(for seconds), but they become stably activated after they
are aĴached to microbes, antibodies, or dying cells. Thus,
the full activation and therefore the biologic functions of
the complement system are limited to microbial cell
surfaces or to sites of antibodies bound to antigens and do
not occur in the blood.
• Complement activation is inhibited by regulatory proteins
that are present on normal host cells and absent from
microbes. The regulatory proteins are an adaptation of
normal cells that minimize complement-mediated damage
to host cells. Because microbes lack these regulatory
proteins, complement activation can occur on microbial
surfaces.
Pathways of Complement Activation
There are three pathways of complement activation: the classical
pathway, which is activated by IgM and IgG antibodies bound to
antigens; the alternative pathway, which is activated on microbial
cell surfaces in the absence of antibody; and the lectin pathway,
which is activated by plasma lectins that bind to surface
carbohydrates on microbes (Fig. 13.6) . The names classical and
alternative arose because the classical pathway was discovered and
characterized ﬁrst, but the alternative pathway is phylogenetically
older. The alternative and lectin pathways are eﬀector mechanisms
of innate immunity, whereas the classical pathway is a major
mechanism of adaptive humoral immunity.
The central event in complement activation is proteolysis of the
complement protein C3 to generate biologically active products and
the subsequent covalent aĴachment of a product of C3, called C3b,
to microbial cell surfaces or to antibody bound to antigen (see Fig.
13.6) . Although the pathways of complement activation diﬀer in
how they are initiated, all of them result in cleavage of the most
abundant complement protein, C3. Complement activation involves
the generation of a proteolytic complex, the C3 convertase, which
cleaves C3 into two fragments called C3a and C3b. (By convention,
the proteolytic products of each complement protein are identiﬁed
by lowercase leĴer suﬃxes, a referring to the smaller product and b
to the larger one; C2 is an exception, for historical reasons.) C3b
becomes covalently aĴached to the microbial cell surface or to
antibody molecules bound to antigen. All of the biologic functions
of complement are dependent on the proteolytic cleavage of C3. For
example, complement activation promotes phagocytosis because
C3b becomes covalently linked to microbes, and phagocytes
(neutrophils and macrophages) express receptors for C3b. Peptides
produced by proteolysis of C3 (and other complement proteins)
stimulate inﬂammation.
In all three pathways of complement activation, after the
generation of C3b by the C3 convertase, a second enzyme complex
called the C5 convertase is assembled, which cleaves C5 into C5a
and C5b. The C5 convertase contributes both to inﬂammation by
generation of the C5a fragment, and to the formation of pores in
the membranes of microbial targets. The pathways of complement
activation diﬀer in how C3b is produced but follow a shared
sequence of reactions after the cleavage of C5.
With this background, we proceed to more detailed descriptions
of the alternative, classical, and lectin pathways.
FIGURE 13.6  The early steps of complement
activation by the alternative, classical, and lectin
pathways.The alternative pathway is activated by
C3b binding to various activating surfaces, such
as microbial cell walls; the classical pathway is
initiated by C1 binding to antigen-antibody
complexes, and the lectin pathway is activated by
binding of a plasma lectin to microbes. The C3b
that is generated by the action of the C3
convertase binds to the microbial cell surface or
the antibody and becomes a component of the
enzyme that cleaves C5 (C5 convertase) and
initiates the late steps of complement activation.
The late steps of all three pathways are the same
(not shown), and complement activated by all
three pathways serves the same functions. MASP,
Mannose-binding lectin-associated serine
protease.
The Alternative Pathway
The alternative pathway of complement activation results in the
proteolysis of C3 and the stable aĴachment of its breakdown
product C3b to microbial surfaces, without a role for antibody (Fig.
13.7 and Table 13.4) . Normally, C3 in plasma is being continuously
hydrolyzed and then cleaved at a low rate (1% to 2% of the total
plasma C3 per hour) to generate C3b in a process that is called C3
tickover. This process involves Factors B and D, described later. The
C3 protein contains a reactive thioester bond that is buried in a
region of the protein known as the thioester domain. When C3 is
cleaved, the C3b molecule undergoes a dramatic conformational
change and the thioester domain ﬂips out (a large shift of
approximately 85 Å), exposing the previously hidden reactive
thioester bond. A small amount of the C3b may become covalently
aĴached to the surfaces of cells, including microbes, through the
thioester domain, which reacts with the amino or hydroxyl groups
of cell surface proteins or polysaccharides to form amide or ester
bonds (Fig. 13.8). If these bonds are not formed, the C3b remains in
the ﬂuid phase, and the exposed reactive thioester bond is quickly
hydrolyzed, rendering the protein inactive. As a result, further
complement activation cannot proceed in plasma.
FIGURE 13.7  The alternative pathway of
complement activation.Spontaneous hydrolysis of
plasma C3 leads to the formation of a fluid-phase
C3 convertase and the generation of C3b in the
process called C3 tickover. The activated
hydrolyzed C3, indicated as C3∗, is deposited on
microbial surfaces, where it binds Factor B and
forms the alternative pathway C3 convertase. This
convertase (C3bBb) cleaves C3 to produce more
C3b, which binds to the microbial surface and
participates in the formation of a C5 convertase.
The C5 convertase, C3bBbC3b, cleaves C5 to
generate C5b, the initiating event in the late steps
of complement activation.
TABLE 13.4
When C3b undergoes its post-cleavage conformational change, a
binding site for a plasma protein called Factor B is also exposed.
Factor B then binds to the C3b protein that is now covalently
tethered to the surface of the cell. Bound Factor B is in turn cleaved
by a plasma serine protease called Factor D, releasing a small
fragment called Ba and generating a larger fragment called Bb that
remains aĴached to C3b. The C3bBb complex is the alternative
pathway C3 convertase and functions to cleave more C3 molecules,
thus seĴing up an ampliﬁcation sequence. Even when C3b is
generated by the classical or lectin pathway, it can form a complex
with Bb, and this complex is able to cleave more C3. Thus, the
alternative 
pathway 
C3 
convertase 
functions 
to 
amplify
complement activation when it is initiated by any of the three
pathways. When C3 is broken down, C3b remains aĴached to cells
and C3a is released. The soluble fragment has several biologic
activities that are discussed later.
FIGURE 13.8  Internal thioester bonds of
C3.Proteolytic cleavage of the α chain of C3
converts it into a metastable form in which the
internal thioester bonds are exposed and
susceptible to nucleophilic attack by oxygen
atoms (as shown) or nitrogen atoms. The result is
the formation of covalent bonds with proteins or
carbohydrates on cell surfaces. C4 is structurally
homologous to C3 and has an identical thioester
bond.
Alternative pathway activation readily occurs on microbial cell
surfaces but not on mammalian cells. If the C3bBb complex is
formed on mammalian cells, it is rapidly degraded and the reaction
is terminated by the action of several regulatory proteins present
on these cells (discussed later). Lack of the regulatory proteins on
microbial cells allows binding and activation of the alternative
pathway C3 convertase. In addition, another protein of the
alternative pathway, called properdin, can bind to and stabilize the
C3bBb complex, and the aĴachment of properdin is favored on
microbial as opposed to normal host cells.
Some of the C3b molecules generated by the alternative pathway
C3 convertase bind to the convertase itself. This results in the
formation of a complex containing one Bb moiety and two
molecules of C3b, which functions as the alternative pathway C5
convertase, which will cleave C5 and initiate the late steps of
complement activation.
The Classical Pathway
The classical pathway is initiated by binding of the complement
protein C1 to the C H 2 domain of IgG or the C H 3 domain of IgM
molecules that have bound antigen (Fig. 13.9 and Table 13.5) .
Among IgG antibodies, IgG1 and IgG3 (in humans) are more
eﬃcient activators of complement than are other subclasses. IgG2
has some ability to activate complement, but IgG4 does not. C1 is a
large, multimeric protein complex composed of C1q, C1r, and C1s
subunits; C1q binds to the antibody, and C1r and C1s are proteases.
The C1q subunit is made up of an umbrella-like radial array of six
chains, each of which has a globular head connected by a collagen-
like arm to a central stalk (Fig. 13.10). This hexamer performs the
recognition function of the molecule and binds speciﬁcally to the Fc
regions of µ and some γ heavy chains. As mentioned in Chapter 4,
C1q binds to pentraxins such as C-reactive protein and serum
amyloid protein and also can bind to apoptotic bodies.
Only antibodies bound to antigens, and not free circulating
antibodies, can initiate classical pathway activation. The reason for
this is that each C1q molecule must bind to at least two Ig heavy
chains to be activated and each Ig Fc region has only a single C1q-
binding site. Therefore, two or more Fc regions have to be
accessible to C1 in order to initiate classical pathway activation.
Because each IgG molecule has only one Fc region, multiple IgG
molecules must be brought close together before C1q can bind, and
multiple IgG antibodies are brought together only when they
simultaneously bind to identical epitopes of a multivalent antigen
or to several antigen molecules on a microbe, cell, or tissue surface
(Fig. 13.11). Even though free (circulating) IgM is pentameric, it
does not bind C1q because the CH3 domains of free IgM are in a
conﬁguration that is inaccessible to C1q. Binding of the IgM to an
antigen induces a conformational change that exposes the C1q
binding sites in the CH3 domains and allows C1q to bind. Because
of its pentameric structure, a single molecule of IgM can bind
multiple C1q molecules, and this is one reason that IgM is a more
eﬃcient complement-binding (also called complement-ﬁxing)
antibody than is IgG.
C1r and C1s are serine proteases that form a tetramer containing
two molecules of each protein. Binding of two or more of the
globular heads of C1q to the Fc regions of IgG or IgM leads to
enzymatic activation of the associated C1r, which cleaves and
activates C1s (see Fig. 13.9). Activated C1s cleaves the next protein
in the cascade, C4, to generate C4b. (The smaller C4a fragment is
released and has biologic activities that are described later.) C4 is
homologous to C3, and C4b contains an internal thioester bond,
similar to that in C3b, that forms covalent amide or ester linkages
with the antigen-antibody complex or with the adjacent surface of a
cell to which the antibody is bound. This aĴachment of C4b ensures
that classical pathway activation proceeds on a cell surface or
immune complex. The next complement protein, C2, then
complexes with the cell surface–bound C4b and is cleaved by a
nearby C1s molecule to generate a soluble C2b fragment of
unknown importance and a larger C2a fragment that remains
physically associated with C4b on the cell surface. The resulting
C4b2a complex is the classical pathway C3 convertase; it has the
ability to bind to and proteolytically cleave C3. Binding of this
enzyme complex to C3 is mediated by the C4b component, and
proteolysis is catalyzed by the C2a component. Cleavage of C3
results in removal of the small C3a fragment, and C3b can form
covalent bonds with cell surfaces or with the antibody where
complement activation was initiated. After C3b is deposited, it can
bind Factor B and generate more C3 convertase by the alternative
pathway, as discussed earlier. The net eﬀect of the multiple
enzymatic steps and ampliﬁcation is that millions of molecules of
C3b can be deposited within minutes on the cell surface where
complement is activated. The key early steps of the alternative and
classical pathways are analogous: C3 in the alternative pathway is
homologous to C4 in the classical pathway, and Factor B is
homologous to C2.
Some of the C3b molecules generated by the classical pathway C3
convertase bind to the convertase (as in the alternative pathway)
and form a C4b2a3b complex. This complex functions as the
classical pathway C5 convertase; it cleaves C5 and initiates the late
steps of complement activation.
The Lectin Pathway
The lectin pathway of complement activation is triggered by the
binding of microbial polysaccharides to circulating lectins, such as
plasma mannose-binding lectin (MBL), or to ﬁcolins (Table 13.6) .
These soluble lectins are collagen-like proteins that structurally
resemble C1q (see Fig. 4.13). MBL, L-ﬁcolin, and H-ﬁcolin are
plasma proteins; M-ﬁcolin is mainly secreted by activated
macrophages in tissues. MBL has an N-terminal collagen-like
domain and a C-terminal carbohydrate recognition (lectin) domain
and is thus a member of the collectin family of serum agglutinins.
The ﬁcolins have a similar structure, with an N-terminal collagen-
like domain and a C-terminal ﬁbrinogen-like domain. The collagen-
like domains help to assemble basic triple-helical structures that
can form higher order oligomers. MBL binds to mannose residues
on polysaccharides, and the ﬁbrinogen-like domain of ﬁcolin binds
N-acetylglucosamine–containing glycans. These polysaccharides
and glycans are abundant in bacteria and fungi. Both MBL and
ﬁcolins associate with MBL-associated serine proteases (MASPs)
including MASP1, MASP2, and MASP3 (see Table 13.6). The MASPs
are structurally homologous to the C1r and C1s proteases and serve
a similar function, namely the cleavage of C4 and C2 to activate the
complement pathway. Multimers of MBL associate with MASP1 and
MASP2 (or MASP3 and MASP2), and MASP2 is the protease that
cleaves C4 and C2. Subsequent events in this pathway are identical
to those that occur in the classical pathway.
FIGURE 13.9  The classical pathway of complement
activation.Antigen-antibody complexes that
activate the classical pathway may be soluble,
fixed on the surface of cells (as shown), or
deposited on extracellular matrices. The classical
pathway is initiated by the binding of C1 to
antigen-complexed antibody molecules, which
leads to the production of C3 and C5 convertases
attached to the surfaces where the antibody was
deposited. The C5 convertase cleaves C5 to
begin the late steps of complement activation.
TABLE 13.5
Late Steps of Complement Activation
C5 convertases generated by the alternative, classical, or lectin
pathway initiate activation of the late components of the
complement system, which culminates in formation of the cytocidal
membrane aĴack complex (MAC) (Table 13.7 and Fig. 13.12) . C5
convertases cleave C5 into a small C5a fragment that is released
and a two-chain C5b fragment (containing an α and a β chain) that
is also released but binds rapidly to plasma C6. C6 undergoes a
conformational change, and the C5b-C6 complex then binds to the
cell membrane through both ionic and hydrophobic interactions.
C5a has potent biologic eﬀects on several cells that are discussed
later. C7 from the plasma then binds to the α chain of C5b and
forms the C5b-C6-C7 (C5b-7) complex. The bound C7 undergoes an
amphiphilic transition and penetrates the membrane; it can
contribute to the release of some phospholipid micelles from the
membrane but does not form complete pores. The C8 protein is a
trimer composed of three distinct chains, one of which binds to the
C5b component of the C5b-7 complex and forms a covalent
heterodimer with the second chain; the third chain inserts into the
lipid bilayer of the membrane. This stably inserted C5b,6,7,8
complex (C5b-8) forms unstable pores that range from 0.4 to 3 nm
in diameter, and very large numbers of these C5b-8 complexes can
lyse cells. The formation of a fully active MAC is accomplished by
the binding of C9, the ﬁnal component of the complement
cascades, to the C5b-8 complex. C9 is a serum protein that
polymerizes at the site of the bound C5b-8 to form pores in plasma
membranes that are made up of C5b-9 complexes containing C5b,
C6, C7, C8, and many molecules of C9. These pores are
approximately 20 nm in external diameter, 1 to 11 nm in internal
diameter, have a height of approximately 15 nm, and form channels
that allow free movement of water and ions. The channel size varies
based on the number of C9 molecules in the C5b-C9 complex.
Tubular complexes of C9 alone may also form. The entry of water
results in osmotic swelling and rupture of the cells on whose
surface the MAC is deposited. The pores formed by polymerized C9
are similar to the membrane pores formed by perforin, the cytolytic
granule protein found in cytotoxic T lymphocytes and NK cells (see
Chapter 11), and C9 is structurally homologous to perforin.
FIGURE 13.10  Structure of C1.C1q consists of six
identical subunits arranged to form a central core
and symmetrically projecting radial arms. The
globular heads at the end of each arm,
designated H, are the contact regions for the Fc
portions of antibodies (IgG, in this case). C1r and
C1s form a tetramer composed of two C1r and
two C1s molecules. The ends of C1r and C1s
contain the catalytic domains of these proteins.
One C1r2s2 tetramer wraps around the radial
arms of the C1q complex in a manner that
juxtaposes the catalytic domains of C1r and C1s.
FIGURE 13.11  C1 binding to the Fc portions of
immunoglobulins M and G.C1 must bind to two or
more Fc portions to initiate the complement
cascade. Soluble IgG molecules will not activate
C1 because each IgG has only one Fc region (A),
but after binding to cell surface antigens, adjacent
IgG Fc portions can bind and activate C1 (B). The
Fc portions of soluble pentameric IgM are not
accessible to C1 (C). After IgM binds to surface-
bound antigens, it undergoes a shape change that
permits C1 binding and activation (D).
TABLE 13.6
The serum concentrations indicated are approximations for some of these proteins.
MASP, Mannose-binding receptor-associated serine protease.
TABLE 13.7
MAC, Membrane attack complex.
FIGURE 13.12  Late steps of complement activation
and formation of the membrane attack
complex.The cell-associated C5 convertase
cleaves C5 and generates C5b, becomes bound
to the convertase. C5b binds C6 and C7
sequentially, and the C5b-7 complex inserts into
the plasma membrane, followed by addition of C8
to the complex, which forms unstable pores. The
C5b-8 complex can form a pore with C9, and C9
can also be induced to homo-oligomerize by the
C5b-8 complex. As many as 15 C9 molecules
may polymerize to form the membrane attack
complex (MAC), which creates pores in the
membrane and induces cell lysis. C5a released on
proteolysis of C5 stimulates inflammation.
Receptors for Complement Proteins
Many of the biologic activities of the complement system are
mediated by the binding of complement fragments to membrane
receptors expressed on various cell types. The best characterized of
these receptors are speciﬁc for fragments of C3 and are described
here (Table 13.8).
• The type 1 complement receptor (CR1, or CD35) functions
mainly to promote phagocytosis of C3b- and C4b-coated
particles and clearance of immune complexes from the
circulation. CR1 is a high-aﬃnity receptor for C3b and C4b.
It is expressed mainly on bone marrow–derived cells,
including erythrocytes, neutrophils, monocytes,
macrophages, eosinophils, and T and B lymphocytes; it is
also found on follicular dendritic cells (FDCs) in the
follicles of secondary lymphoid organs. Phagocytes use this
receptor to bind and internalize particles opsonized with
C3b or C4b. The binding of C3b- or C4b-coated particles to
CR1 also transduces signals that activate the microbicidal
mechanisms of the phagocytes, especially when the Fcγ
receptor is simultaneously engaged by antibody-coated
particles. CR1 on erythrocytes binds circulating immune
complexes with aĴached C3b and C4b and transports the
complexes to the liver and spleen. Here, phagocytes remove
the immune complexes from the erythrocyte surface, and
the erythrocytes continue to circulate. CR1 is also a
regulator of complement activation (discussed in the
section that follows).
• The type 2 complement receptor (CR2, or CD21) functions to
stimulate humoral immune responses by enhancing B cell
activation by antigen and by promoting the trapping of
antigen-antibody complexes in germinal centers. CR2 is
present on B lymphocytes, FDCs, and some epithelial cells.
It speciﬁcally binds cleavage products of C3b, called C3d,
C3dg, and iC3b (i referring to inactive), which are generated
by Factor I–mediated proteolysis (discussed later). On B
cells, CR2 is expressed as part of a trimolecular complex
that includes two other noncovalently aĴached proteins
called CD19 and CD81 (or TAPA1 [target of
antiproliferative antibody-1]). This complex delivers signals
to B cells that enhance the responses of B cells to antigen
(see Fig. 7.20). On FDCs, CR2 serves to trap iC3b-, C3d-, and
C3dg-coated antigen-antibody complexes in germinal
centers. The functions of complement in B cell activation
are described later.
• The type 3 complement receptor, also called MAC-1 (CR3,
CD11bC D18), is an integrin that functions as a receptor for
the iC3b fragment produced by proteolysis of C3b. MAC-1 is
expressed on neutrophils, mononuclear phagocytes, mast
cells, and NK cells. This member of the integrin family (see
Chapter 3) consists of an α chain (CD11b) noncovalently
linked to a β chain (CD18) that is identical to the β chains of
two closely related integrin molecules, LFA-1 (leukocyte
y
g
y
function–associated antigen 1), and p150,95 (CR4). MAC-1
on neutrophils and monocytes promotes phagocytosis of
microbes opsonized with iC3b. In addition, MAC-1 may
directly recognize bacteria for phagocytosis by binding to
some unknown microbial molecules (see Chapter 4). It also
binds to ICAM-1 (intercellular adhesion molecule-1) on
endothelial cells and promotes stable aĴachment of the
leukocytes to endothelium, even without complement
activation. This binding leads to the recruitment of
leukocytes to sites of infection and tissue injury (see
Chapter 3).
TABLE 13.8
CCPRs, Complement control protein repeats; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; FDCs, follicular
dendritic cells; ICAM-1, intercellular adhesion molecule 1; MAC, membrane attack
complex; NK, natural killer.
• The type 4 complement receptor (CR4, p150,95, CD11cCD18)
is another integrin with a diﬀerent α chain (CD11c) and the
same β chain as MAC-1. It also binds iC3b, and the function
of this receptor is probably similar to that of MAC-1. CD11c
is abundantly expressed on DCs and is used as a marker for
this cell type.
• The complement receptor of the immunoglobulin family
(CRIg) is expressed on the surface of macrophages in the
liver known as Kupﬀer cells. CRIg is an integral membrane
protein with an extracellular region made up of Ig domains.
It binds the complement fragments C3b and iC3b and is
involved in the clearance of opsonized bacteria and other
blood-borne pathogens.
Other receptors include those for C3a, C4a, and C5a, which
stimulate inﬂammation, and for C1q. The proinﬂammatory eﬀects
of C3a, C4a, and C5a are mediated by binding of these fragments to
speciﬁc receptors on various cell types. The C5a receptor, C5aR1, is
the most thoroughly characterized. It is a member of the G protein–
coupled receptor family expressed on many cell types, including
neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils, monocytes, macrophages, mast
cells, endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, epithelial cells, and
astrocytes. The C3a receptor is also a member of the G protein–
coupled receptor family. These receptors collaborate with Toll-like
receptors (TLRs) in the activation of sentinel cells and phagocytes.
The C1q receptor is expressed on phagocytes and may assist in the
clearance of apoptotic bodies and protein ﬁbers such as amyloid
ﬁbrils, both of which bind C1q.
Regulation of Complement Activation
Activation of the complement cascade and the stability of active
complement proteins are tightly regulated to prevent complement
activation on normal host cells and to limit the duration of
complement activation even on microbial cells and antigen-antibody
complexes. Regulation of complement is mediated by several
circulating and cell membrane proteins (Table 13.9). Many of these
proteins belong to a family called regulators of complement activity
(RCA) and are encoded by homologous genes that are located
adjacent to one another on chromosome 1 at q3.2. RCA proteins
include the cell membrane proteins, decay-accelerating factor (DAF
[CD55]), membrane cofactor protein (MCP [CD46]), complement
receptor 1 (CR1), and complement receptor 2 (CR2). The circulating
RCA proteins in the plasma include Factor H and C4-binding
protein (C4BP).
Complement activation needs to be regulated for two reasons.
First, low-level complement activation goes on spontaneously, and
if such activation is allowed to proceed, the result can be damage to
normal cells and tissues. Second, even when complement is
activated where needed, such as on microbial cells or antigen-
antibody complexes, it needs to be controlled because degradation
products of complement proteins can diﬀuse to adjacent cells and
injure them.
TABLE 13.9
CCPRs, Complement control protein repeats; conc., concentration; GPI,
glycophosphatidylinositol; MAC, membrane attack complex.
Diﬀerent regulatory mechanisms inhibit the formation of C3
convertases in the early steps of complement activation, break
down and inactivate C3 and C5 convertases, and inhibit formation
of the MAC in the late steps of complement activation.
• The proteolytic activity of C1r, C1s, and MASP2 is inhibited
by a plasma protein called C1 inhibitor (C1 INH). C1 INH is
a serine protease inhibitor (serpin) that mimics the normal
substrates of C1r and C1s. If C1q binds to an antibody and
begins the process of complement activation, C1 INH
becomes a target of the enzymatic activity of the bound
C1r2-C1s2. C1 INH is cleaved by and becomes covalently
aĴached to these complement proteins, and, as a result, the
C1r2-C1s2 tetramer dissociates from C1q, thus stopping
activation by the classical pathway (Fig. 13.13). In this way,
C1 INH prevents the accumulation of enzymatically active
C1r2-C1s2 in the plasma and limits the time for which active
C1r2-C1s2 is available to activate subsequent steps in the
complement cascade. Similarly, by inactivating MASP2, C1
INH also dampens the lectin pathway. An autosomal
dominant inherited disease called hereditary angioedema is
due to a deﬁciency of C1 INH. Clinical manifestations of the
disease include intermiĴent acute accumulation of edema
ﬂuid in the skin and mucosa, which causes abdominal pain,
vomiting, diarrhea, and potentially life-threatening airway
obstruction. In some of these patients, the plasma levels of
C1 INH protein are suﬃciently reduced (<20% to 30% of
normal) that activation of C1 by immune complexes is not
properly controlled and increased breakdown of C4 and C2
occurs. The mediators of edema formation in patients with
hereditary angioedema include a proteolytic fragment of
C2, called C2 kinin, and bradykinin. C1 INH is an inhibitor
of other plasma serine proteases besides C1, including
kallikrein and coagulation factor XII, both of which can
promote increased formation of bradykinin. Recombinant
C1 INH is now used to treat patients with this deﬁciency.
• Assembly of the components of C3 and C5 convertases is
inhibited by the binding of regulatory proteins of the RCA
family to C3b and C4b deposited on cell surfaces (Fig. 13.14) .
If C3b is deposited on the surfaces of normal mammalian
cells, it may be bound by several membrane proteins,
including MCP (CD46), CR1, and DAF, and the plasma
protein Factor H. C4b deposited on cell surfaces is similarly
bound by DAF, CR1, MCP, and another plasma protein,
C4BP. By binding to C3b or C4b, these proteins
competitively inhibit the binding of other components of
the C3 convertase, such as Bb of the alternative pathway
and C2a of the classical pathway, thus blocking further
progression of the complement cascade. (Factor H inhibits
binding of only Bb to C3b and is thus a regulator of the
alternative but not the classical pathway.) MCP, CR1, and
DAF are produced by mammalian cells but not by
microbes. Therefore, these regulators of complement
selectively inhibit complement activation on host cells and
allow complement activation to proceed on microbes. In
addition, cell surfaces rich in sialic acid favor binding of the
regulatory protein Factor H over the alternative pathway
protein Factor B. Mammalian cells express higher levels of
sialic acid than most microbes do, which is another reason
that complement activation is prevented on normal host
cells and permiĴed on microbes. DAF is a GPI-linked
membrane protein expressed on endothelial cells and
erythrocytes. A hematopoietic stem cell deﬁciency of the
enzyme required to form such protein-lipid linkages results
in a lack of blood cell expression of many GPI-linked
membrane proteins, including DAF and CD59 (see later)
and causes a disease called paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria. This disease is characterized by recurrent
bouts of intravascular hemolysis, at least partly aĴributable
to unregulated complement activation on the surface of
erythrocytes. Recurrent intravascular hemolysis in turn
leads to chronic hemolytic anemia and venous thrombosis.
An unusual feature of this disease is that the causative
mutation in the gene that encodes an enzyme responsible
for the generation of the GPI anchor is not inherited but is
an acquired somatic mutation in hematopoietic stem cells.
A rare inherited deﬁciency of DAF causes small vessel
thrombosis and protein-losing enteropathy, which responds
well to C5 inhibitor therapy. It does not cause paroxysmal
nocturnal hemoglobinuria because CD59 expression is
normal.
FIGURE 13.13  Regulation of C1 activity by C1
inhibitor.C1 inhibitor (C1 INH) displaces
C1r2s2 from C1q and terminates classical
pathway activation.
FIGURE 13.14  Inhibition of the formation of C3
convertases.The classical pathway C3
convertase, C4b2a, or the alternative
pathway C3 convertase, C3bBb, can be
dissociated by the replacement of one
component with decay-accelerating factor
(DAF). Other regulatory proteins, such as
membrane cofactor protein (MCP) and
complement receptor 1 (CR1), function
similarly to DAF (see text).
• Cell-associated C3b is proteolytically degraded by a plasma
serine protease called Factor I, which is active only in the
presence of regulatory proteins (Fig. 13.15). MCP, Factor H,
C4BP, and CR1 all serve as cofactors for Factor I–mediated
cleavage of C3b (and C4b). Thus, these regulatory host cell
proteins promote proteolytic degradation of complement
proteins; as discussed earlier, the same regulatory proteins
cause dissociation of C3b (and C4b)–containing complexes.
Factor I–mediated cleavage of C3b generates the fragments
called iC3b, C3d, and C3dg, which do not participate in
complement activation but are recognized by receptors on
phagocytes and B lymphocytes.
• Inﬂammation induced by C3a and C5a is regulated by the
rapid cleavage of their C-terminal arginine residues by
plasma carboxypeptidases. This results in the generation of
C3a des-Arg and C5a des-Arg, each of which has only
approximately 10% of the activity of the native forms of
these proteins.
• Formation of the MAC is inhibited by a membrane protein
called CD59. CD59 is a GPI-linked protein expressed on
many cell types. It works by incorporating itself into
assembling MACs after the membrane insertion of C5b-8,
thereby inhibiting the subsequent addition of C9 molecules
(Fig. 13.16). CD59 is present on normal host cells, where it
limits MAC formation, but it is not present on microbes.
Formation of the MAC is also inhibited by plasma proteins
such as S protein, which functions by binding to soluble
C5b,6,7 complexes and thereby preventing their insertion
into cell membranes near the site where the complement
cascade was initiated. Growing MACs can insert into any
neighboring cell membrane besides the membrane on
which they were generated. Inhibitors of the MAC in the
plasma and in host cell membranes ensure that lysis of
innocent bystander cells does not occur near the site of
complement activation.
FIGURE 13.15  Factor I–mediated cleavage of
C3b.In the presence of cell membrane–bound
cofactors (membrane cofactor protein [MCP]
or complement receptor 1 [CR1]), plasma
factor I proteolytically cleaves C3b attached
to cell surfaces, leaving an inactive form of
C3b (iC3b). Factor H and C4-binding protein
can also serve as cofactors for Factor I–
mediated cleavage of C3b. The same
process is involved in the proteolysis of C4.
Much of the analysis of the function of complement regulatory
proteins has relied on in vitro experiments, and most of these
experiments have focused on assays that measure MAC-mediated
lysis of erythrocytes as an endpoint. On the basis of these studies, a
hierarchy of importance for inhibiting complement activation is
thought to be CD59 > DAF > MCP; this hierarchy may reﬂect the
relative abundance of these proteins on cell surfaces.
FIGURE 13.16  Regulation of formation of the
membrane attack complex.The membrane attack
complex (MAC) is formed on cell surfaces as an
end result of complement activation. The
membrane protein CD59 and S protein in the
plasma inhibit formation of the MAC.
FIGURE 13.17  Functions of complement.The major
functions of the complement system in host
defense are shown. Cell-bound C3b is an opsonin
that promotes phagocytosis of coated cells (A);
the proteolytic products C5a, C3a, and (to a
lesser extent) C4a stimulate leukocyte recruitment
and inflammation (B); and the membrane attack
complex (MAC) lyses cells (C).
The function of regulatory proteins may be overwhelmed by
excessive activation of complement pathways. We have emphasized
the importance of these regulatory proteins in preventing
complement activation on normal cells. However, complement-
mediated phagocytosis and damage to normal cells are important
pathogenic mechanisms in many immunologic diseases (see
Chapter 19). In these diseases, large amounts of antibodies may be
deposited on host cells, generating enough active complement
proteins that the regulatory molecules are unable to control
complement activation.
Functions of Complement
The principal functions of the complement system in innate immunity
and adaptive humoral immunity are to promote phagocytosis of
microbes on which complement is activated, to stimulate
inﬂammation, and to induce the lysis of these microbes. In addition,
products of complement activation facilitate the activation of B
lymphocytes and the production of antibodies. Phagocytosis,
inﬂammation, and stimulation of humoral immunity are all
mediated by the binding of proteolytic fragments of complement
proteins to various cell surface receptors, whereas cell lysis is
mediated by the MAC. In the following section, we will describe
these functions of the complement system and their roles in host
defense.
Opsonization and Phagocytosis
Microbes on which complement is activated become coated with
C3b, iC3b, or C4b and are phagocytosed by the binding of these
proteins to speciﬁc receptors on macrophages and neutrophils (Fig.
13.17A) . As discussed previously, activation of complement leads
to the generation of C3b and iC3b covalently bound to cell surfaces.
Both C3b and iC3b act as opsonins by virtue of their ability to
speciﬁcally bind to receptors on neutrophils and macrophages. C3b
and C4b (the laĴer generated by the classical pathway only) bind to
CR1, and iC3b binds to CR3 (Mac-1) and CR4. By itself, CR1 is
ineﬃcient at inducing the phagocytosis of C3b-coated microbes,
but its ability to do so is enhanced if the microbes are coated with
IgG antibodies that simultaneously bind to Fcγ receptors.
Macrophage activation by the cytokine IFN-γ also enhances CR1-
mediated phagocytosis. C3b- and iC3b-dependent phagocytosis of
microorganisms is a major defense mechanism against infections in
innate and adaptive immunity. One example of the importance of
complement is host defense against bacteria with polysaccharide-
rich capsules, such as pneumococci and meningococci, which is
mediated primarily by humoral immunity. IgM antibodies against
capsular polysaccharides bind to the bacteria, activate the classical
pathway of complement, and cause phagocytic clearance of the
bacteria in the spleen. This is why individuals lacking the spleen
(e.g. as a result of autosplenectomy in sickle cell anemia patients, or
due to surgical removal after traumatic rupture of the spleen or to
treat patients with autoimmune hemolytic anemia) are susceptible
to disseminated pneumococcal and meningococcal septicemia.
Stimulation of Inflammatory Responses
The proteolytic complement fragments C5a, C4a, and C3a induce
acute inﬂammation by activating mast cells, neutrophils, and
endothelial cells (Fig. 13.17B). All three peptides bind to mast cells
and induce degranulation, with the release of vasoactive mediators,
such as histamine. These peptides are also called anaphylatoxins
because the mast cell reactions they trigger are characteristic of
anaphylaxis (see Chapter 20). In neutrophils, C5a stimulates
motility, ﬁrm adhesion to endothelial cells, and, at high doses,
stimulation of the respiratory burst and production of reactive
oxygen species. In addition, C5a may act directly on vascular
endothelial cells and induce increased vascular permeability and
the expression of P-selectin, which promotes neutrophil binding.
This combination of C5a actions on mast cells, neutrophils, and
endothelial 
cells 
contributes 
to 
inﬂammation 
at 
sites 
of
complement activation. C5a is the most potent mediator of mast
cell degranulation, C3a is approximately 20-fold less potent, and
C4a is approximately 2500-fold less.
Complement-Mediated Cytolysis
Complement-mediated lysis of foreign organisms is mediated by
the MAC (Fig. 13.17C). Most pathogens have evolved thick cell walls
or capsules that impede access of the MAC to their cell membranes.
Complement-mediated lysis appears to be critical for defense
against only a few pathogens that are unable to resist MAC
insertion, such as bacteria of the genus Neisseria, which have very
thin cell walls.
Other Functions of the Complement System
By binding to antigen-antibody complexes, complement proteins
promote the solubilization of these complexes and their clearance by
phagocytes. Small numbers of immune complexes are frequently
formed in the circulation when an individual mounts a vigorous
antibody response to a circulating antigen. If the immune
complexes accumulate in the blood, they may be deposited in
vessel walls and lead to inﬂammatory reactions that damage the
vessels and surrounding tissue. The formation of immune
complexes may require not only the multivalent binding of Ig Fab
regions to antigens but also noncovalent interactions of Fc regions
of juxtaposed Ig molecules. Complement activation on Ig molecules
can sterically block these Fc-Fc interactions, thereby promoting
dissolution of the immune complexes. In addition, as discussed
earlier, immune complexes with aĴached C3b bind to CR1 on
erythrocytes and the complexes are cleared by phagocytes in the
liver.
The C3d protein generated from C3 binds to CR2 on B cells and
facilitates B cell activation and the development of humoral immune
responses. C3d is generated when complement is activated by an
antigen, either directly (e.g., when the antigen is a microbial
polysaccharide) or after the binding of antibody. Complement
activation results in the covalent aĴachment of C3b and its cleavage
product C3d to the antigen. B lymphocytes can bind the antigen
through their Ig receptors and simultaneously bind the aĴached
C3d through CR2, the coreceptor on B cells, thus enhancing
antigen-induced signaling in B lymphocytes (see Chapters 7 and
12). Opsonized antigens are also bound by FDCs in the germinal
centers of lymphoid organs. FDCs display antigens to B cells in the
germinal centers, and this process is important for the selection of
high-aﬃnity B cells (see Fig. 12.18). The importance of complement
in humoral immune responses is illustrated by the impairment in
antibody production and germinal center formation seen in
knockout mice lacking C3 or C4 or the CR2 protein.
Complement proteins and natural antibodies contribute to the
clearance of apoptotic cells and fragments. Many diﬀerent host
proteins contribute to the clearance of apoptotic cells by
macrophages, but the functional importance of complement
proteins in this process is revealed in patients with inherited
complement deﬁciencies (discussed next).
Complement Deficiencies
Genetic deﬁciencies of complement proteins and regulatory
proteins are the causes of various human diseases. Inherited and
spontaneous deﬁciencies in many of the complement proteins have
been described in humans.
• Genetic deﬁciencies in classical pathway components,
including C1q, C1r, C4, C2, and C3, have been described; C2
deﬁciency is the most common human complement
deﬁciency. More than 50% of patients with C1q, C2, and C4
deﬁciencies develop systemic lupus erythematosus. The
reason for this association of complement defects and an
autoimmune immune complex disease is unknown, but it
may be related to inadequate clearance of circulating
immune complexes because of defects in complement
activation. If normally generated immune complexes are
not cleared from the circulation, they may be deposited in
blood vessel walls and tissues, where they activate
leukocytes by Fc receptor–dependent pathways and
produce local inﬂammation. Complement may also play an
important role in the clearance of apoptotic bodies
containing fragmented DNA. These apoptotic bodies are
likely sources of the nuclear antigens that trigger
autoantibody responses in lupus. In addition, complement
proteins regulate antigen-mediated signals received by B
cells; in their absence, self antigens may not induce B cell
tolerance and autoimmunity results. Some patients with C2
or C4 deﬁciency show increased susceptibility to infections,
and others are asymptomatic. Deﬁciency of C3 is associated
with frequent serious pyogenic bacterial infections that may
be fatal, illustrating the central role of C3 in opsonization,
enhanced phagocytosis, and destruction of these
organisms.
• Deﬁciencies in components of the alternative pathway result
in increased susceptibility to meningococcal infections.
Factor B and Factor D deﬁciencies are rare, but X-linked
recessive properdin deﬁciency is more common. Genetic
variants of the genes encoding MBL and MASP2 contribute
to immunodeﬁciency in some patients; this is discussed in
Chapter 21.
• Deﬁciencies in the terminal complement components,
including C5, C6, C7, C8, and C9, have also been described.
Interestingly, the only consistent clinical problem in these
patients is a propensity for disseminated infections by
Neisseria bacteria, including Neisseria meningitidis and
Neisseria gonorrhoeae. As mentioned earlier, complement-
mediated bacterial lysis is particularly important for
defense against these thin-walled organisms.
• Deﬁciencies in complement regulatory proteins are
associated with abnormal complement activation and a
variety of related clinical abnormalities.
○ Deﬁciencies in C1 INH and DAF cause hereditary
angioedema and paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria, respectively, mentioned earlier.
○ In patients with Factor I deﬁciency, plasma C3 is
depleted as a result of the unregulated formation of
ﬂuid-phase C3 convertase (by the normal tickover
p
y
mechanism). The clinical consequence is increased
infections with pyogenic bacteria.
○ Factor H deﬁciency is rare and is characterized by
excess alternative pathway activation, consumption of
C3, and glomerulonephritis caused by inadequate
clearance of immune complexes and renal deposition of
complement by-products.
○ A form of hemolytic-uremic syndrome involves
defective complement regulation, and the most
common mutations in this condition are in the Factor H
gene. Another gene that is mutated in some patients is
the MCP gene. In this disease, children present with
microangiopathic hemolytic anemia,
thrombocytopenia, and acute renal failure, all triggered
by endothelial cell injury caused by hyperactivation of
the alternative pathway of complement. Mutant Factor
H or MCP binds less well to C3b and C4b on
endothelial surfaces, and as a result there is excessive
complement activation, leading to the formation of
microthrombi and vascular damage.
○ Mutations in Factor I or Factor H result in unregulated
activation of the alternative complement pathway and
kidney diseases collectively called C3
glomerulonephritis. This is similar to the eﬀects of an
autoantibody called C3 nephritic factor (C3NeF), which
is speciﬁc for alternative pathway C3 convertase
(C3bBb). C3NeF stabilizes C3bBb and protects the
complex from Factor H–mediated dissociation, which
results in unregulated activation of C3.
○ Speciﬁc allelic variants of Factor H are associated with
age-related macular degeneration. Excessive
inﬂammation in the absence of complement regulation
contributes to the disruption of photoreceptor cells in
the macular region and consequent blindness.
○ Mutations in the PIG-A (phosphatidylinositol
glycosyltransferase-A) gene result in paroxysmal
g y
y
g
p
y
nocturnal hemoglobinuria, as discussed earlier, as a
result of defective GPI anchors for CD59 and DAF.
• Deﬁciencies in complement receptors include the absence
of CR3 and CR4, both resulting from rare mutations in the β
chain (CD18) that is shared by the CD11/CD18 family of
integrin molecules. The disease caused by this gene defect
is called leukocyte adhesion deﬁciency (see Chapter 21).
This disorder is characterized by recurrent pyogenic
infections and is caused by inadequate adherence of
neutrophils to endothelium at tissue sites of infection and
perhaps by impaired iC3b-dependent phagocytosis of
bacteria.
Pathologic Effects of the Complement
System
Even when it is properly regulated and appropriately activated, the
complement system can cause signiﬁcant tissue damage. Some of
the pathologic eﬀects associated with bacterial infections may be
due to complement-mediated acute inﬂammatory responses to
infectious organisms. In some situations, complement activation is
associated with intravascular thrombosis and can lead to ischemic
injury to tissues. For instance, antiendothelial antibodies against
vascularized organ transplants and the immune complexes
produced in autoimmune diseases may bind to vascular
endothelium and activate complement, thereby leading to
inﬂammation and generation of the MAC with damage to the
endothelial surface, which favors coagulation. There is also
evidence that some of the late complement proteins may activate
prothrombinases in the circulation that initiate thrombosis
independent of MAC-mediated damage to endothelium
The clearest examples of complement-mediated pathologic
conditions are immune complex–mediated diseases. Systemic
vasculitis and immune complex glomerulonephritis result from the
deposition of antigen-antibody complexes in the walls of blood
vessels and kidney glomeruli (see Chapter 19). Complement
activated by these deposited immune complexes initiates the acute
inﬂammatory responses that destroy the vessel walls or glomeruli
and lead to thrombosis, ischemic damage to tissues, and scarring.
Studies with knockout mice lacking the complement proteins C3 or
C4 or lacking Fcγ receptors suggest that Fc receptor–mediated
leukocyte activation may also cause inﬂammation and tissue injury
as a result of IgG deposition, even in the absence of complement
activation.
Two therapeutic agents that target the complement system are
currently approved for clinical use. Antibodies against human C5
that block the proteolytic cleavage of C5 are used to treat
paroxysmal 
nocturnal 
hemoglobinuria, 
complement-mediated
hemolytic uremic syndrome, and neuromyelitis optica and are also
being investigated as a therapeutic in a number of chronic
inﬂammatory disorders. Recombinant human C1 INH is used to
treat patients with hereditary angioedema.
Evasion of Complement by Microbes
Pathogens have evolved diverse mechanisms for evading the
complement system. Some microbes express thick cell walls that
prevent the binding of complement proteins, such as the MAC.
Gram-positive bacteria and some fungi are examples of microbes
that use this relatively nonspeciﬁc evasion strategy. A few of the
more speciﬁc mechanisms used by selected pathogens will be
considered here. These evasion mechanisms may be divided into
three groups.
• Microbes can evade the complement system by recruiting
host complement regulatory proteins. Many pathogens, in
contrast to nonpathogenic microbes, express sialic acids,
which can inhibit the alternative pathway of complement by
recruiting Factor H, which displaces C3b from Bb. Some
pathogens, like schistosomes, N. gonorrhoeae, and certain
Haemophilus species, scavenge sialic acids from the host
and enzymatically transfer the sugar to their cell surfaces.
Others, including Escherichia coli K1 and some
meningococci, have evolved special biosynthetic routes for
sialic acid generation. Some microbes synthesize proteins
that can recruit the regulatory protein Factor H to the cell
surface. GP41 on human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) can
bind to Factor H, and this property of the virus is believed
to contribute to virion protection. Many other pathogens
have evolved proteins that facilitate the recruitment of
Factor H to their cell walls. These include bacteria such as
Streptococcus pyogenes, Borrelia burgdorferi (the causative
agent of Lyme disease), N. gonorrhoeae, and N. meningitidis;
the fungal pathogen Candida albicans; and nematodes, such
as Echinococcus granulosus. Other microbes, such as HIV,
incorporate multiple host regulatory proteins into their
envelopes. For instance, HIV incorporates the GPI-anchored
complement regulatory proteins DAF and CD59 when it
buds from an infected cell.
• A number of pathogens produce proteins that inhibit diﬀerent
steps in complement activation.  E. coli makes a C1q-binding
protein that inhibits the association of C1q, C1r, and C1s.
Staphylococcus aureus makes a protein called staphylococcal
complement inhibitor that binds to and stably inhibits both
the classical and alternative pathway C3 convertases and
thus inhibits all three complement pathways. Glycoprotein
C1 of the herpes simplex virus destabilizes the alternative
pathway convertase by preventing its C3b component from
binding to properdin. GP160, a membrane protein on
Trypanosoma cruzi, the causative agent of Chagas disease,
binds to C3b and prevents the formation of the C3
convertase and also accelerates its decay. Vaccinia virus
complement inhibitory protein structurally resembles
human C4BP but can bind to both C4b and C3b and
accelerate the decay of both C3 and C5 convertases.
• Complement-mediated inﬂammation also can be inhibited by
microbial products.  S. aureus synthesizes a protein called
p
y
p
chemokine inhibitory protein of staphylococci (CHIPS),
which is an antagonist of the C5a anaphylatoxin.
Summary
• Humoral immunity is mediated by antibodies and is the
eﬀector arm of the adaptive immune system responsible for
defense against extracellular microbes and microbial toxins.
The antibodies that provide protection against infection
may be produced by long-lived plasma cells generated by
the ﬁrst exposure to microbial antigen or by reactivation of
memory B cells by the antigen.
• Antibodies block, or neutralize, the infectivity of microbes
by binding to the microbes and sterically hindering
interactions of the microbes with cellular receptors.
Antibodies similarly block the pathologic actions of toxins
by preventing binding of the toxins to host cells.
• Antibody-coated (opsonized) particles are phagocytosed by
binding of the Fc portions of the antibodies to phagocyte Fc
receptors. There are several types of Fc receptors speciﬁc for
diﬀerent subclasses of IgG and for IgA and IgE antibodies,
and diﬀerent Fc receptors bind the antibodies with varying
aﬃnities. AĴachment of antigen-complexed Ig to phagocyte
Fc receptors also delivers signals that stimulate the
microbicidal activities of phagocytes.
• The complement system consists of serum and membrane
proteins that interact in a highly regulated manner to
produce biologically active products. The three major
pathways of complement activation are the alternative
pathway, which is activated on microbial surfaces in the
absence of antibody; the classical pathway, which is
activated by antigen-antibody complexes; and the lectin
pathway, which is initiated by circulating lectins binding to
carbohydrates on pathogens. These pathways generate
enzymes that cleave the C3 protein, and cleaved products of
C3 become covalently aĴached to microbial surfaces or
antibodies, so subsequent steps of complement activation
are limited to these sites. All pathways converge on the
common set of late steps, which involve the proteolytic
cleavage of C5 and culminate in the formation of a
membrane pore.
• Complement activation is regulated by various plasma and
cell membrane proteins that inhibit diﬀerent steps in the
cascades.
• The biologic functions of the complement system include
opsonization of organisms and immune complexes by
proteolytic fragments of C3, followed by binding to
phagocyte receptors for complement fragments and
phagocytic clearance; activation of inﬂammatory cells by
proteolytic fragments of complement proteins called
anaphylatoxins (C3a, C4a, C5a); cytolysis mediated by
membrane aĴack complex formation on cell surfaces;
solubilization and clearance of immune complexes; and
enhancement of humoral immune responses.
Selected Readings
∗Indicates publications of historical interest, generally reporting
the discovery of a phenomenon or process that was later shown to
be of fundamental importance in the immune system. Many (but
not all) of these discoveries led to Nobel Prizes for the
discoverer(s). The nature of the discovery is summarized brieﬂy in
each reference.
Antibody Effector Functions and Fc Receptors
∗Berken A, Benacerraf B. Properties of antibodies cytophilic for macrophages.  J Exp Med
. 1966;123:119–144 (This was the ﬁrst report that recognized the existence of Fc receptors.).
Bournazos S, Wang T.T, Dahan R, et al. Signaling by antibodies: recent progress.  Annu Rev
Immunol . 2017;35:285–311.
Castro-Dopico T, Clatworthy M.R. IgG and Fc gamma receptors in intestinal immunity and
inﬂammation.  Front Immunol . 2019;10:805.
Chenoweth A.M, Wines B.D, Anania J.C, Mark Hogarth P. Harnessing the immune system
via FcγR function in immune therapy: a pathway to next-gen MAbs.  Immunol Cell Biol
. 2020;98:287–304.
de Taeye S.W, Rispens T, Vidarsson G. The ligands for human IgG and their eﬀector
functions.  Antibodies (Basel) . 2019;8:30.
Lu L.L, Suscovich T.J, Fortune S.M, Alter G. Beyond binding: antibody eﬀector functions in
infectious diseases.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2018;18:46–61.
Seeling M, Bruckner C, Nimmerjahn F. Diﬀerential antibody glycosylation in
autoimmunity: sweet biomarker or modulator of disease activity?  Nat Rev Rheumatol
. 2017;13:621–630.
Wang T.T, Ravetch J.V. Functional diversiﬁcation of IgGs through Fc glycosylation.  J Clin
Invest . 2019;129:3492–3498.
Complement
∗Bordet J. On the agglutination and dissolution of red blood cells by the serum of animals
injected with deﬁbrinated blood.  Ann Inst Pasteur . 1898;12:688–695 (In this study a
serum component other than antibody that helped antibodies cause the lysis of red blood cells,
later to be called “complement,” was discovered. Bordet received the Nobel prize for this
discovery.).
Garcia B.L, Zwarthoﬀ S.A, Rooijakkers S.H, Geisbrecht B.V. Novel evasion mechanisms of
the classical complement pathway.  J Immunol . 2016;197:2051–2060.
Goldberg B.S, Ackerman M.E. Antibody-mediated complement activation in pathology and
protection.  Immunol Cell Biol . 2020;98:305–317.
Haapasalo K, Meri S. Regulation of the complement system by pentraxins.  Front Immunol
. 2019;10:1750.
Liszewski M.K, Java A, Schramm E.C, Atkinson J.P. Complement dysregulation and
disease: insights from contemporary genetics.  Annu Rev Pathol . 2017;12:25–52.
Presumey J, Bialas A.R, Carroll M.C. Complement system in neural synapse elimination in
development and disease.  Adv Immunol . 2017;135:53–79.
Reis E.S, Mastellos D.C, Hajishengallis G, Lambris J.D. New insights into the immune
functions of complement.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2019;19:503–516.
Ricklin D, Lambris J.D. New milestones ahead in complement-targeted therapy.  Semin
Immunol . 2016;28:208–222.
Xie C.B, Jane-Wit D, Pober J.S. Complement membrane aĴack complex: new roles,
mechanisms of action, and therapeutic targets.  Am J Pathol . 2020;190:1138–1150.
Chapter 14: Specialized
Immunity at Epithelial Barriers
and in Immune Privileged
Tissues 
General Features of Immunity at Epithelial Barriers,
Immunity In The Gastrointestinal System,
Innate Immunity in the Gastrointestinal Tract,
Adaptive Immunity in the Gastrointestinal Tract,
Regulation of Immunity in the Gastrointestinal
Tract by Regulatory T Cells and Cytokines,
Oral Tolerance and Oral Vaccines,
The Role of the Commensal Microbiome in
Immune Regulation,
Immunity in Other Mucosal Tissues,
Immunity in the Respiratory System,
Immunity in the Genitourinary System,
The Cutaneous Immune System,
Innate and Adaptive Immune Responses in the
Skin,
Immune-Privileged Tissues,
Immune Privilege in the Eye, Brain, and Testis,
Immunity in the Mammalian Fetus and Newborn,
Immune Privilege of the Mammalian Fetus,
Passive Immunity in the Fetus and Newborn,
Summary,
Most of our discussion of innate and adaptive immunity so far in
this book has covered features and mechanisms of immune
responses in any anatomic location in the body. However, the
immune system has evolved specialized properties in diﬀerent
parts of the body, especially in epithelial barrier tissues. These
features are essential for protection against the types of microbial
challenges that are most often encountered at these locations, and
they also ensure that we live in harmony with nonpathogenic
commensal organisms that colonize epithelial surfaces of the skin
and the lumens of mucosal organs (Table 14.1). The collection of the
immune cells and molecules serving specialized functions at a
particular anatomic location is called a regional immune system.
Most of this chapter is devoted to a discussion of these regional
immune systems. We end with a consideration of some tissues that
do not normally support and may actively suppress immune
responses and are said to be immune privileged.
General Features of Immunity at Epithelial
Barriers
Regional immune systems include the mucosal immune systems,
which 
protect 
the 
gastrointestinal, 
bronchopulmonary, 
and
genitourinary mucosal barriers, and the cutaneous (skin) immune
system. The gastrointestinal immune system is the largest and most
complex. The intestinal mucosa of an adult human is estimated to
contain approximately 50 × 109 lymphocytes (Table 14.2), and more
antibody is made in the intestines than in all other parts of the
immune system combined. The dedication of so many immune
system resources to the gut reﬂects the large surface area of the
intestinal mucosa, which has evolved to maximize the primary
absorptive function of the tissue, but must also resist invasion by
trillions of bacteria in the lumen. The skin is also a barrier tissue
with vast surface area that must be protected from the
environmental microbes that have ready access to the external
lining. The total number of lymphocytes in the skin of an adult is
estimated to be 20 × 109, about twice the total number of circulating
lymphocytes (see Table 14.2). The diﬀerent physical features of the
mucosa (soft, wet, and warm) and the skin (tough, dry, and cool)
favor colonization and invasion by diﬀerent types of microbes.
Therefore, it is not surprising that the immune system is
specialized in diﬀerent ways in these two types of tissues.
The immune systems at epithelial barriers share a basic anatomic
organization, with an outer epithelial layer that prevents microbial
invasion, underlying connective tissue containing various cell types
that mediate immune responses to organisms that do invade through
the epithelium, and local or more distant draining secondary
lymphoid tissues where adaptive immune responses to invading
microbes develop. The epithelial barrier may be several layers thick,
as in the skin, or a single layer siĴing on a basement membrane, as
in the intestines. The underlying connective tissue, such as the
dermis in the skin and the lamina propria in the gut, contains
numerous 
scaĴered 
lymphocytes, 
dendritic 
cells 
(DCs),
macrophages, and other cells that mediate innate immune
responses and the eﬀector phase of adaptive immune responses.
Mucosal tissues also contain unencapsulated but organized
secondary lymphoid tissues just under the epithelial barrier, which
include B and T lymphocytes, DCs, and macrophages. These
collections of immune cells, often called mucosa-associated
lymphoid tissue (MALT), are sites of development of some
adaptive immune responses specialized for the particular mucosa.
Adaptive immune responses in epithelial barrier immune systems
are also induced in draining lymph nodes that are located outside
the barrier tissues. In skin and mucosal tissues, antigens outside
the epithelial barrier are sampled by specialized cells within the
epithelium and are delivered to draining lymph nodes or MALT.
Table 14.1
Table 14.2
Estimated Numbers of Lymphocytes in Different Human Tissues
Spleen
70 × 109
Lymph nodes
190 × 109
Bone marrow
50 × 109
Blood
10 × 109
Skin
20 × 109
Intestines
50 × 109
Liver
10 × 109
Lungs
30 × 109
Regional immune systems contain specialized cell types and
molecules that may not be abundant in other sites. The cell types
that are restricted to one or more regional immune systems but are
not present throughout the immune system include subsets of DCs
(e.g., Langerhans cells in the skin), antigen transport cells (e.g.,
microfold [M] cells in the gut), T lymphocytes (e.g., γδ T cells in
epithelia), subsets of B lymphocytes (e.g., immunoglobulin A [IgA]-
producing B cells and plasma cells in mucosal tissues), and various
innate lymphoid cells (ILCs). The unique anatomic features and cell
types in each tissue endow that tissue with special functional
characteristics. For example, the sampling of antigens in the gut
and their transport to secondary lymphoid organs rely on cell types
and routes of lymphatic drainage that are diﬀerent from what takes
place in the skin or internal organs. Furthermore, the MALT
structures in various regions of the gut and in other mucosal organs
have distinct features.
The eﬀector lymphocytes that are generated in the draining lymph
nodes of a particular regional immune system (e.g., skin or small
intestine) will enter the blood and preferentially home back to the
same organ (e.g., dermis or lamina propria, respectively). The
migration and localization of subsets of lymphocytes to diﬀerent
tissues is in part a result of tissue-speciﬁc homing mechanisms that
direct these subsets from the blood into particular tissues, which
we will discuss in detail later in this chapter.
FIGURE 14.1  The gastrointestinal immune system.
A, Schematic diagram of the cellular components
of the mucosal immune system in the intestine.
The main features include an epithelial barrier
covered by secreted mucus, dendritic cells (DCs)
and microfold (M) cells that sample antigens, Tuft
cells that respond to helminths by secreting
cytokines, various innate sentinel cells, and
lymphocytes in the lamina propria beneath the
epithelial layer, organized mucosal-associated
lymphoid tissues beneath the epithelial barrier,
such as Peyer’s patches, draining mesenteric
lymph nodes, and plasma cells beneath the
epithelium that secrete immunoglobulin A (IgA),
which is transported into the lumen. Details of
antigen sampling by DCs and M cells, the
structure of Peyer’s patches, migration of
lymphocytes between mucosa and mesenteric
lymph nodes, and the secretion and transport of
IgA are all described in detail in this chapter. B,
Photomicrograph of mucosal lymphoid tissue in
the human intestine. Similar aggregates of
lymphoid tissue are found throughout the
gastrointestinal tract.
Regional immune systems have important regulatory functions
that prevent unwanted responses to nonpathogenic microbes and
foreign substances that are likely to be present at diﬀerent barriers.
The clearest example is the gut-associated immune system, which
must suppress responses to commensal bacteria that colonize the
intestinal lumen, as well as to foreign food substances, but must
respond to pathogenic bacteria, which will be present in much
fewer numbers than the commensals. The suppression of immune
responses to nonpathogenic organisms and harmless foreign
substances is also important in other sites of the body, including
the skin, lung, and genitourinary tract, which are not sterile and are
constantly exposed to the environment.
With this introduction, we will discuss the details of these
various features in diﬀerent regional immune systems, beginning
with the largest.
Immunity in the Gastrointestinal System
The gastrointestinal system, like other mucosal tissues, is
composed of a tube-like structure lined by a continuous epithelial
cell layer siĴing on a basement membrane that serves as a physical
barrier to the external environment. Underlying the epithelium is a
layer of loose connective tissue called the lamina propria that
contains blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, and MALTs (Fig. 14.1).
The submucosa is a dense connective tissue layer between the
mucosa and the layers of smooth muscle.
From the perspective of the immunologist, the gastrointestinal
tract has several remarkable properties. First, the combined mucosa
of the small and large bowel has a total surface area of more than
200 m2 (the size of a tennis court), most of which is accounted for
by the small intestinal villi and microvilli. Second, the lumen of the
gut is teeming with microbes, many of which are ingested along
with food and most of which are continuously growing in the
lumen as commensals in healthy individuals. It is estimated that
more than 500 to 1000 diﬀerent species of bacteria, amounting to
approximately 1014 cells, live in the mammalian gut, about equal to
the total number of all the human cells in the body, or about 10
times the number of nucleated human cells in the body (∼90% of
human cells are the anucleate red blood cells). There are about
600,000 genes in the human gut microbiome, 30 times more than all
the genes in the human genome. These ratios have prompted
microbiologists to point out that we are actually more bacterial
than human! Humans have evolved to depend on these
commensals for several functions, including the degradation of
components of our diet that our own cells cannot digest. These
commensals also compete with potentially pathogenic microbes in
the gut and prevent harmful infections. Although the commensal
organisms are beneﬁcial when they are contained on the outside of
the gut mucosal barrier, they are potentially injurious if they cross
the mucosal barrier and enter the circulation or traverse the bowel
wall, especially in immune-compromised individuals. Furthermore,
noncommensal pathogenic organisms may become part of the
diverse mixture of organisms that make up the gut ﬂora at any time
if they are ingested in contaminated food or water. These
pathogenic organisms, including bacteria, viruses, protozoa, and
helminthic parasites, can cause signiﬁcant disease, even if they
represent a tiny fraction of the microbes in the gut lumen. For
health to be maintained, the mucosal immune system must be able
to recognize and eliminate these numerically rare pathogens in the
presence of great numbers of nonpathogenic microbes. Third, the
gut is constantly exposed to nonmicrobial foreign substances in
ingested food and normally does not mount immune responses
against these.
These challenges have been met by the evolution of a complex set
of innate and adaptive immune recognition strategies and eﬀector
mechanisms. Overall, intestinal immunity protects us against
infections while allowing the persistence of commensal microbes.
The gut prevents infections in three major ways:
1. The presence of a thick mucus layer keeps most organisms
in the lumen away from the intestinal epithelium.
2. Antibiotic peptides produced by intestinal epithelial cells
kill pathogens in the lumen or reduce their entry into the
epithelium.
3. IgA, produced by plasma cells in the lamina propria, is
transported into the lumen and neutralizes pathogens
before they can enter through the epithelium.
The gastrointestinal immune system has to constantly maintain a
balance between defense against intestinal pathogens and
tolerance to commensals and food antigens. Only some of the
mechanisms responsible for this equilibrium are understood.
Unfortunately, intestinal infections by pathogenic organisms are
frequently not controlled by mucosal immunity and account for
millions of deaths each year throughout the world. Many of the
features of the gastrointestinal immune system are shared by other
mucosal tissues, and we will point out these common features of
mucosal immunity.
Innate Immunity in the Gastrointestinal Tract
Intestinal epithelial cells lining the small and large bowel are an
integral part of the gastrointestinal innate immune system, involved
in responses to pathogens and antigen sampling for delivery to the
adaptive immune system in the gut. There are several diﬀerent types
of intestinal epithelial cells, all derived from a common precursor
found in the crypts of intestinal glands. Among these are the
mucus-secreting goblet cells, which reside at the top of the
intestinal villi; antigen-sampling M cells, found in specialized dome
structures overlying lymphoid tissues; and anti-bacterial peptide–
secreting Paneth cells, found at the boĴom of the crypts (see Fig.
14.1). All of these cell types contribute in diﬀerent ways to the
barrier function of the mucosa, as we will discuss later.
Innate immune protection in the gut is mediated in part by the
physical and chemical barrier provided by the mucosal epithelial
cells and their mucus secretions. Adjacent intestinal epithelial cells
are held together by proteins that form tight junctions, which block
the movement of microbes between the cells into the lamina
propria. In addition, mucosal epithelial cells produce antimicrobial
substances, including defensins (see Chapter 4). Several cell types
located 
in 
the 
mucosa, 
including 
epithelial 
cells, 
DCs,
macrophages, and ILCs, are capable of mounting inﬂammatory and
antiviral responses. Most of these responses are induced by paĴern
recognition receptor engagement by microbial ligands, which we
discussed in Chapter 4.
Several diﬀerent extensively glycosylated proteins, called mucins,
are secreted by goblet cells and form a viscous physical barrier that
prevents microbes from contacting the epithelial lining of the
gastrointestinal tract. Mucins contain many diﬀerent O-linked
oligosaccharides 
and 
include 
secreted 
and 
cell 
surface
glycoproteins. Most of the intestinal mucus layer is composed of
MUC2, which forms a hydrated gel ranging from 300 to 700 µm in
thickness. In the small bowel, the mucus forms a single layer, and
most of the bacteria are in the outer portion of the mucus.
Therefore, bacteria rarely make direct contact with small intestine
epithelial cells except at the tips of villi that extend toward the top
of the mucus layer. In contrast, colonic mucosa has two layers: an
outer less-dense layer that is colonized by bacteria and an inner
denser layer that is aĴached to the epithelium and is bacteria-free.
These mucus layers also serve as a matrix for display of
antimicrobial substances produced by the epithelial cells. Some
p
y
p
mucins act as decoy molecules that can be shed from the epithelial
cells and bind to the adhesin proteins that pathogenic bacteria use
to aĴach to host cell membranes. In addition to the secreted mucus,
the apical surface of gastrointestinal epithelial cells is coated with
membrane-bound mucin proteins, which combine with various
glycolipids to form the glycocalyx. This is a dense macromolecular
layer, which ranges from 30 to 500 nm in thickness in diﬀerent
locations in the gut. The glycocalyx, like the secreted mucus, serves
as a physical barrier to prevent microbial contact.
The mucus barrier of the intestine undergoes turnover and
chemical changes in response to various environmental and immune
signals, which allow rapid increases in mucosal barrier function.
Mucins are constitutively produced by the goblet cells in the
gastrointestinal epithelium and by the submucosal glands. They are
replaced by newly synthesized molecules every 6 to 12 hours, and
many liters of mucus are secreted each day in the adult gut. Several
diﬀerent environmental and immune stimuli can induce dramatic
increases in mucin production. These stimuli include cytokines
(interleukin-1 [IL-1], IL-4, IL-6, IL-9, IL-13, tumor necrosis factor
[TNF], and type I interferons), neutrophil products (such as
elastase), and microbial adhesive proteins. These stimuli not only
increase mucin gene expression but also alter the glycosylation of
the mucins because of induced changes in the expression of
glycosyltransferase enzymes. The changes in quantity and
glycosylation of mucins are thought to increase barrier function
against pathogens.
Defensins produced by intestinal epithelial cells provide innate
immune protection against luminal bacteria. Defensins are peptides
produced by various cell types in the body that exert lethal toxic
eﬀects on microbes by inserting into and causing loss of integrity of
their outer phospholipid membranes (see Chapter 4). In the small
bowel, the major defensins are the α-defensins, including human
defensin 5 (HD5) and HD6, produced constitutively as inactive
precursor proteins by Paneth cells located at the base of crypts
between microvilli. Active HD5 and HD6 peptides are generated by
proteolytic cleavage by trypsin, which is also produced by Paneth
p
y
g
y
yp
p
y
cells. In the colon, β-defensins are produced by absorptive
epithelial cells in the intestinal crypts, some constitutively and
others in response to IL-1 or invasive bacteria. In addition,
neutrophil granules are rich in α-defensins, which likely contribute
to their antimicrobial functions in the seĴing of infections of the
bowel wall.
Paneth cells and other epithelial cells of the intestine also secrete
C-type lectins called regenerating islet-derived proteins (REGIIIs),
which block bacterial colonization of the epithelial surface. REGIIIγ
in mice and its human homolog REGIIIα bind to gram-positive
bacterial peptidoglycan and have bactericidal eﬀects.
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and cytoplasmic NOD-like receptors
(NLRs) expressed by intestinal epithelial cells promote immune
responses to invasive pathogens, but also limit inﬂammatory
responses to commensal bacteria. As we discussed in Chapter 4,
TLRs and NLRs are cellular receptors that recognize pathogen-
associated molecular paĴerns (PAMPs) produced by microbes and
generate signals that promote inﬂammatory and antiviral responses
by the cells. Most luminal bacteria of the gut are nonpathogenic if
they are retained outside the epithelial barrier, yet they may
express the same array of PAMPs that pathogenic bacteria express,
such as lipopolysaccharide, peptidoglycans, CpG DNA, and
ﬂagellin. Intestinal epithelial cells express a wide range of TLRs,
including TLRs 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 9, with diﬀerent receptors expressed
in diﬀerent regions of the gut. Ligation of some TLRs results in the
phosphorylation and reorganization of tight junction proteins
causing increased strength of the junctions between epithelial cells.
TLR signaling also increases intestinal epithelial motility and
proliferation. TLR signaling stimulates the secretion of defensins,
REGIII lectins, and IgA, all of which will prevent bacterial
transgression of the barrier.
Because inﬂammatory responses that involve the intestinal
epithelial cells can impair barrier function and can lead to bacterial
invasion and pathologic inﬂammation, it is not surprising that
stringent control mechanisms have evolved to limit innate immune
responses. TLR responses in the gut appear to be regulated in part
p
p
g
pp
g
p
by levels of expression or compartmentalized expression in only
certain sites. Several TLRs, including TLR5, which recognizes
bacterial ﬂagellins, and TLR4, which recognizes bacterial endotoxin,
are mainly expressed on the basolateral surface of intestinal
epithelial cells, where they will be accessible to bacteria that have
invaded through the barrier but not to commensal bacteria in the
lumen. Similarly, NLR family receptors for ﬂagellins (e.g., NAIP)
are expressed in the cytosol of intestinal epithelial cells and will
activate inﬂammatory responses only when pathogenic bacteria or
their products gain access to the cytosol. There is also evidence that
regulators of TLR signaling inside intestinal epithelial cells
maintain a higher threshold for activation of inﬂammatory
responses compared with epithelial cells and DCs in other tissues.
In healthy individuals, DCs and macrophages in the lamina
propria of the gut inhibit inﬂammation and maintain homeostasis.
Some intestinal macrophages have a unique phenotype that
enables them to phagocytose and kill microbes while secreting
antiinﬂammatory cytokines, such as IL-10. This phenotype is
apparently induced in the local mucosal environment by
transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β). TLR4 expression on both
macrophages and DCs in the lamina propria is lower than in other
tissues, and inﬂammatory gene expression in these cells is often
inhibited by microbial products. This may be a mechanism to
prevent damaging inﬂammation in response to commensal bacteria
and bacterial products that traverse the epithelial barrier.
ILCs in the intestinal mucosa contribute to immune defense
against bacteria and parasites, promote epithelial barrier function,
and may suppress responses to commensal bacteria. ILCs do not
express T cell antigen receptors (TCRs), but rather respond to local
cytokine cues by secreting eﬀector cytokines, and subsets of ILCs
exist that secrete cytokines typical of helper T cell subsets (see
Chapters 2 and 4). Some of the cytokines that activate ILCs are
referred to as alarmins because they are released by epithelial cells
in response to injury or microbes and serve as an alarm for the
immune system. Most of the ILC3s in the body are found in the gut.
In response to IL-1 (an alarmin) and IL-23, ILC3s secrete IL-17 and
p
IL-22. IL-17 promotes acute inﬂammatory response to the microbes,
and both IL-17 and IL-22 enhance intestinal mucosal barrier
function by stimulating production of defensins and by enhancing
epithelial tight junction function. Studies in mice show that ILC2s
play an important role in intestinal innate immunity against
helminths. In response to the alarmin cytokine IL-33 released by
stressed or damaged epithelial cells and the epithelium-derived
cytokine IL-25, ILC2s secrete IL-5 and IL-13. IL-5 activates
eosinophils, which secrete enzymes that degrade the outer
integument of helminths, and IL-13 increases mucus production,
contributing to expulsion of the worms. A specialized intestinal
epithelial cell type called the tuft cell is activated by helminths and
other microbes to secrete abundant IL-25, which stimulates ILC2s
to secrete IL-13, which in turn stimulates the diﬀerentiation of
mucus-secreting goblet cells and more tuft cells from intestinal
crypt stem cells.
ILC function in the intestinal mucosa is regulated in part by the
autonomic nervous system. Experimental evidence from mouse
studies shows that ILCs in the gut are stimulated by neuropeptides
made by enteric neurons in the gut wall and inhibited by
neurotransmiĴers produced by sympathetic neurons innervating
the gut. Most of the evidence for neuronal regulation of ILCs has
focused on ILC2s. Many enteric neurons produce neuropeptides,
including 
neuromedin 
U 
and 
vasointestinal 
peptide, 
and
production of these molecules increases after intestinal helminth
infections. Both of these peptides can strongly and rapidly
stimulate ILC2s to secrete IL-5 and IL-13, thereby enhancing
antihelminthic immunity. Conversely, norepinephrine produced by
intestinal sympathetic neurons inhibits ILC2 production of IL-5
and IL-13, which may serve to downregulate the inﬂammatory
response after parasite elimination. Enteric glial cells, which are
closely associated with enteric neurons, secrete ligands for a
signaling receptor expressed on intestinal ILC3s called RET. The
RET ligands derived from the glial cells stimulate IL-22 production
by ILC3s, which promotes integrity of the intestinal epithelial
barrier.
Mucosa-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells are speciﬁc for
vitamin B metabolites generated by intestinal bacteria and fungi.
Most human MAIT cells are in the liver and thus are in a position to
respond to microbes delivered there from the gut via the portal
circulation. These cells are described in Chapter 10.
Adaptive Immunity in the Gastrointestinal
Tract
The adaptive immune system in the gastrointestinal tract has
features that are distinct from adaptive immune systems in other
organs.
• The major form of adaptive immunity in the gut is humoral
immunity directed at microbes in the lumen. This function is
mediated mostly by dimeric IgA antibodies that are
secreted into the lumen of the gut or, in the case of breast-
feeding infants, IgA that is secreted into colostrum and
mother’s milk and ingested by the infant. The antibody in
the lumen binds to commensals and pathogens and
prevents them from invading through the mucosal
epithelial barrier and colonizing the tissues.
• The dominance of IgA in mucosal secretions, especially in the
gut, is because B cells activated in lymph nodes draining
mucosa or in mucosal lymphoid tissues tend to undergo class
switching to IgA and IgA-producing B cells tend to home to
the gut. We will discuss the mechanisms underlying both of
these unusual features of mucosal B cells later.
• Protective cell-mediated immune responses against microbes
in the gut are mediated by helper T cells. Th17 cells are the
most numerous eﬀector T cell subset in the intestinal
mucosa, but Th1 and Th2 cells are also present.
• A major mechanism for controlling inﬂammatory reactions in
the gut is the activation of regulatory T cells (Tregs).
Nowhere else in the body is there such an extensive
commitment of the immune system to maintaining
tolerance to foreign antigens, including food antigens and
commensal microbial antigens. IL-10–producing Treg
subsets are more abundant in MALT than in other
lymphoid organs.
We will now discuss the special features of adaptive immunity in
the gastrointestinal system, including anatomic organization,
antigen sampling, lymphocyte homing and diﬀerentiation, and
antibody delivery to the lumen.
The Functional Anatomy of the Adaptive Immune System in the
Gastrointestinal Tract
Adaptive immune responses in the gut are initiated in discretely
organized collections of lymphocytes and antigen-presenting cells
closely associated with the mucosal epithelial lining of the bowel
and in mesenteric lymph nodes (see Fig. 14.1) . Naive lymphocytes
are exposed to antigens in these sites and diﬀerentiate into eﬀector
cells. These gut-associated lymphoid tissues adjacent to the
mucosal epithelium are sometimes referred to as GALT, which is
the gastrointestinal version of MALT, although the terms are often
used interchangeably. The most prominent GALT structures are
Peyer’s patches, found mainly under the epithelium in the distal
ileum, but there are many lymphoid follicles, either isolated or in
small aggregates, in the lamina propria of the appendix and colon.
Peyer’s patches have the structure of lymphoid follicles, with
germinal centers containing B lymphocytes, T follicular helper cells,
follicular dendritic cells, and macrophages. The germinal centers in
the follicles are surrounded by IgM- and IgD-expressing naive
follicular B cells. A region called the dome is located between the
follicles and the overlying epithelium and contains B and T
lymphocytes, DCs, and macrophages. Between the follicles are T
cell–rich parafollicular areas, similar to lymph nodes, but overall,
the ratio of B cells to T cells in GALT is about ﬁve times higher than
in lymph nodes. Distinct from lymph nodes, GALT structures are
not encapsulated, and antigen is delivered directly to these
p
g
y
structures, independent of lymphatics. Development of both
specialized lymphoid structures, such as Peyer’s patches, and
isolated follicles in the gut lamina propria requires lymphoid tissue
inducer cells, which are a subset of ILC3s that produce the cytokine
lymphotoxin-β (LTβ).
FIGURE 14.2  M cells in the small intestine.Microfold
(M) cells are specialized intestinal epithelial cells
found in the small bowel epithelium overlying
Peyer’s patches and lamina propria lymphoid
follicles (A). Unlike neighboring epithelial cells with
tall microvillus borders and primary absorptive
functions, M cells have shorter villi. They appear
sunken next to absorptive epithelial cells in the
scanning electron microscopic image shown in
(B). M cells engage in transport of intact microbes
or molecules across the mucosal barrier into gut-
associated lymphoid tissues, where they are
handed off to dendritic cells (C). 
Electron micrograph from Ohno H. Intestinal M cells. J Biochem.
2016;159:151–160.
Antigen may be delivered from the lumen to the GALT through
specialized cells within the gut epithelium called M cells (Fig. 14.2) .
M cells are located in regions of the gut epithelium called follicle-
associated (or dome) epithelium that overlie the domes of Peyer’s
patches and other GALT structures. Although M cells and the more
numerous absorptive epithelial cells likely arise from a common
epithelial precursor, the M cells are distinguishable by a thin
glycocalyx, relatively short, irregular microvilli (referred to as
microfolds), and large fenestrations in their membranes, all
features that enhance the uptake of antigens from the gut lumen.
Unlike the absorptive epithelium, the follicle-associated epithelium
where M cells are located has a paucity of both mucus-secreting
goblet cells and defensin-secreting Paneth cells and reduced ability
to transport IgA into the lumen. These features of M cells facilitate
their close association with luminal microbial antigens. The main
function of M cells is transcellular transport of various substances
from the lumen of the intestine across the epithelial barrier to
underlying antigen-presenting cells. M cells take up luminal
contents eﬃciently and in various ways, including phagocytosis in a
manner similar to macrophages, and vesicular endocytosis or ﬂuid-
phase pinocytosis. M cells express various surface molecules that
bind microbial structures and mediate their uptake; one example is
glycoprotein 2, which binds type I pili on gram-negative bacteria in
the gut and mediates uptake and delivery of these bacteria to
Peyer’s patches. These pathways enable uptake of whole bacteria,
viruses, and soluble microbial products. Unlike macrophages or
DCs, M cells do not engage in extensive processing of the
substances they take up, but rather move the particles and
molecules through endocytic vesicles across the cytosol and deliver
them by exocytosis at the basolateral membrane to DCs or B cells in
the dome regions of underlying Peyer’s patches and lamina propria
lymphoid follicles. Although M cells play an important role in
protective immunity to luminal microbes, some microbes have
evolved to take advantage of M cells as a route of invasion through
the mucosal barrier. The best described example of this is
Salmonella typhimurium, which is similar to the human pathogen
Salmonella typhi, the cause of typhoid fever. M cells express lectins
that allow these bacteria to speciﬁcally bind and be internalized.
The bacteria are toxic to the M cells, producing gaps in the
epithelium that promote invasion of more organisms. M cell lectins
also may be used by certain enteric viruses to breach the epithelial
barrier.
Mesenteric lymph nodes collect lymph-borne antigens from the
small and large intestines and are sites of diﬀerentiation of eﬀector
and regulatory lymphocytes that home back to the lamina propria.
There are 100 to 150 of these lymph nodes in the mesentery.
Mesenteric lymph nodes serve some of the same functions as
GALT, including diﬀerentiation of B cells into IgA-secreting plasma
cells and the development of eﬀector T cells as well as regulatory T
cells. The cells that diﬀerentiate in the mesenteric lymph nodes in
response to bowel wall invasion by pathogens or commensals often
home to the lamina propria (discussed later).
FIGURE 14.3  Homing properties of intestinal
lymphocytes.The gut-homing properties of
effector lymphocytes are imprinted in the lymphoid
tissues, where they have undergone differentiation
by naive precursors. Dendritic cells in gut-
associated lymphoid tissues (GALT), including
Peyer patches and mesenteric lymph nodes, are
induced by cytokines such as thymic stromal
lymphopoietin (TSLP) and other factors to
express retinaldehyde dehydrogenase (RALDH),
which converts dietary vitamin A into retinoic acid.
When naive B or T cells are activated by antigen
in GALT, they are exposed to retinoic acid
produced by the dendritic cells, and this induces
the expression of the chemokine receptor CCR9
and the integrin α4β7 on the plasmablasts and
effector T cells that arise from the naive
lymphocytes. The effector lymphocytes enter the
circulation and home back into the gut lamina
propria because the chemokine CCL25 (the ligand
for CCR9) and the mucosal addressin cell
adhesion molecule 1 (MAdCAM -1) (the ligand for
α4β7) are displayed on lamina propria venular
endothelial cells.
Lingual and palatine tonsils are unencapsulated lymphoid
structures located beneath stratiﬁed squamous epithelial mucosa in
the base of the tongue and oropharynx, respectively, and are sites of
immune responses to microbes in the oral cavity. These tonsils,
together with nasopharyngeal tonsils (also called adenoids), form a
ring of lymphoid tissue called Waldeyer’s ring. The bulk of the
tonsillar tissue is composed of lymphoid follicles, usually with
prominent germinal centers. The lingual and palatine tonsils are
separated from the microbe-rich oral cavity by multiple layers of
squamous epithelial cells, rather than the single columnar
epithelial cell layer that separates the intestinal lumen from other
GALT. There are numerous narrow and deep invaginations of the
surface squamous epithelium, called crypts, which grow into the
tonsillar follicular tissue. The lingual and palatine tonsils respond
to infections of the epithelial mucosa by signiﬁcant enlargement
and vigorous, mainly IgA, antibody responses. Typically, tonsillar
enlargement is caused by infection with streptococci and the
Epstein-Barr virus, often in children.
Eﬀector lymphocytes that are generated in the GALT and
mesenteric lymph nodes are imprinted with selective integrin- and
chemokine receptor–dependent gut-homing properties, and they
circulate from the blood back into the lamina propria of the gut (Fig.
14.3) . The functions of the gastrointestinal immune system depend
on a large number of T cells and antibody-secreting cells that are
able to recirculate back into the lamina propria and respond rapidly
to pathogens. Both eﬀector T cells and IgA-secreting B cells acquire
this gut-homing phenotype because of changes in adhesion
molecules and chemokine receptors that are acquired during
lymphocyte activation in the GALT or gut-draining lymph nodes.
The major integrin on gut-homing B and T lymphocytes is α4β7,
which binds to the MAdCAM-1 protein expressed on postcapillary
venular endothelial cells in the gut lamina propria. Gut homing
requires the chemokine receptor CCR9 on the B and T lymphocytes
and its chemokine ligand CCL25, which is produced by intestinal
epithelial cells. The combined expression of MAdCAM-1 on
endothelium and CCL25 in tissues is restricted to the gut. Homing
of IgA-producing cells to the colon also requires CCR10 expression
and the chemokine CCL28, but this is not a gut-speciﬁc pathway
because CCL28 is expressed by epithelial cells in other mucosal
tissues, such as the lung and genitourinary tract. Blocking
monoclonal antibodies that are speciﬁc for the α4 chain of α4β7
have been used to treat patients with inﬂammatory bowel disease
(IBD) on the basis of the knowledge that eﬀector T cells use this
integrin to enter gut tissues.
The gut-homing phenotype of IgA-producing B cells and eﬀector T
cells is imprinted by DCs through the action of retinoic acid during
the process of T cell activation (see Fig. 14.3) . In addition to
promoting naive T cell diﬀerentiation into eﬀector T cells and naive
B cell diﬀerentiation into IgA antibody–secreting cells (discussed
later), DCs in GALT and mesenteric lymph nodes also provide
signals that lead to the expression of the α4β7 integrin and CCR9 on
these eﬀector cells. The induction of these homing molecules
depends on secretion of retinoic acid by the DCs. Gut lymphoid
tissues are exposed to dietary vitamin A, and DCs in GALT and
mesenteric lymph nodes express retinaldehyde dehydrogenase
(RALDH), the enzyme needed for retinoic acid synthesis from
vitamin A, whereas DCs in other tissues do not. In addition,
intestinal epithelial cells express RALDH and can synthesize
retinoic acid. How retinoic acid induces expression of gut-homing
molecules is not known. Consistent with these properties of the
intestinal immune system, it is known that oral vaccination favors
the expansion of gut-homing IgA-producing B cells as compared
with intradermal immunization.
The lamina propria contains diﬀusely distributed eﬀector
lymphocytes, DCs, and macrophages and is the site of the eﬀector
phase of gastrointestinal adaptive immune responses. As discussed
previously, eﬀector lymphocytes generated in Peyer’s patches, other
GALT structures, and mesenteric lymph nodes home back into the
lamina propria. In this location, T cells can respond to invading
pathogens, and B cells can secrete antibodies that are transported
into the lumen and neutralize pathogens before they invade.
Humoral Immunity in the Gastrointestinal Tract
The major function of humoral immunity in the gastrointestinal tract
is to neutralize luminal microbes, and this function is mediated
mainly by IgA produced in the lamina propria and transported
across the mucosal epithelium into the lumen. Smaller quantities of
IgG and IgM are also secreted into the gut lumen. Within the
lumen, the antibodies bind to microbes and toxins and neutralize
them by preventing their binding to host cells. This form of
humoral immunity, sometimes called secretory immunity, has
evolved to be particularly prominent in mammals. Studies in mice
indicate that IgA responses are made to antigens expressed on only
a small fraction of all the commensal species in the gut, and these
are largely bacteria in the small intestine and not the colon. In
addition to speciﬁcally binding microbes, glycans in the secretory
component of IgA (discussed later) can bind to bacteria and reduce
their motility, thereby preventing them from reaching the epithelial
barrier. Patients with selective IgA deﬁciency often present with
gastrointestinal and respiratory infections (see Chapter 21). Beyond
a role in protective immunity, IgA may also facilitate small
intestinal colonization by “helpful” commensals, especially
Bacteroides species. One mechanism by which secreted IgA may
promote survival of certain bacterial species is that the glycans on
the Fc regions and the secretory piece serve as carbon sources for
the microbes. Antibody responses to antigens encountered by
ingestion are typically dominated by IgA, and secretory immunity
is the mechanism of protection induced by oral vaccines such as the
polio vaccine.
FIGURE 14.4  IgA-secreting plasma cells in the
intestine.The abundance of immunoglobulin A
(IgA)-producing plasma cells (green) in colon
mucosa compared with IgG-secreting cells (red)
is shown by immunofluorescence staining. IgA that
is being transcytosed by the crypt epithelial cells
is visualized in their cytoplasm (green fluorescent
stain). 
From Brandtzaeg P. The mucosal immune system and its
integration with the mammary glands. J Pediatr. 2010;156[Suppl.
1]:S8–S16.
IgA is produced in higher amounts than any other antibody
isotype. It is estimated that a normal 70-kg adult secretes about 2 g
of IgA per day, which accounts for 60% to 70% of the total
production of antibodies. This tremendous output of IgA is
because of the large number of IgA-producing plasma cells in the
GALT, which by some estimates account for 80% of all the
antibody-producing plasma cells in the body (Fig. 14.4). Because
IgA synthesis occurs mainly in mucosal lymphoid tissue and most
of the locally produced IgA is eﬃciently transported into the
mucosal lumen, this isotype constitutes less than one-quarter of the
antibody in plasma and is a minor component of systemic humoral
immunity compared with IgG.
Several unique properties of the gut environment result in
selective development of IgA-secreting cells that stay in the
gastrointestinal tract or, if they enter the circulation, home back to
the lamina propria of the intestines. The result is that IgA-secreting
cells eﬃciently accumulate next to the epithelium that will take up
the secreted IgA and transport it into the lumen.
The abundance of intestinal plasma cells that produce IgA is due in
part to selective induction of IgA isotype switching in B cells in
GALT and mesenteric lymph nodes. IgA class switching in the gut
can occur by T-dependent and T-independent mechanisms (Fig.
14.5). Studies in mice suggest that most of the IgA secreted into the
lumen is produced by T-independent mechanisms. In both T-
dependent and T-independent IgA class switching, two essential
steps are cytokine-induced transcription through the genomic IgA
locus, which opens up access to the enzymes needed for switch
recombination, and the induced expression of activation-induced
deaminase (AID), the enzyme that mediates switch recombination
(see Chapter 12). TGF-β is the major cytokine required for both T-
dependent and T-independent IgA isotype switching in the gut and
in other mucosal tissues. In the gut, TGF-β is produced by
epithelial cells and DCs in GALT. Furthermore, GALT DCs express
the αvβ8 integrin, which is required for activation of TGF-β. In T-
dependent IgA class switching, AID is induced in B cells by CD40
signaling, which is activated by CD40-ligand on T follicular helper
(TĢ) cells binding to CD40 on B cells that present antigen to the
TĢ cells (see Fig. 14.5A). In T-independent IgA class switching,
g
p
g
g
AID expression in B cells is induced by membrane and secreted
forms of the cytokines APRIL (a proliferation-inducing ligand) and
BAFF (B cell–activating factor), which are structurally related to
CD40L and bind to a CD40-related receptor on B cells called TACI
(transmembrane activator and calcium-modulating cyclophilin-
ligand interactor). APRIL and BAFF are produced by GALT DCs,
and intestinal epithelial cells produce APRIL in response to TLR
ligands made by commensal bacteria. Intestinal epithelial cells also
produce TSLP (thymic stromal lymphopoietin) in response to TLR
signals, and TSLP stimulates additional APRIL production by
GALT DCs. TLR ligands made by commensal bacteria in the gut
also increase expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase in DCs,
leading to nitric oxide production. Nitric oxide is thought to
promote both T-dependent and T-independent IgA class switching
by enhancing the expression of TGF-β receptors and APRIL.
Intestinal B cell IgA production is at least partly dependent on the
vitamin A metabolite all-trans retinoic acid, which is made by
intestinal epithelial cells and GALT DCs, although the mechanisms
by which retinoic acid promotes IgA production are not known.
Retinoic acid is also important in B cell homing to the gut, as
discussed earlier. There is an abundance of TGF-β and retinoic acid
within the GALT and mesenteric lymph nodes compared with
nonmucosal lymphoid tissues such as spleen and skin-draining
lymph nodes, largely accounting for the propensity of B cells in the
GALT to switch to IgA production.
FIGURE 14.5  IgA class switching in the
gut.Immunoglobulin A (IgA) class switching in the
gut occurs by both T-dependent and T-
independent mechanisms. A, In T-dependent IgA
class switching, dendritic cells in the subepithelial
dome of Peyer’s patches capture bacterial
antigens delivered by microfold (M) cells and
migrate to the interfollicular zone, where they
present antigen to naive CD4+ T cells. The
activated T cells differentiate into helper T cells
with a T follicular helper phenotype and engage in
cognate interactions with antigen-presenting IgM+
B cells that have also taken up and processed the
bacterial antigen. B cell class switching to IgA is
stimulated through T cell CD40L binding to B cell
CD40, together with the action of transforming
growth factor-β (TGF-β). This T cell–dependent
pathway yields high-affinity IgA antibodies. B, T-
independent IgA class switching involves dendritic
cell activation of IgM+ B cells, including B-1 cells.
Toll-like receptor (TLR) ligand–activated dendritic
cells secrete cytokines that induce IgA class
switching, including BAFF, APRIL, and TGF- β.
This T cell–independent pathway yields relatively
low-affinity IgA antibodies to intestinal bacteria.
The molecular mechanisms of class switching are
described in Chapter 12. APRIL, A proliferation-
inducing ligand; BAFF, B cell–activating factor;
PAMP, pathogen-associated molecular pattern.
IgA production in the gastrointestinal tract is further enhanced by
selective gut-homing properties of IgA-producing cells that arise in
GALT and mesenteric lymph nodes (see Fig. 14.3) . Some of the IgA
that is transported across the intestinal epithelium may be
produced by plasma cells that diﬀerentiated and remained within
underlying GALT follicles. However, IgA-secreting plasma cells are
widely dispersed in the lamina propria of the gastrointestinal tract,
not just in lymphoid follicles. As discussed earlier, activated B cells
that undergo isotype switching into IgA-producing cells in the
GALT and mesenteric lymph nodes may enter the systemic
circulation and then selectively home back to the intestinal lamina
propria, where they may reside as plasma cells.
Secreted IgA is transported through epithelial cells into the
intestinal lumen by an Fc receptor called the poly-Ig receptor (Fig.
14.6) . The IgA secreted by plasma cells in the lamina propria is in
the form of a dimer that is held together by the coordinately
produced J chain, which is covalently bound by disulﬁde bonds to
the Fc regions of the α heavy chains of two IgA molecules. Mucosal
plasma cells produce abundant J chain, more than plasma cells in
nonmucosal tissues, whereas serum IgA is usually a monomer
lacking the J chain. The dimeric IgA must be transported from the
lamina propria across the epithelium into the lumen. This function
is mediated by the poly-Ig receptor, an integral membrane
glycoprotein with ﬁve extracellular Ig domains. IgM produced by
lamina propria plasma cells is also a polymer (pentamer) associated
covalently with the J chain, and the poly-Ig receptor also transports
IgM into intestinal secretions. This is why this receptor is called the
poly-Ig receptor. This receptor is synthesized by mucosal epithelial
cells and is expressed on the basal and lateral surfaces of epithelial
cells. Its production can be increased by inﬂammatory stimuli.
Dimeric IgA (and pentameric IgM) secreted by plasma cells in
the lamina propria bind to the poly-Ig receptor on the basolateral
surface of mucosal epithelial cells through a domain of the J chain
(see Fig. 14.6). The antibody-receptor complex is endocytosed into
the epithelial cell, and unlike other endosomes that typically traﬃc
to lysosomes, poly Ig-receptor–containing vesicles are directed to
and fuse with the apical (luminal) plasma membrane of the
epithelial cell. On the apical cell surface, the poly-Ig receptor is
proteolytically cleaved, its transmembrane and cytoplasmic
domains are left aĴached to the epithelial cell, and the extracellular
domain of the receptor, carrying the IgA molecule, is released into
the intestinal lumen. This process of IgA transport across the
epithelium is called transcytosis. The cleaved part of the poly-Ig
receptor, called the secretory component, remains associated with
the dimeric IgA in the lumen. It is thought that the bound
secretory component protects IgA (and IgM) from proteolysis by
proteases present in the intestinal lumen, and these antibodies are
therefore able to serve their function of neutralizing microbes and
toxins in the lumen.
IgG is present in intestinal secretions at levels equal to those of
IgM but lower than those of IgA. In some mucosal secretions (i.e.,
in the rectum, genitourinary tract, and airways), IgG levels are quite
high. The transport of IgG into mucosal secretions may be
mediated by transcytosis via the neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn), which
we discussed in Chapters 5 and 13.
IgA produced in lymphoid tissues in the mammary gland is
secreted into colostrum and mature breast milk through poly-Ig
receptor–mediated transcytosis and mediates passive mucosal
immunity in breast-fed children. The human lactating mammary
gland contains a large number of IgA-secreting plasma cells, and
the mammary gland epithelium can store large quantities of
secretory IgA. The plasma cells in the breast may originate in
various MALTs. They home to the breast because most IgA
plasmablasts express CCR10, regardless of the lymphoid tissues in
which they were generated, and the breast tissues express CCL28,
the chemokine that binds CCR10. During breast-feeding, a child
ingests a signiﬁcant quantity of maternal IgA, which provides
broad polymicrobial protection in the infant’s gut. Moderate
amounts of IgG and IgM are also secreted into breast milk and
contribute to the passive immunity of breast-fed children. Many
epidemiologic studies have shown that breast-feeding signiﬁcantly
reduces the risk for diarrheal disease and sepsis, especially in
developing countries, and this correlates with the presence of
secretory IgA in breast milk speciﬁc for enterotoxic species of
bacteria including Escherichia coli and Campylobacter.
T Cell–Mediated Immunity in the Gastrointestinal Tract
T cells play important roles in protection against microbial
pathogens in the gastrointestinal system and in regulating
responses to food and commensal antigens. Furthermore, T cells
contribute to inﬂammatory diseases in the gastrointestinal tract. As
in other parts of the body, T cell immunity in the gut involves
diﬀerent subsets of T cells and is inﬂuenced in various ways by
antigen-presenting DCs, which also belong to diﬀerent subsets. In
this section, we will discuss important features of T cell and DC
functions in the intestines.
FIGURE 14.6  Transport of IgA across epithelial
cells.IgA is produced by plasma cells in the lamina
propria of mucosal tissue and binds to the poly-Ig
receptor at the base of an epithelial cell. The
complex is transported across the epithelial cell,
and the bound IgA is released into the lumen by
proteolytic cleavage. The process of transport
across the cell, from the basolateral to the luminal
surface in this case, is called transcytosis.
T cells are found within the gut epithelial layer, scaĴered
throughout the lamina propria and submucosa and around and
within follicles in Peyer’s patches and other GALT structures. In
humans, most of the intraepithelial T cells are CD8+ cells and only
about 10% of intraepithelial lymphocytes are γδ cells, which is still
higher than the percentages of γδ cells among T cells in other
tissues. In mice, about 50% of intraepithelial lymphocytes express
the γδ form of the TCR, similar to intraepidermal lymphocytes in
the skin. Both the αβ and the γδ TCR–expressing intraepithelial
lymphocytes have a limited diversity of antigen receptors, and thus
a limited range of speciﬁcities compared to most T cells. This
restricted repertoire may have evolved to recognize microbes that
are commonly encountered at the epithelial surface. Lamina
propria T cells are mostly CD4+, and most have the phenotype of
previously activated eﬀector or memory T cells (see Chapter 9).
Many of the memory T cells are noncirculating tissue-resident
memory cells. Recall that these lamina propria eﬀector and memory
T cells are generated from naive precursors in the GALT and
mesenteric lymph nodes, enter the circulation, and preferentially
home back into the lamina propria (see Fig. 14.3). T cells within
Peyer’s patches and in other follicles adjacent to the intestinal
epithelium are mostly CD4+ helper T cells, including follicular
helper T cells and regulatory T cells.
DCs and macrophages are abundant in the gastrointestinal
immune system and can participate in stimulating protective eﬀector
T cell responses or inducing regulatory T cell responses that suppress
immunity to ingested antigens and commensal organisms. DCs in the
lamina propria take up and process protein antigens from microbes
that are in the lumen or have breached the epithelial barrier and
transport these antigens via lymphatics to mesenteric lymph nodes
(Fig. 14.7). Within the mesenteric lymph nodes, DCs present
processed protein antigens to naive T cells and induce the
diﬀerentiation of these T cells into Th1, Th2, or Th17 eﬀector cells
or into FOXP3+ Tregs. Some macrophage-derived DCs in the
terminal ileum of the gut project dendrites between epithelial cells
and sample luminal contents (see Fig. 14.7). These specialized
antigen-sampling cells, identiﬁable by expression of the chemokine
receptor CX3CR, maintain epithelial barrier integrity despite
protruding their dendrites between the epithelial cells, by
producing the same junctional proteins that the epithelial cells
express. These DCs promote protective adaptive immune responses
to pathogens in the lumen by passing the sampled antigens to
more mobile lamina propria DCs, which then migrate to mesenteric
lymph nodes and activate eﬀector T cell responses to those
antigens.
In the gastrointestinal tract, diﬀerent subsets of eﬀector CD4 +   T
cells are induced by and protect against diﬀerent microbial species
(Fig. 14.8) . In Chapter 10, we introduced the concept that helper T
cell subsets that secrete diﬀerent cytokines are specialized for
protection against diﬀerent types of microbes. This fundamental
concept is highly relevant to the mucosal immune system. Th1, Th2,
and Th17 cells are found in the lamina propria of the intestine, and
the commensal bacterial microﬂora of the gut lumen exerts
profound 
inﬂuences 
on 
T 
cell 
phenotypes, 
even 
during
homeostasis.
• Th17 cells. Studies in mice have shown that certain classes of
bacteria, or in some cases individual species of bacteria, can
shift the dominant paĴern of T cell cytokine production. For
example, the lamina propria of the small bowel in healthy
mice is particularly rich in IL-17–producing cells, whereas
the colon is not. The presence of the Th17 cells depends on
colonization of the gut with a certain phylum of bacteria
(segmented ﬁlamentous bacteria) in the postnatal period.
These and other bacteria stimulate intestinal epithelial cell
production of factors such as serum amyloid A that
enhance release of IL-1, IL-6, and TGF-β by DCs, thereby
promoting Th17 diﬀerentiation. Substances derived from
food or intestinal microbes activate the transcription factor
aryl hydrocarbon receptor in Th17 cells, which is required
for secretion of IL-22. The steady-state presence of Th17
cells is required for protection against pathogenic species of
bacteria (e.g., Citrobacter rodentium). Th17 cells appear to
play a special role in maintaining mucosal epithelial barrier
function because of the actions of the two signature
cytokines they produce, IL-17 and IL-22, which, as discussed
earlier, are also products of the group 3 subset of ILCs in
the gut. The receptors for both these cytokines are
expressed on intestinal epithelial cells, and both induce the
expression of proteins important for barrier function, such
as mucins and β-defensins, which protect the epithelial
cells against microbe-induced injury.
FIGURE 14.7  Antigen sampling by intestinal
dendritic cells.Dendritic cells (DCs) are
present in the intestinal mucosa and sample
antigens for presentation to T cells in GALT
and mesenteric lymph nodes. A, Some DCs
extend dendritic processes between intestinal
epithelial cells into the lumen to sample
antigens and then pass the antigens to mobile
lamina propria DCs, which migrate into MALT
and present the antigens to naive T cells.
Macrophages may also sample luminal
antigens in this manner. B, The lamina propria
DCs also sample antigens that are derived
from luminal contents and have gotten
through the epithelial barrier and present the
antigens to naive T cells in MALT.
• Th2 cells. Intestinal helminthic infections induce strong Th2
responses, which are eﬀective in eliminating the worms
because the Th2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-13 cooperate in
enhancing ﬂuid and mucus secretions and inducing smooth
muscle contraction and bowel motility.
• Th1 cells are relatively sparse in healthy lamina propria
compared to Th17 or Th2 cells, but their numbers increase
in the seĴing of IBD, and they may contribute to the
pathogenesis of this disorder.
Regulation of Immunity in the
Gastrointestinal Tract by Regulatory T Cells
and Cytokines
Regulatory T cells are abundant in GALT and prevent inﬂammatory
reactions against intestinal commensal microbes. It is estimated that
the proportion of FOXP3+ Tregs among CD4+ cells is about twofold
greater in the intestine than in other tissues. Many of these Tregs
are induced in the gut in response to antigens encountered locally
and thus belong to the category of peripheral Tregs (see Chapter
15) (see Fig. 14.8). The factors that contribute to the generation of
these peripheral Tregs include local production of retinoic acid and
TGF-β by CD103+ DCs and lamina propria macrophages. Both
retinoic acid and TGF-β promote FOXP3 expression and inhibit the
generation of Th1 and Th2 cells. Furthermore, fermentation
metabolites, such as the short-chain faĴy acid butyrate produced by
intestinal commensal bacteria, especially Clostridia species,
stimulate peripheral expansion of Tregs. As discussed in Chapter
15, Tregs are thought to suppress immune responses by several
mechanisms. Of these, the dominant mechanism in the gut seems
to be production of the immunosuppressive cytokine IL-10.
FIGURE 14.8  Effector and regulatory T cells in the
intestinal mucosa.Th17 effector T cells and
regulatory T cells are abundant in the intestinal
mucosa. Bacterial antigen–specific Th17 cells
differentiate from naive CD4+ T cells in gut-
associated lymphoid tissues (not shown) in
response to antigens presented by dendritic cells
(DCs) and cytokines they secrete, including
interleukin-6 (IL-6) and IL-23. Differentiation of
bacterial antigen–specific regulatory T cells
(Tregs) is promoted by transforming growth
factor-β (TGF-β) and retinoic acid produced by
intestinal epithelial cells. Thymic Tregs that
migrate to the intestine expand in number under
the influence of bacterial metabolites. Regulatory
T cells require antigen presentation by DCs (not
shown); the nature of these antigens is unknown.
Several cytokines, including TGF-β, IL-10, and IL-2, play crucial
roles in maintaining homeostasis in the gut immune system, and
deﬁciencies in these cytokines or their receptors result in pathologic
bowel inﬂammation. Much of our knowledge of cytokine-mediated
regulation in the gut comes from studies with cytokine or cytokine
receptor gene knockout mice. A major feature of the phenotype of
mice with engineered deﬁciencies in TGF-β, IL-10, IL-10 receptor,
IL-2, and the IL-2 receptor is uncontrolled inﬂammation in the
bowel. Mutations in the IL-10 receptor gene are also the cause of a
rare type of colitis in infants, conﬁrming the importance of IL-10 in
preventing pathologic intestinal inﬂammation in humans. The
uncontrolled inﬂammation observed in the gut in the absence of
these cytokines or their receptors is most likely caused by immune
responses to commensal gut ﬂora because the inﬂammation does
not occur in mice raised in germ-free conditions.
The cellular sources of the cytokines and the relevant receptor-
expressing target cells that are critical for preventing bowel
inﬂammation are not completely deﬁned. Mouse models in which
cytokines, cytokine receptors, and cytokine receptor signaling are
genetically ablated only in speciﬁc cell types have been used to
address the question of which cell types are important. In the case
of TGF-β–dependent and IL-10–dependent regulation of gut
inﬂammation, evidence indicates that Tregs are an important
source of these cytokines. For example, selective deletion of the Il10
gene in FOXP3+ cells leads to severe colitis, consistent with the
critical role of Treg-produced IL-10 in maintaining homeostasis in
the gastrointestinal tract. The target cells that express receptors for
and are regulated by TGF-β and IL-10 likely include DCs, eﬀector T
cells, innate eﬀector cells such as macrophages, and epithelial cells.
IBD in mice lacking IL-2 or its receptor is a consequence of defects
in the development and function of Tregs, which require IL-2 for
their maintenance (see Chapter 15).
Oral Tolerance and Oral Vaccines
Oral tolerance is systemic unresponsiveness to antigens that are
ingested or otherwise administered via mucosal tissues. Oral
tolerance has been most clearly demonstrated in experimental
rodent models. Mice fed high doses of a protein antigen may
subsequently show impaired humoral and T cell–mediated
responses to the same antigen administered by other routes, such
as through the skin. A similar phenomenon can be demonstrated
when antigens are administered through the nasal passages into
the respiratory mucosa, and the more general term mucosal
tolerance is used to describe tolerance induced by oral or nasal
antigen administration. The physiologic role of oral tolerance is
speculated to be the prevention of potentially harmful immune
responses to food proteins and commensal bacteria. The
underlying mechanisms of oral tolerance are not well understood
but likely include the mechanisms of peripheral tolerance
discussed in Chapter 15, such as anergy, deletion, and Treg-
mediated suppression. Oral tolerance is systemic because Tregs
induced in mucosa may circulate to other tissues, or eﬀector T cells
may be killed or rendered unresponsive in the gut and are no
longer available to respond to antigens at other sites. AĴempts to
treat autoimmune disease by oral or nasal administration of
relevant self antigens have so far been unsuccessful, but there has
been success in reducing development of peanut allergy by oral
administration of peanut extract during early childhood (discussed
in Chapter 20).
Oral administration of antigen in the seĴing of concomitant
stimulation of innate immunity can lead to productive adaptive
immune responses, as in the use of oral vaccines to induce protective
antibody responses to poliovirus or the bacterium S. typhi. These
vaccines are live aĴenuated microbes that may infect cells in the
intestine and stimulate strong innate responses that then promote
T and B cell activation.
The Role of the Commensal Microbiome in
Immune Regulation
The human intestinal microbiome includes all of the commensal
bacteria that normally reside in the intestines, discussed earlier, as
well as thousands of species of viruses, fungi, and protozoans.
Humans and their intestinal microbiome have co-evolved
mechanisms for mutual beneﬁt, including mechanisms to defend
against invasion by these organisms together with mechanisms to
maintain equilibrium by minimizing unneeded proinﬂammatory
immune responses to the commensal organisms. One consequence
of this co-evolution is a profound inﬂuence of the microbiome on
the immune system. The microbiome changes with age, diet, and
disease, and experimental studies indicate that these changes aﬀect
immune function locally in the gut and systemically.
Commensal organisms in the intestines induce and regulate innate
immune responses in the gut and also inﬂuence systemic innate
immunity. Studies in mice have shown that commensal bacteria are
needed for proliferation and repair of the intestinal epithelial
barrier after injury, an eﬀect mediated by bacterial cell wall PAMPs
and the TLRs to which they bind on the epithelial cells. As
mentioned earlier, microﬂora in the gut stimulate the expression of
mucins and antimicrobial molecules (including defensins and
REGIIIγ) that prevent bacterial colonization. In addition, several
studies in mice have shown that products of commensal bacteria in
the gut inﬂuence the way circulating neutrophils and macrophages
function systemically. For example, short-chain faĴy acids from gut
bacteria dampen neutrophil inﬂammatory responses, whereas
fragments of intestinal bacterial peptidoglycan enhance the ability
of circulating neutrophils to kill gram-positive bacteria. Likewise,
gut bacteria appear to be required for systemic antiviral functions
of macrophages, DCs, and natural killer (NK) cells.
Intestinal commensal organisms inﬂuence local and systemic
adaptive immune responses. In mice, the production of IgA in the
intestinal mucosa, which is a major adaptive immune mechanism
for protection against microbial invasion through the intestinal
epithelial barrier, is dependent on the presence of a subset of small
bowel luminal bacterial ﬂora. Commensal bacterial antigens
activate speciﬁc IgA responses by inducing the expression of BAFF,
p
g
p
y
g
p
APRIL, and retinoic acid, which are IgA switch factors required for
T-dependent and T-independent B cell class switching to IgA
(discussed earlier). By preventing commensals reaching the barrier
epithelium, IgA in the gut reduces innate responses to these
organisms, and limits B cell activation and antibody responses
locally and systemically. Certain species of commensal organisms
are also required for accumulation of Th17 cells in the gut, as
discussed earlier, and the presence of these species reduces
resistance to some gut pathogens but may increase susceptibility to
autoimmune disease outside the gut. Other commensal species
contribute to the development of Tregs.
In humans, the impact of gut microﬂora on local and systemic
immune responses is inferred from many clinical observations and
experimental therapies. Normal ﬂora appears to be required to
prevent harmful intestinal innate responses and inﬂammation
induced by pathogenic bacteria. For example, antibiotic treatment
for infections outside the gut will invariably alter the makeup of the
gut microﬂora, and this is associated with increased risk for
pathologic bacterial infections in the colon, especially with
Clostridium diﬃcile. Patients with chronic C. diﬃcile infection beneﬁt
from orally administered fecal transplants, which repopulate the
gut with ﬂora from healthy individuals.
It has been suggested that alterations in the intestinal
microbiome, which is sometimes called dysbiosis, may underlie the
development of numerous disorders, but how human commensal
gut ﬂora inﬂuence systemic immunologic health is largely
unknown. The risk for developing allergic disease, including
asthma, has been linked to variations in microﬂora acquired during
early childhood as a consequence of mode of birth (vaginal versus
cesarean section), breast-feeding, and antibiotic use. Currently, the
microbiomes of various normal and patient populations are being
characterized by genetic methods. Although this work may lead to
a beĴer understanding of how the human immune system is
regulated by gut bacteria, a major challenge in interpreting the data
is the signiﬁcant variation of the human microbiome among
individuals and over time even in one person.
p
Immunity in Other Mucosal Tissues
Like the gastrointestinal mucosa, the mucosae of the respiratory
system and the genitourinary system must maintain a barrier
against invasion of diverse microbes in the environment and
balance eﬀective protective responses to invading microbes and
suppression of responses to commensal organisms. Many of the
features we described for gastrointestinal immunity are shared by
mucosal immunity in these diﬀerent locations. These shared
features include relatively impermeable mucus- and defensin-
secreting epithelial barriers; localized collections of lymphoid
tissues beneath the epithelium; the constant sampling of antigens
located outside the barriers by immune cells within the barrier; the
integration of proinﬂammatory and regulatory signals generated by
microbial products binding to epithelial and DC innate immune
receptors; the strong reliance on secretory IgA–mediated humoral
immunity to prevent microbial invasion; and the presence of DC
populations that stimulate particular types of eﬀector and
regulatory T cell responses. In addition to these shared features,
diﬀerent mucosal tissues have unique properties that reﬂect the
distinct functions and anatomy of the organs of which it is part and
the range of environmental antigens and microbes that are present
at each site. We will now discuss some of the major features of
mucosal immunity in the respiratory and genitourinary systems.
Immunity in the Respiratory System
The mucosa of the respiratory system lines the nasal passages,
nasopharynx, trachea, and bronchial tree. Alveoli, the epithelium-
lined sac-like termini of the bronchial airways, also may be
considered part of the respiratory mucosa. Inhalation of air exposes
the respiratory mucosa to a wide variety of foreign substances,
including airborne infectious organisms, plant pollens, dust
particles, and various other environmental antigens. The microbial
ﬂora of the airways is less dense and less diverse than that in the
gut, and the deep airways and alveoli have fewer organisms than
the upper airways. Nonetheless, similar mechanisms have evolved
in the respiratory mucosal immune system to achieve a balance
between immune activation to protect against pathogens and
immune regulation to avoid unnecessary or excessive responses
that might impair physiologic functions. Failure of the immune
system to control bronchopulmonary infections and excessive
immune or inﬂammatory responses to infections are major causes
of morbidity and mortality worldwide.
Innate Immunity in the Respiratory System
The pseudostratiﬁed, ciliated columnar epithelium that lines most
of the respiratory mucosa, including the nasal passages,
nasopharynx, and bronchial tree, performs physical and chemical
barrier functions similar to those of gut epithelium, by virtue of
tight junctions between cells and secretion of mucus, defensins,
and cathelicidins. The mucus in the airways traps foreign
substances, including microbes, and the cilia move the mucus and
trapped microbes up and out of the lungs. The importance of
mucus and cilia in innate immune protection in the lung is
illustrated by the greatly increased frequency of serious
bronchopulmonary infections in people with decreased cilia
function, such as heavy smokers, or abnormal mucus production,
such as patients with cystic ﬁbrosis.
Innate responses in alveoli serve antimicrobial functions but are
tightly controlled to prevent inﬂammation, which would impair gas
exchange. The alveoli are susceptible to infection spreading from
bronchopneumonia, and alveolar lining cells can be directly
infected by viruses. Surfactant proteins A (SP-A) and D (SP-D),
which are secreted into the alveolar spaces, are members of the
collectin family (see Chapter 4) and bind to carbohydrate PAMPs
on the surface of many pathogens. These surfactants are involved in
viral neutralization and clearance of microbes from the alveoli, but
they also suppress inﬂammatory and allergic responses in the lung.
For example, SP-A inhibits TLR2 and TLR4 signaling and the
production of inﬂammatory cytokines in alveolar macrophages, and
SP-A also binds to TLR4 and inhibits lipopolysaccharide binding.
SP-A and SP-D reduce the phagocytic activity of alveolar
macrophages.
Alveolar macrophages represent most of the free cells within the
alveolar spaces. These tissue-resident macrophages are functionally
distinct from those in most other tissues in that they maintain an
antiinﬂammatory phenotype. They express IL-10, nitric oxide, and
TGF-β and are poorly phagocytic compared with resident
macrophages in other tissues, such as the spleen and liver. Alveolar
macrophages inhibit T cell responses as well as the antigen
presentation function of airway DCs, eﬀects that are aĴributed to
the IL-10 and TGF-β they secrete.
ILCs are present in bronchial mucosal tissue, and contribute to
pulmonary 
inﬂammatory 
responses 
to 
helminths 
and
environmental allergens. Damage to bronchial epithelium by
microbes results in the release of alarmin cytokines such as IL-33,
which activate ILC2s and Th2 cells. Pulmonary ILC2s also can be
activated by neuropeptides derived from autonomic nerves and also
from bronchial neuroendocrine cells.
Adaptive Immunity in the Respiratory System
Protective humoral immunity in the airways is dominated by
secretory IgA, as in other mucosal tissues, although the amount of
IgA secreted is less than in the gastrointestinal tract. Secretory IgA
plays an important role in the upper airway. The anatomic sites of
naive B cell activation, diﬀerentiation, and IgA class switching
include tonsils and adenoids in the nasopharynx and lymph nodes
in the mediastinum and adjacent to bronchi in the lungs. There are
relatively few aggregated or isolated lymphoid follicles in the
lamina propria in the lower airways compared with the gut and
likely less initiation of humoral immune responses in these
locations. The homing of IgA-secreting plasmablasts back into the
airway tissue in proximity to respiratory mucosal epithelium
depends on the chemokine CCL28 secreted by respiratory
epithelium and its receptor CCR10 on the plasma cells. IgA is
transported into the airway lumen by the same poly-Ig receptor
mechanism of transcellular transport as in the gut. IgE responses to
airway antigens occur frequently and are involved in allergic
diseases of the respiratory system, including hay fever and asthma.
IgE performs its inﬂammatory eﬀector functions when bound to
mast cells, which are abundant in the submucosa of the airways.
T cell responses in the lung are initiated by DC sampling of
airway antigens and presentation of these antigens to naive T cells
in peribronchial and mediastinal lymph nodes. A network of DCs is
present in the mucosa of the airways, and a subset of these
bronchial DCs extend dendrites between the bronchial epithelial
cells into the airway lumen. These DCs sample airway antigens,
migrate to draining lymph nodes, and present the processed
antigens to naive T cells. Other DCs are found in the lamina propria
beneath the epithelial cells, where they capture antigens that cross
the epithelium. Airway DCs may drive diﬀerentiation of naive CD4+
T cells toward diﬀerent phenotypes depending on the nature of the
antigen and the disease context. For example, Th1 cells are often
generated in viral infections, while Th2 cells are frequent in allergic
responses to inhaled allergens in asthma.
Immunity in the Genitourinary System
Innate immune defense against microbial invasion and infection in
the genitourinary mucosa relies mainly on the epithelial lining, as
in other mucosal barriers. Stratiﬁed squamous epithelium lines the
vaginal mucosa and terminal male urethra, and a single layer of
mucus-secreting columnar epithelium lines the female genital tract.
The vaginal epithelium contains Langerhans cells, and a variety of
DCs and macrophages have been described beneath the epithelium
in the vagina, endocervix, and urethra. There are also resident B and
T cells in the genital mucosa. The adaptive immune system in the
genitourinary mucosa lacks prominent MALTs. Unlike other
mucosa, in which IgA is the dominant antibody isotype, most of the
antibody in genital secretions is IgG, about half of which is
produced by plasma cells in genital tract mucosa and the rest is
from the circulation. Infections in the genitourinary tract are a
major cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide and occur when
the epithelial barriers are damaged, urinary tract function is
impaired, or microbes evade the local mechanisms of defense.
The Cutaneous Immune System
The skin includes two main layers, the outer epidermis, composed
mainly of epithelial cells, and, separated by a thin basement
membrane, the underlying dermis composed of connective tissue
and specialized adnexal structures such as hair follicles and sweat
glands. Within both of these layers, there are a variety of diﬀerent
cell types and their products, comprising the cutaneous immune
system, which provide physical barrier and active immune defense
functions against microbes (Fig. 14.9). The skin of an adult is about
2 m2 in area and is the second-largest barrier of the body against
environmental microbes and other foreign materials. Given its
outermost location, the skin is normally colonized by many
microbes and is frequently breached by trauma and burns.
Therefore, the skin is a common portal of entry for a wide variety of
microbes and other foreign substances and is the site of many
immune responses.
Innate and Adaptive Immune Responses in
the Skin
The epidermis provides a physical barrier to microbial invasion. The
epidermis consists of multiple layers of stratiﬁed squamous
epithelium, made up almost entirely of specialized epithelial cells
called keratinocytes. The basal layer of keratinocytes, anchored
onto the basement membrane, continuously proliferate, and their
maturing progeny cells are displaced upward and diﬀerentiate to
form several diﬀerent layers. In the top layer, called the stratum
corneum, the cells undergo programmed death, thereby forming a
keratin- and lipid-rich permeability barrier that is important for
protection against microbes and harmful physical and chemical
agents.
FIGURE 14.9  Cellular components of the cutaneous
immune system.The major components of the
cutaneous immune system shown in this
schematic diagram include keratinocytes,
Langerhans cells, and intraepithelial lymphocytes,
all located in the epidermis, and T lymphocytes,
innate lymphoid cells, dendritic cells, and
macrophages, located in the dermis.
In addition to forming a physical barrier, keratinocytes actively
respond to pathogens and injury by producing antimicrobial
peptides, which kill microbes, and various cytokines, which promote
and regulate immune responses. The antimicrobial peptides that
keratinocytes produce include defensins, S100, and cathelicidins
(see Chapter 4). The cytokines made by keratinocytes include TNF,
TSLP, IL-1, IL-6, IL-18, IL-25, and IL-33, which promote
inﬂammation; granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(GM-CSF), which induces diﬀerentiation and activation of DCs in
the epidermis (discussed later); and IL-10, which controls immune
responses. Keratinocytes produce the chemokine CCL27, which
participates in recruitment of lymphocytes expressing CCR10. The
expression 
of 
defensins, 
cytokines, 
and 
chemokines 
by
keratinocytes is induced by innate immune receptors, including
TLRs and NLRs (see Chapter 4). Keratinocytes in normal skin
constitutively synthesize pro–IL-1β and pro–IL-18. Stimuli such as
ultraviolet irradiation activate the inﬂammasome to process these
pro-cytokines to the active forms, which explains the inﬂammatory
response to sunburn. When signal transduction pathways linked to
inﬂammatory responses, such as the NF-κB (nuclear factor κB) and
STAT3 (signal transducer and activator of transcription3) pathways,
are genetically activated only in keratinocytes, mice develop
inﬂammatory skin diseases, showing the potential of keratinocytes
to act as central players in cutaneous immune responses.
Innate immune responses to pathogens that breach the epidermal
barrier are initiated by macrophages, mast cells, and ILCs in the
dermis. As we have described for other tissues, tissue-resident
sentinel cells such as macrophages and mast cells express TLRs and
other innate paĴern recognition receptors and respond to PAMPs
and DAMPs (damage-associated molecular paĴerns) by secreting
inﬂammatory cytokines and lipid mediators. ILCs are activated by
cytokines secreted by keratinocytes and sentinel cells and in turn
secrete inﬂammatory cytokines, which inﬂuence the type of
inﬂammatory responses that follow. For example, ILC2s are
activated by keratinocyte-derived TSLP, IL-25, and IL-33, and the
ILC2s then secrete IL-5, which promotes eosinophilic inﬂammation.
IL-18 production by keratinocyte and sentinel cells activates ILC1s
to secrete IFN-γ, which promotes macrophage-mediated defense.
DCs also play an important sentinel role in the skin, as is discussed
in more detail next.
Several DC populations are normally present in the skin and
contribute to innate immune responses and initiation of T cell
p
f
responses to microbial and environmental antigens that enter the
body through the skin. In the epidermis, the most abundant DCs
are Langerhans cells (see Fig. 2.5), which express a C-type lectin
receptor called langerin (CD207) and have numerous Birbeck
granules in the cytoplasm. Langerhans cells populate the skin
during embryonic development and are developmentally related to
other tissue-resident macrophages rather than conventional DCs.
The dendrites of Langerhans cells form a dense meshwork between
the keratinocytes of the epidermis. In the dermis, there are
relatively sparse langerin-expressing DCs, which express CD103 in
mice and CD141 in humans and are a distinct lineage from
Langerhans cells. Each of these DC populations expresses innate
paĴern recognition receptors for PAMPs as well as for DAMPs
derived from injured cells. The DCs respond to these ligands by
secreting inﬂammatory cytokines.
Both epidermal Langerhans cells and dermal DCs take up protein
antigens, process them into peptides, and migrate to draining
lymph nodes where they present peptide-MHC complexes to naive
T cells (see Chapter 6). The contributions of the diﬀerent skin DC
subsets to the initiation of diﬀerent types of T cell responses are
not fully deﬁned. Mouse models have been developed in which
particular DC subsets are eliminated, and these models show that
mouse Langerhans cells are not required for activation of CD4+ and
CD8+ T cell responses to many types of antigens in the skin, but
they do appear to play a role in Th17 responses to extracellular
pathogens, and in tolerance to some skin antigens. Langerin-
expressing cDC1s in mice and humans are required for cross-
presentation of antigens to naive CD8+ T cells.
Normal human skin contains many T cells, 95% of which have a
memory phenotype. There are about 2 × 1010 total T cells in the skin.
About 98% of these T cells are present in the dermis, and 2% are
intraepidermal lymphocytes. Dermal T lymphocytes (both CD4+
and CD8+ cells) are located predominantly adjacent to blood vessels
and hair follicles. Most of these dermal T cells are tissue-resident
memory cells generated within lymph nodes during prior skin
infections, which then home to and remain in the skin for long
periods without recirculating. Smaller numbers of both CD4+ and
CD8+ resident memory T cells are present in the epidermis and
express the integrin CD103, which binds to ligands on epithelial
cells and retains the T cells in the skin. All of these resident
memory T cells display potent eﬀector functions when activated by
antigen and include CD4+ cells of each major helper subset, Th1,
Th2, Th17, and Treg. Th1 and Th17 cells are important for microbial
defense 
against 
intracellular 
and 
extracellular 
microbes,
respectively, as in other tissues. The two signature Th17 cytokines,
IL-17 and IL-22, induce expression of defensins and cathelicidins by
keratinocytes and IL-22 induces epidermal cell proliferation. In
contrast, the Th2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-13 suppress production of
defensins and cathelicidin, which can result in infections in Th2-
driven skin diseases. Dermal γδ T cells may be a source of IL-17 in
some chronic inﬂammatory skin diseases.
T cells in the skin express homing molecules that direct their
migration out of dermal microvessels (Fig. 14.10) . Migration of
eﬀector or memory T cells into the skin depends on T cell
expression of cutaneous lymphocyte antigen (CLA), which is an E-
selectin–binding carbohydrate moiety displayed on various
glycoproteins on the endothelial cell plasma membrane. In
addition, T cell expression of CCR4, CCR8, and CCR10, which bind
the chemokines CCL17, CCL1, and CCL27, respectively, is also
required for T cell traﬃcking to skin. The skin-homing properties of
T cells are imprinted during activation in skin-draining lymph
nodes, by a process analogous to imprinting of gut-homing
properties of T cells in mesenteric lymph nodes, discussed earlier
in the chapter. When naive T cells recognize antigens presented by
DCs in skin-draining lymph nodes, the T cells receive signals from
the DCs that not only induce proliferation and diﬀerentiation into
eﬀector cells but also induce expression of the skin-homing
molecules CLA, CCR4, CCR8, and CCR10. Interestingly, sunlight
and vitamin D appear to play an important role in T cell migration
to the skin, analogous to the role of vitamin A and its metabolite
retinoic acid in lymphocyte migration to the gut. UVB rays in
sunlight act on 7-dehydrocholesterol made in the basal layer of the
epidermis, converting it to previtamin D3. Dermal DCs express
vitamin D3 hydroxylases that convert previtamin D3 to the active
form, 1,25(OH)2D3, which may be transported in free form or
within migrating DCs to skin-draining lymph nodes. Within the
node, 1,25(OH)2D3 enters T cells that have been activated by
antigen-presenting DCs, translocates to the nucleus, and induces
transcription of CCR10. IL-12 made by the DCs participates in
induction of CLA. CCR4 and CCR8 are also upregulated, and the
gut-homing integrin α4β7 is downregulated, by unknown signals,
during T cell activation in skin-draining lymph nodes. Thus, naive T
cells activated in skin-draining lymph nodes will diﬀerentiate into
eﬀector T cells that preferentially home back into the skin.
1,25(OH)2D3 may also act locally within the dermis on eﬀector and
memory T cells to upregulate CCR10 and promote migration of the
T cells into the epidermis in response to the CCR10 ligand CCL27
made by keratinocytes.
Immune-Privileged Tissues
Immune responses and associated inﬂammation in certain parts of
the body, including brain, eye, testes, placenta, and fetus, carry a
high risk for lethal organ dysfunction or reproductive failure. These
tissues, which have evolved to be protected, to a variable degree,
from immune responses, are called immune-privileged sites. Peter
Medawar coined the term immune privilege in the 1940s to describe
the lack of immune responses to tissue transplanted into the brain
or the anterior chamber of the eye of experimental animals. Foreign
antigens that would evoke an immune response in most tissues are
often tolerated in these immune-privileged sites. The mechanisms
underlying immune privilege vary between these tissues and are
not fully understood. Some of the mechanisms are similar to
mechanisms of regulation in gut and skin (discussed earlier) and
mechanisms of self-tolerance (discussed in Chapter 15).
Immune Privilege in the Brain, Eye, and
Testis
The Brain
Inﬂammation in the brain can lead to functional derangement and
death of neurons, with disastrous consequences. A major feature of
the brain that impairs inﬂammatory responses is the presence of
vascular barriers that impede movement of inﬂammatory cells and
microbes into the brain. If these barriers are broken, common
pathogens may stimulate strong inﬂammatory responses that
damage the brain parenchyma. The main vascular barrier is the
blood-brain barrier, which includes the endothelial layer of small
vessels, with tight junctions that are less leaky than in other
vascular beds. In addition, pericytes, which are contractile cells that
surround the endothelial layer, are also key to limiting the
movement of blood leukocytes and microbes out of cerebral
vessels. Furthermore, the cerebral vessel pericytes have been found
to inhibit T cell responses in part by producing TGF-β and retinoic
acid and inducing regulatory T cell diﬀerentiation. Perivascular
macrophages and glial cells provide additional blood-brain barrier
functions against pathogen entry and immune cell traﬃcking, and
even if T cells have migrated out of vessels, they are often found
restricted to a cuﬀ around the vessel and do not readily migrate
deep into the brain parenchyma. In addition, there are pial and
epithelial barriers that under normal conditions impede the
movement of leukocytes and microbes from blood into the
cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) and from the CSF into the brain
parenchyma and separate the CSF from the brain parenchyma.
Nonetheless, when pathogens do gain access to the CSF, there can
be robust inﬂammatory responses, such as occurs in bacterial
meningitis.
FIGURE 14.10  Homing properties of skin
lymphocytes.The skin-homing properties of
effector lymphocytes are imprinted in skin-draining
lymph nodes, where they have undergone
differentiation from naive precursors. Ultraviolet
rays in sunlight (UVB) stimulate production of
vitamin D, which induces expression of CCR10;
interleukin-12 (IL-12) induces expression of the E-
selectin ligand CLA; and other signals induce
CCR4, CCR8, and CCR10 expression. These
homing molecules direct migration of the effector
T cells into the skin. CLA, Cutaneous lymphocyte
antigen.
Besides these barriers that limit access of the brain to infectious
organisms and to immune cells, strong innate responses and
initiation of adaptive immunity to antigens in the brain may be
relatively 
impaired 
compared 
to 
other 
tissues 
by 
other
mechanisms. These include inhibitory signaling pathways that
block activation of microglial cells, which are the major tissue-
resident macrophages in the brain, and a relative scarcity of DCs.
The initiation of a T cell response to a microbe in the brain would
most likely require delivery of the antigen into CSF and then to
meningeal lymphatic vessels that drain to cervical lymph nodes.
Contrary to common assumptions about immune privilege, there
is evidence that immune surveillance against microbes does occur
in the central nervous system (CNS). For example, the frequency of
some 
opportunistic 
infections 
within 
the 
brain 
increases
signiﬁcantly in immunosuppressed patients. One example is the
activation of latent JC virus in patients with primary, acquired, and
drug-induced immunosuppression, leading to a uniformly fatal
CNS disease called progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
(PML). One of the drugs that is associated with increased risk for
PML is a monoclonal antibody that blocks integrin-mediated
monocyte and T cell recruitment into the brain, which is used to
treat patients with multiple sclerosis and IBD. This observation
suggests that T cell or monocyte traﬃcking into the brain is
necessary to keep latent viruses in check and argues that the brain
is not a stringently immune-privileged site.
The Eye
Vision, which is essential for the survival of most vertebrates, can
be easily impaired by inﬂammation within the eye. Various
anatomic and physiologic features have evolved that minimize the
likelihood of immune responses and inﬂammation in the eye. Many
of these features are analogous to those that underlie immune
privilege in the brain. The retina is anatomically an extension of the
CNS and is protected by a blood-retinal barrier with many of the
same vascular wall properties as the blood-brain barrier. The
anterior chamber of the eye is the ﬂuid-ﬁlled space between the
transparent cornea in front and the iris and lens behind.
Inﬂammation in this chamber could lead to opaciﬁcation of the
transparent cornea and lens, with loss of sight. The ﬂuid in this
space, aqueous humour, is biochemically similar to CSF, and in
terms of access to the immune system, is analogous to lymph, in
that it drains into veins or into conjunctival lymphatics. Despite
this access, the anterior chamber of the normal eye maintains a
signiﬁcant degree of immune privilege. Anatomic features of the
anterior chamber that contribute to immune privilege include the
tight junctions of the epithelial layer and resistance to leakiness of
blood vessels in the tissues adjacent to the anterior chamber, and
the avascular nature of the cornea. There are several soluble factors
with immunosuppressive and antiinﬂammatory properties in the
aqueous humor that ﬁlls the anterior chamber, including
neuropeptides (α-melanocyte–stimulating hormone, vasointestinal
peptide, somatostatin), TGF-β, and indolamine 2,3-dioxygenase
(IDO, discussed later). Cells lining the anterior chamber, including
the epithelium of the iris and the endothelium, constitutively
express FAS ligand and PD-L1, which can induce death or
inactivation of T cells, respectively.
One liability of the sequestration of self antigens in the eye is
that immune tolerance to these antigens is not induced. This lack of
tolerance becomes a problem only when trauma exposes the eye
antigens to the immune system. A striking example of this is
sympathetic ophthalmia, in which trauma to one eye causes release
of eye antigens leading to autoimmune disease in both the injured
eye and the uninjured eye. Presumably, although self antigens in
the normal eye are inaccessible to the extraocular immune system
to induce either autoimmunity or tolerance, activated immune
eﬀector cells and antibodies that are generated in the periphery
g
p
p
y
when one eye is injured have access to and cause injury to the
normal eye.
An 
experimental 
phenomenon 
called 
anterior 
chamber–
associated immune deviation occurs when an antigen placed in the
anterior chamber of a mouse eye results in systemic immune
tolerance to that antigen. A similar phenomenon has been
described when the antigen is placed in the brain. Several diﬀerent
mechanisms have been proposed, but the relevance of this
phenomenon to immune privilege is unclear.
The Testis
Immune privilege in the testis serves to limit inﬂammation that
may impair male fertility. Many self antigens in the adult testis are
ﬁrst expressed at the time of puberty, well after the development of
a competent immune system, so it is unlikely that lymphocytes
speciﬁc for these antigens are deleted during development.
Therefore, immune privilege in the testis may also serve to prevent
autoimmunity. The testis, like the eye and brain, has a blood-tissue
barrier that limits delivery of cells and molecules to the sites of
spermatogenesis. This barrier is not formed by endothelial cells but
rather by Sertoli cells, which line the outer layer of the seminiferous
tubules where spermatogenesis takes place. The hormonal milieu
of the testis, which is rich in androgens, has an antiinﬂammatory
inﬂuence on macrophages. TGF-β is produced by Leydig, Sertoli,
and peritubular cells and likely contributes to local immune
suppression.
Immunity in the Mammalian Fetus and
Newborn
Immune Privilege of the Mammalian Fetus
In eutherian mammals (mammals with placentae), the fetus
expresses paternally inherited genes that are foreign to the mother,
but fetuses are not normally rejected by the mother. In essence, the
fetus is a naturally occurring allograft, but one that is protected
from graft rejection. (Allograft rejection is discussed in Chapter 17.)
It is clear that the mother is exposed to fetal antigens during
pregnancy because maternal antibodies against paternal major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules are easily detectable.
Obviously, there has been very strong selective pressure that has
led to the evolution of mechanisms that protect the fetus from the
maternal immune system, so called fetal tolerance, yet these
mechanisms remain poorly understood. Many diﬀerent special
molecular and barrier features of the placenta and local
immunosuppression may contribute.
The anatomic location of the fetus is a critical factor in the
absence of rejection. For example, pregnant animals are able to
recognize and reject allografts syngeneic to the fetus placed at
extrauterine sites without compromising fetal survival. Wholly
allogeneic fetal blastocysts that lack maternal genes can
successfully develop in a pregnant or pseudopregnant mother.
Thus, neither speciﬁc maternal nor paternal genes are necessary for
survival of the fetus. Hyperimmunization of the mother with cells
bearing paternal antigens does not compromise placental and fetal
growth.
The failure to reject the fetus has focused aĴention on the region
of physical contact between the mother and fetus. The fetal tissues
of the placenta that most intimately contact the mother are
composed of vascular trophoblast, which is exposed to maternal
blood for purposes of mediating gas exchange and nutrient supply,
or implantation site trophoblast, which diﬀusely inﬁltrates the
uterine lining (decidua) for purposes of anchoring the placenta to
the mother.
One simple explanation for fetal survival is that trophoblast cells
fail to express paternal MHC molecules. Class II MHC molecules
have not been detected on trophoblast cells. In mice, cells of
implantation trophoblast, but not of vascular trophoblast, do
express paternal class I MHC molecules. In humans, the situation
may be more complex in that trophoblast cells express mainly a
nonpolymorphic class I molecule called HLA-G. This molecule may
be involved in protecting trophoblast cells from maternal NK cell–
p
g
p
mediated lysis. A specialized subset of NK cells called uterine NK
cells are the major type of lymphocyte present at implantation sites,
and interferon-γ (IFN-γ) production by these cells is essential for
decidual development. The way in which uterine NK cells are
stimulated and their role in maternal responses to fetal
alloantigens are not known. Even if trophoblast cells do express
classical MHC molecules, they may lack costimulator molecules and
fail to act as antigen-presenting cells.
The uterine decidua may be a site where immune responses are
functionally inhibited. In support of this idea is the observation that
mouse decidua is highly susceptible to infection by Listeria
monocytogenes and cannot support a delayed-type hypersensitivity
response. The basis of immunologic privilege is clearly not a simple
anatomic barrier because maternal blood is in extensive contact
with trophoblast cells. Rather, the immune barrier is likely to be
created 
by 
functional 
inhibition, 
aĴributable 
to 
multiple
mechanisms.
Maternal tolerance of the fetus may be mediated by Tregs.
Experimental evidence suggests that Treg cells prevent immune
reactions against paternally derived antigens that are not expressed
in the mother. Fetal antigens induce long-lived FOXP3+ Tregs in
mice, and depletion of these cells results in fetal loss. During
pregnancy, systemic and decidual Tregs increase in mothers and
abundant Tregs are found in the fetus. Indeed, eutherian mammals
have evolved a transposon-mediated change in a regulatory
sequence of the Foxp3 gene that allows these species to generate
stable peripheral Treg. This regulatory region of Foxp3 is not found
in earlier vertebrates or even in metatherian mammals such as
kangaroos and wallabies that carry their young. The contribution of
Tregs in human pregnancy is under active investigation, as is the
possibility of Treg defects as the basis for recurrent spontaneous
abortions.
Immune responses to the fetus may be regulated by local
concentrations of tryptophan and its metabolites in the decidua,
which inhibit T cell responses. The enzyme IDO is made in the
placenta and catabolizes tryptophan, generating a by-product,
kynurenine. Tryptophan is required for proliferating cells,
including lymphocytes, and kynurenine is toxic to these cells. These
observations led to the hypothesis that T cell responses to the fetus
are normally blocked because decidual tryptophan levels are kept
low or the levels of toxic metabolites produced by IDO are high.
Several other mechanisms may also dampen the maternal
immune response to the fetus, including FASL expression by fetal
trophoblast cells that promote apoptosis of activated FAS-
expressing maternal lymphocytes, and the induction by galectin-1
in the decidua of tolerogenic DCs that facilitate Treg generation.
Passive Immunity in the Fetus and Newborn
Fetal and neonatal mammals cannot make their own IgG antibodies,
but they defend against infection by maternal IgG transported
across the placenta into the fetal circulation and by IgA in breast
milk ingested by the nursing infant. Transport of maternal IgG
across the placenta is mediated by the IgG-speciﬁc neonatal Fc
receptor (FcRn). This receptor is expressed on syncytiotrophoblast
cells of the placental villi, which form a barrier between the
maternal and fetal tissues. FcRn binds IgG from the maternal blood
present in the intervillous spaces, and the receptor mediates
transcytosis of the IgG to the fetal side of the syncytiotrophoblast,
where it is released into the villous stroma. The IgG is then
transported across fetal capillary endothelium into the fetal
circulation (Fig. 14.11A). Thus, a newborn contains essentially the
same IgG antibodies as the mother. Protective levels of maternal
IgG are maintained for about 6 months, after which time the
majority of circulating IgG is made by the baby (Fig. 14.11B). This
transition period is a time of enhanced susceptibility of babies to
infections because they will not have accumulated memory B cells
and 
long-lived 
plasma 
cells 
from 
prior 
infections. 
The
transepithelial transport of maternal IgA into breast milk depends
on the poly-Ig receptor described earlier this chapter, and the
ingested IgA can neutralize pathogenic organisms that aĴempt to
colonize the infant’s gut.
FIGURE 14.11  Fetal and neonatal immunity
mediated by passive transfer of maternal IgG. A,
IgG is transported from maternal blood in the
intervillous spaces of the placenta across the
placental syncytial trophoblast cells by the
neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn), and is then
transported across fetal vessel endothelial cells
into the fetal circulation. B, Serum immunoglobulin
levels in the fetus and neonate. The neonate
starts making IgG soon after birth, but the loss of
maternal IgG and the slow increase in neonatally
derived IgG results in a nadir of blood IgG
concentration at about 6 months of age. The fetus
starts making IgM late in pregnancy, and the IgM
concentrations approach adult levels more quickly
in the baby than IgG. Nonetheless, these IgMs will
not be specific for the wide range of microbes
that the maternal IgGs will recognize, and the
baby has a heightened risk for infection at the
time of the IgG nadir. IgA levels in the baby take
longer to reach adult levels than either IgM or
IgG, but maternal IgA in breast milk can provide
passive intestinal immunity in nursing babies.
Summary
• Regional immune systems, including those in the
gastrointestinal tract, respiratory tract, and skin, are
specialized collections of innate and adaptive immune cells
at particular anatomic locations that perform protective and
regulatory functions that are unique to those sites.
• The gastrointestinal immune system must cope with the
presence of trillions of commensal bacteria in the gut
lumen by preventing their invasion and tolerating their
presence in the lumen, while also identifying and
responding to numerically rare pathogenic organisms.
• Innate immunity in the gastrointestinal system is mediated
by mucosal epithelial lining cells, which impede microbial
invasion by tight intercellular junctions, secretion of mucus,
and production of antimicrobial molecules such as
defensins. Innate immune eﬀector cells in the lamina
propria include macrophages, DCs, ILCs, and mast cells.
Intraepithelial lymphocytes, including γδ T cells, defend
against commonly encountered microbes at the intestinal
epithelial barrier.
• The adaptive immune system in the intestinal tract includes
subepithelial collections of lymphoid tissues called gut-
associated lymphoid tissues (GALT), such as the
oropharyngeal tonsils, Peyer’s patches in the ileum, and
similar collections in the colon. M cells in the epithelial
lining sample lumen antigens and transport them to
antigen-presenting cells in the GALT. Lamina propria DCs
extend processes through intestinal epithelial lining cells to
sample luminal antigens.
• Eﬀector B and T lymphocytes that diﬀerentiate from naive T
cells in the GALT or mesenteric lymph nodes enter the
circulation, and selectively migrate back to the intestinal
lamina propria.
• Humoral immunity in the gastrointestinal tract is
dominated by IgA secretion into the lumen, where the
antibodies neutralize potentially invading pathogens. B
cells in the GALT and mesenteric lymph nodes diﬀerentiate
into IgA-secreting plasma cells through both T-dependent
and T-independent mechanisms, and the plasma cells
migrate to the lamina propria beneath the epithelial barrier
and secrete IgA. Dimerized IgA is transported across the
epithelium by the poly-Ig receptor and released into the
lumen. IgA is also secreted into breast milk and mediates
passive immunity in the gut of breast-feeding infants.
• Th17 cells in the intestinal tract secrete IL-17 interleukin-17
(IL-17) and IL-22, which enhance epithelial barrier function.
Th2 cells are important in defense against intestinal
parasites. Changes in bacterial ﬂora inﬂuence the balance
between diﬀerent helper T cell subset responses, both in
the gut and systemically.
• Immune responses to commensal organisms and food
antigens in the lumen of the intestinal tract are minimized
by selective expression of paĴern recognition receptors on
basolateral surfaces of the epithelial lining cells, and the
generation of regulatory T cells that suppress adaptive
immune responses. TGF-β, IL-10, and IL-2 are essential to
maintain immune homeostasis in the bowel wall. Systemic
tolerance to some antigens can be induced by feeding the
antigens to mice, a phenomenon called oral tolerance.
• Mucosal immunity in the respiratory system defends
against airborne pathogens and is the cause of allergic
airway diseases such as asthma. Innate immunity in the
bronchial tree depends on the mucus-producing, ciliated
epithelial lining, which moves the mucus with entrapped
microbes out of the lungs. Defensins, surfactant proteins,
and alveolar macrophages provide antimicrobial and
antiinﬂammatory functions. Treg and immunosuppressive
cytokines are important for prevention of harmful
responses to nonpathogenic organisms or other inhaled
antigens.
• The cutaneous immune system defends against microbial
invasion through the skin and suppresses responses against
numerous commensal organisms. The epidermis provides a
physical barrier to microbial invasion. Keratinocytes secrete
defensins and inﬂammatory cytokines in response to
microbial products. The dermis contains a mixed
population of mast cells, macrophages, and DCs that
respond to microbes and injury and mediate inﬂammatory
responses.
• Skin DCs mediate innate immune responses and transport
microbial and environmental antigens that enter through
the skin to draining lymph nodes, where they initiate T cell
responses. T cells activated in skin-draining lymph nodes
express chemokine receptors and adhesion molecules that
favor homing back to the skin.
• CD4+ or CD8+ eﬀector memory cells generated in response
to skin infections or commensals migrate to and stay in the
dermis and epidermis for long periods. These resident
memory cells have Th1, Th2, Th17, and CTL phenotypes, are
important for defense against diﬀerent types of skin-
invading pathogens. Resident memory Tregs are also
present in the skin and likely maintains tolerance to
commensal skin organisms.
• Immune-privileged sites, which are tissues where immune
responses are not readily initiated, include the brain,
anterior chamber of the eye, and testis. The mechanisms of
immune privilege include the tight junctions of endothelial
cells in blood vessels, local production of
immunosuppressive cytokines, and expression of cell
surface molecules that inactivate or kill lymphocytes.
• Maternal immunologic tolerance to the developing
mammalian fetus, which expresses allogeneic paternal
antigens, depends on mechanisms that act locally at the
placental maternal-fetal interface. Possible mechanisms
include lack of MHC expression on fetal trophoblasts, the
actions of Tregs, and the local IDO-mediated depletion of
tryptophan needed for lymphocyte growth and generation
of a toxic by-product.
• Neonatal protection against infections up to about 6 months
of age is mediated by maternal IgG antibodies transferred
to the fetal circulation through the placenta and in
intestines of nursing babies by maternal IgA in ingested
breast milk.
Selected Readings
∗Indicates publications of historical interest, generally reporting
the discovery of a phenomenon or process that was later shown to
be of fundamental importance in the immune system. Many (but
not all) of these discoveries led to Nobel Prizes for the
discoverer(s). The nature of the discovery is summarized brieﬂy in
each reference.
Gastrointestinal Immune System
Agace W.W, McCoy K.D. Regionalized development and maintenance of the intestinal
adaptive immune landscape.  Immunity . 2017;46:532–548.
Ahern P.P, Maloy K.J. Understanding immune-microbiota interactions in the intestine. 
Immunology . 2000;159:4–14.
Al Nabhani Z, Eberl G. Imprinting of the immune system by the microbiota early in life. 
Mucosal Immunol . 2020;13:183–189.
Blander J.M, Longman R.S, Iliev I.D, et al. Regulation of inﬂammation by microbiota
interactions with the host.  Nat Immunol . 2017;18:851–860.
Brown E.M, Kenny D.J, Xavier R.J. Gut microbiota regulation of T cells during inﬂammation
and autoimmunity.  Annu Rev Immunol . 2019;37:599–624.
Burgueno J.F, Abreu M.T. Epithelial Toll-like receptors and their role in gut homeostasis and
disease.  Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol . 2020;17:263–278.
Chewning J.H, Weaver C.T. Development and survival of Th17 cells within the intestines:
the inﬂuence of microbiome- and diet-derived signals.  J Immunol . 2014;193:4769–4777.
Diefenbach A, Gnafakis S, Shomrat O. Innate lymphoid cell-epithelial cell modules sustain
intestinal homeostasis.  Immunity . 2020;52:452–463.
Gensollen T, Iyer S.S, Kasper D.L, Blumberg R.S. How colonization by microbiota in early
life shapes the immune system.  Science . 2016;352:539–544.
Godfrey D.I, Koay H.F, McCluskey J, Gherardin N.A. The biology and functional
importance of MAIT cells.  Nat Immunol . 2019;20:1110–1128.
Habtezion A, Nguyen L.P, Hadeiba H, Butcher E.C. Leukocyte traﬃcking to the small
intestine and colon.  Gastroenterology . 2016;150:340–354.
Honda K, LiĴman D.R. The microbiota in adaptive immune homeostasis and disease. 
Nature . 2016;535:75–84.
Joeris T, Muller-Luda K, Agace W.W, Mowat A.M. Diversity and functions of intestinal
mononuclear phagocytes.  Mucosal Immunol . 2017;10:845–864.
Johansson M.E, Hansson G.C. Immunological aspects of intestinal mucus and mucins.  Nat
Rev Immunol . 2016;16:639–649.
Kanaya T, Williams I.R, Ohno H. Intestinal M cells: tireless samplers of enteric microbiota. 
Traﬃc . 2020;21:34–44.
Kurashima Y, Kiyono H. Mucosal ecological network of epithelium and immune cells for
gut homeostasis and tissue healing.  Annu Rev Immunol . 2017;35:119–147.
Muller P.A, Matheis F, Mucida D. Gut macrophages: key players in intestinal immunity and
tissue physiology.  Curr Opin Immunol . 2020;62:54–61.
Sun T, Nguyen A, Gommerman J.L. Dendritic cell subsets in intestinal immunity and
inﬂammation.  J Immunol . 2020;204:1075–1083.
Tanoue T, Atarashi K, Honda K. Development and maintenance of intestinal regulatory T
cells.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2016;16:295–309.
Van Kaer L, Olivares-Villagomez D. Development, homeostasis, and functions of intestinal
intraepithelial lymphocytes.  J Immunol . 2018;200:2235–2244.
Varyani F, Fleming J.O, Maizels R.M. Helminths in the gastrointestinal tract as modulators
of immunity and pathology.  Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol . 2017;312:G537–
G549.
Whibley N, Tucci A, Powrie F. Regulatory T cell adaptation in the intestine and skin.  Nat
Immunol . 2019;20:386–396.
Antibody Production in the Gastrointestinal Immune System
Bunker J.J, Bendelac A. IgA responses to microbiota.  Immunity . 2018;49:211–224.
Chen K, Magri G, Grasset E.K, CeruĴi A. Rethinking mucosal antibody responses: IgM, IgG
and IgD join IgA.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2020;20:427–441.
∗Chodirker W.B, Tomasi Jr. T.B. Gamma-globulins: quantitative relationships in human
serum and nonvascular ﬂuids.  Science . 1963;142:1080–1081 (The foundational discovery
in the ﬁeld of mucosal immunology that IgA is the predominant class of antibody present in a
variety of secretions found at mucosal surfaces, including saliva, bile, tears, and intestinal
ﬂuid, which led to characterization of secretory IgA.).
Guĵeit C, Magri G, CeruĴi A. Intestinal IgA production and its role in host-microbe
interaction.  Immunol Rev . 2014;260:76–85.
Macpherson A.J, Yilmaz B, Limenitakis J.P, Ganal-Vonarburg S.C. IgA function in relation
to the intestinal microbiota.  Annu Rev Immunol . 2018;36:359–381.
Respiratory Mucosal Immune System
Chen K, Kolls J.K. T cell-mediated host immune defenses in the lung.  Annu Rev Immunol
. 2013;31:605–633.
Hussell T, Bell T.J. Alveolar macrophages: plasticity in a tissue-speciﬁc context.  Nat Rev
Immunol . 2014;14:81–93.
Silva-Sanchez A, Randall T.D. Role of iBALT in respiratory immunity.  Curr Top Microbiol
Immunol . 2020 31974759.
Stehle C, Hernandez D.C, Romagnani C. Innate lymphoid cells in lung infection and
immunity.  Immunol Rev . 2018;286:102–119.
Skin Immune System
Ali N, Rosenblum M.D. Regulatory T cells in skin.  Immunology . 2017;152:372–381.
Chen Y.E, Fischbach M.A, Belkaid Y. Skin microbiota-host interactions.  Nature
. 2018;553:427–436.
Ho A.W, Kupper T.S. T cells and the skin: from protective immunity to inﬂammatory skin
disorders.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2019;19:490–502.
Klicznik M.M, Szenes-Nagy A.B, Campbell D.J, Graĵ I.K. Taking the lead: how
keratinocytes orchestrate skin T cell immunity.  Immunol LeĴ . 2018;200:43–51.
Malissen B, Tamoutounour S, Henri S. The origins and functions of dendritic cells and
macrophages in the skin.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2014;14:417–428.
Other Specialized Immune Systems
Deshmukh H, Way S.S. Immunological basis for recurrent fetal loss and pregnancy
complications.  Ann Rev Pathol . 2019;14:185–210.
Engelhardt B, Vajkoczy P, Weller R.O. The movers and shapers in immune privilege of the
CNS.  Nat Immunol . 2017;18:123–131.
Erlebacher A. Mechanisms of T cell tolerance towards the allogeneic fetus.  Nat Rev Immunol
. 2013;13:23–33.
Forrester J.V, McMenamin P.G, Dando S.J. CNS infection and immune privilege.  Nat Rev
Neurosci . 2018;19:655–671.
PrabhuDas M, Bonney E, Caron K, et al. Immune mechanisms at the maternal-fetal
interface: perspectives and challenges.  Nat Immunol . 2015;16:328–334.
Schumacher A, Sharkey D.J, Robertson S.A, Zenclussen A.C. Immune cells at the
fetomaternal interface: how the microenvironment modulates immune cells to foster
fetal development.  J Immunol . 2018;201:325–334.
Chapter 15: Immunologic
Tolerance and Autoimmunity
Overview Of Immunologic Tolerance,
T Lymphocyte Tolerance,
Central T Cell Tolerance,
Peripheral T Cell Tolerance,
Factors That Determine the Tolerogenicity of
Self Antigens,
B Lymphocyte Tolerance,
Central B Cell Tolerance,
Peripheral B Cell Tolerance,
Tolerance to Commensal Microbes and Other Foreign
Antigens,
Therapeutic Tolerance Induction,
Mechanisms Of Autoimmunity,
General Features of Autoimmune Disorders,
Immunologic Abnormalities Leading to
Autoimmunity,
Genetic Basis of Autoimmunity,
Role of Infections in Autoimmunity,
Other Factors in Autoimmunity,
Summary,
Immunologic tolerance is deﬁned as unresponsiveness to an
antigen that is induced by exposure to that antigen. The term arose
from the experimental observation that animals that had
encountered an antigen under particular conditions would not
respond to, that is, would tolerate, subsequent exposures to the
same antigen. When speciﬁc lymphocytes encounter antigens, the
lymphocytes may be activated, leading to immune responses, or the
cells may be inactivated or eliminated, leading to tolerance. The
same antigen may induce an immune response or tolerance,
depending on the conditions of exposure and the presence or
absence of other concomitant stimuli such as costimulators.
Antigens that induce tolerance are called tolerogens, or tolerogenic
antigens, to distinguish them from immunogens, which generate
immunity. Tolerance to self antigens, also called self-tolerance, is a
fundamental property of the normal immune system, and failure of
self-tolerance results in immune reactions against self (autologous)
antigens. Such reactions are called autoimmunity, and the diseases
they cause are called autoimmune diseases. In Chapter 1, we
introduced the concept of self–non-self discrimination, which is the
ability of the immune system to recognize and respond to foreign
antigens but not to self antigens. Macfarlane Burnet, among the
ﬁrst to hypothesize clonal selection, added the corollary that
lymphocytes speciﬁc for self antigens are eliminated to prevent
immune reactions against one’s own tissues. We now know there
are multiple mechanisms of self-tolerance, in addition to
elimination 
of 
self-reactive 
lymphocytes. 
Elucidating 
these
mechanisms and why they sometimes fail is the key to
understanding the pathogenesis of autoimmunity.
In this chapter, we will discuss immunologic tolerance mainly in
the context of self-tolerance and how self-tolerance may fail,
resulting in autoimmunity. We will also consider tolerance to
foreign antigens and the potential of tolerance induction as a
therapeutic strategy for allergic and autoimmune diseases.
Induction of tolerance to prevent the rejection of cell and organ
transplants is discussed in Chapter 17.
Overview of Immunologic Tolerance
There are several characteristics of tolerance in T and B lymphocyte
populations. It is important to appreciate the general principles
before we discuss the speciﬁc mechanisms of tolerance in these
lymphocytes.
The mechanisms of tolerance eliminate and inactivate lymphocytes
that express high-aﬃnity receptors for self antigens. All individuals
inherit essentially the same antigen receptor gene segments, and
these recombine and are expressed in lymphocytes as the cells arise
from precursor cells. The speciﬁcities of the receptors encoded by
the recombined genes are random and are not inﬂuenced by what
is foreign or self for each individual (see Chapter 8). It is not
surprising that during this process of generating a large and
diverse repertoire, some developing T and B cells in every
individual may express receptors capable of recognizing normal
molecules in that individual (i.e., self antigens). Therefore, there is
a risk for lymphocytes to react against that individual’s cells and
tissues, causing disease. The mechanisms of immunologic tolerance
prevent such reactions.
Tolerance is antigen speciﬁc, resulting from the recognition of
antigens by individual clones of lymphocytes. This contrasts with
therapeutic immunosuppression, which aﬀects lymphocytes of
many speciﬁcities. The key advances that allowed immunologists to
study tolerance were the ability to induce this phenomenon in
animals by exposure to deﬁned antigens under various conditions
and to then analyze the survival and functions of the lymphocytes
that had encountered the antigens. In the 1950s, Peter Medawar and
colleagues showed that neonatal mice of one strain exposed to cells
from other strains became unresponsive to subsequent skin grafts
from the donor strain. Later studies showed that tolerance could be
induced not only to foreign cells but also to proteins and other
antigens. Any antigen may be an immunogen or a tolerogen,
depending on numerous factors, such as antigen exposure during
lymphocyte maturation and recognition by speciﬁc lymphocytes in
the presence or absence of innate immune responses. These factors
are discussed later in the chapter.
Self-tolerance 
may 
be 
induced 
in 
immature 
self-reactive
lymphocytes in the generative lymphoid organs (central tolerance) or
in mature lymphocytes in peripheral sites (peripheral tolerance) (Fig.
15.1) . Central tolerance ensures that the repertoire of mature naive
lymphocytes becomes incapable of responding to self antigens that
are expressed in the generative lymphoid organs (the thymus for T
cells and the bone marrow for B lymphocytes, also called primary or
central lymphoid organs). However, central tolerance is not perfect,
and many self-reactive lymphocytes complete their maturation and
are present in healthy individuals. Therefore, the mechanisms of
peripheral tolerance are needed to prevent activation of these
potentially dangerous lymphocytes.
FIGURE 15.1  Central and peripheral tolerance to
self antigens.In central tolerance, immature
lymphocytes specific for self antigens may
encounter these antigens in the generative
lymphoid organs (referred to as central organs in
the context of tolerance induction) and are
deleted, change their specificity (B cells only), or
(in the case of CD4+ T cells) develop into
regulatory lymphocytes (Tregs). In peripheral
tolerance, some self-reactive lymphocytes may
mature and enter peripheral tissues and may be
inactivated or deleted by an encounter with self
antigens in these tissues or are suppressed by
the regulatory T cells (Tregs, peripheral
tolerance).
Central tolerance occurs during a stage in the maturation of
lymphocytes when an encounter with an antigen may lead to cell
death or replacement of a self-reactive antigen receptor with one
that is not self-reactive. As lymphocytes are maturing in the
generative lymphoid organs, immature cells may encounter
antigens in these organs. The antigens that are present in these
organs are mostly self antigens, because foreign (e.g., microbial)
antigens that enter from the external environment are typically
captured and taken to secondary lymphoid organs, such as the
lymph nodes, spleen, and mucosal lymphoid tissues, and are not
concentrated in the thymus or bone marrow. The antigens normally
present in the thymus and bone marrow include ubiquitous, or
widely disseminated, self antigens, some of which may be
expressed by cells in the thymus and others may be brought in by
the blood. In addition, many peripheral tissue–speciﬁc antigens are
expressed in the thymus by a special mechanism that is described
later. Therefore, in the generative lymphoid organs, the immature
lymphocytes that recognize antigens are typically cells with high-
aﬃnity receptors speciﬁc for self antigens. The fates of immature
lymphocytes that recognize self antigens with high aﬃnity are
described later (see Fig. 15.1).
Mature lymphocytes that recognize self antigens in peripheral
tissues become incapable of activation by re-exposure to that
antigen or die by apoptosis. These mechanisms of peripheral
tolerance are important for maintaining unresponsiveness to self
antigens that are expressed in peripheral tissues and not in the
generative lymphoid organs and for tolerance to antigens that are
expressed after mature lymphocytes speciﬁc for these antigens have
already been generated.
Peripheral tolerance is also maintained by regulatory T cells
(Tregs) that actively suppress the activation of lymphocytes speciﬁc
for self and other antigens. Treg-mediated suppression occurs in
secondary lymphoid organs and nonlymphoid tissues. In addition
to suppressing immune responses to self antigens in peripheral
tissues, Tregs may also prevent responses to antigens derived from
commensal microbes, or from the fetus in pregnant females.
Some self antigens are sequestered from the immune system, and
other antigens are ignored. Antigens may be sequestered from the
immune system by anatomic barriers, such as in the testes and
eyes, and thus cannot engage antigen receptors (see Chapter 14).
Commensal microbes also may be separated from the immune
system by physical barriers, such as the keratin layer of the skin
and the mucus layer of the gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts.
In experimental models, some self antigens are available for
recognition by lymphocytes but, for unknown reasons, fail to elicit
any response and are functionally ignored. The importance of this
phenomenon of ignorance for the maintenance of self-tolerance is
not established.
The induction of immunologic tolerance is a possible therapeutic
strategy for preventing harmful immune responses in autoimmune
and allergic disease and transplant rejection. Tolerance induction
also may be useful for preventing immune reactions to the
products of newly expressed genes in gene therapy protocols, for
preventing reactions to injected proteins in patients with
deﬁciencies of these proteins (e.g., patients with hemophilia treated
with Factor VIII), and for promoting acceptance of stem cell
transplants.
Experimental approaches, especially the creation of genetically
modiﬁed mice, have provided valuable models for analysis of self-
tolerance, and many of our current concepts are based on studies
with such models. Furthermore, by identifying mutations and
genetic polymorphisms that may be associated with autoimmunity
in mice and humans, it has been possible to deduce some of the
p
mechanisms of self-tolerance. However, for most self antigens, we
do not know which ones induce central or peripheral tolerance (or
are ignored). More importantly, it is also not known which
tolerance mechanisms fail in common human autoimmune
diseases, and this remains a major challenge in understanding
autoimmunity.
We will discuss central and peripheral tolerance ﬁrst in T cells
and then in B lymphocytes, but many aspects of the processes are
common to both lineages.
T Lymphocyte Tolerance
Much of our understanding of tolerance to self antigens is based on
studying this process in T lymphocytes. This is, in part, because
immunologists have developed informative experimental models
for studying T cell tolerance. In addition, many of the therapeutic
strategies that are being developed to induce tolerance to
transplants and autoantigens are aimed at inactivating or
eliminating T cells. This is because pathologic inﬂammatory
reactions are typically mediated by T cells, and CD4+ helper T cells
also promote the production of potentially injurious antibodies by
B cells.
Central T Cell Tolerance
During their maturation in the thymus, many immature T cells that
recognize antigens with high avidity die, and some of the surviving
cells in the CD4 +   lineage develop into Tregs (Fig. 15.2) . Death of
immature T cells as a result of recognition of antigens in the
thymus is known as deletion, or negative selection; it was described
in Chapter 8 in the discussion of T cell maturation. This process
aﬀects class I and class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC)-
restricted T cells and is therefore important for tolerance in both
CD8+ and CD4+ lymphocyte populations. Negative selection of
thymocytes is responsible for the fact that the repertoire of mature
T cells that leave the thymus and populate peripheral lymphoid
tissues is unresponsive to many self antigens that are present in the
thymus. Negative selection occurs in double-positive T cells in the
thymic cortex and newly generated single-positive T cells in the
medulla. In both locations, immature thymocytes with high-aﬃnity
receptors for self antigens that encounter these antigens die by
apoptosis. The two main factors that determine if a particular self
antigen will induce negative selection of self-reactive thymocytes
are the presence of that antigen in the thymus, by local expression
or delivery by the blood, and the aﬃnity of the thymocyte T cell
receptors (TCRs) that recognize the antigen. Thus, the important
questions that are relevant to negative selection are which self
antigens are present in the thymus and how immature T cells that
recognize these antigens are deleted.
FIGURE 15.2  Central T cell tolerance.Recognition of
self antigens by immature T cells in the thymus
leads to the death of the cells (negative selection,
or deletion) or to the development of regulatory T
cells (Tregs) that enter peripheral tissues.
The antigens that are present in the thymus include many
circulating and cell-associated proteins that are widely distributed
in most tissues. The thymus also has a special mechanism for
expressing numerous protein antigens that are not ubiquitously
expressed but rather are limited to certain peripheral tissues, so
that immature T cells speciﬁc for these antigens can be deleted
from the developing T cell repertoire. These peripheral tissue
antigens are produced in medullary thymic epithelial cells (MTECs)
under the control of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) protein.
Mutations in the AIRE gene are the cause of an autoimmune
disease called autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS1).
This group of diseases is characterized by antibody- and
lymphocyte-mediated 
injury 
to 
multiple 
endocrine 
organs,
including the parathyroids, adrenals, and pancreatic islets, as well
as the skin and other tissues. A mouse model of APS1 has been
developed by knockout of the AIRE gene, and it recapitulates many
of the features of the human disease. Studies with mice have shown
that several proteins that are produced in peripheral organs (such
as pancreatic insulin) are also expressed at low levels in MTECs by
an AIRE-dependent mechanism, and immature T cells that
recognize these antigens are deleted in the thymus or the T cells
develop into Tregs. In the absence of functional AIRE (as in APS1
patients and AIRE-knockout mice), these antigens are not
expressed in the thymus, and CD4+ and CD8+ T cells speciﬁc for the
antigens escape deletion, mature, and enter the periphery, where
they aĴack the target tissues in which the antigens are expressed
independent of AIRE (Fig. 15.3). Patients also make a variety of
autoantibodies, probably because of failure to delete helper T cells
speciﬁc 
for 
self 
antigens. 
Interestingly, 
some 
of 
these
autoantibodies react against and neutralize their own interleukin-
17 (IL-17), IL-22, and type I interferons (IFNs). The deﬁciency of IL-
17 (and perhaps IL-22) makes these patients susceptible to
mucocutaneous candidiasis, which is a common feature of APS1
and reﬂects the essential role of Th17 cytokines in defense against
this fungal infection (see Chapter 10). The AIRE protein may
function as a transcriptional regulator to promote the expression of
selected tissue-restricted antigens in the thymus. It is a component
of a multiprotein complex that is expressed mainly in MTECs and is
involved in transcriptional elongation and chromatin remodeling.
How AIRE drives expression of a wide range of tissue antigens and
not other proteins is still not known. AIRE is also expressed in
peripheral tissues, but its role in the elimination of self-reactive T
cells in the periphery is not established,
High-aﬃnity TCR signaling in immature T cells triggers the
mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis. The mechanisms of apoptosis
are described later in this chapter, when we discuss deletion as a
mechanism of peripheral T cell tolerance. Clearly, immature and
mature lymphocytes interpret antigen receptor signals diﬀerently—
the former die and the laĴer are activated. The biochemical basis of
this diﬀerence is not known.
Some self-reactive CD4 +   T cells that see self antigens in the
thymus are not deleted but instead diﬀerentiate into Tregs that are
speciﬁc for these antigens (see Fig. 15.2) . The regulatory cells leave
the thymus and inhibit responses against self antigens in the
periphery. What determines the choice between deletion and
development of Tregs is not known. Possible factors include the
aﬃnity of antigen recognition, the types of antigen-presenting cells
(APCs) presenting the antigen, and the availability of certain
cytokines locally in the thymus. We will describe the characteristics
and functions of Tregs later in the context of peripheral tolerance
because these cells suppress immune responses in the periphery.
Peripheral T Cell Tolerance
The mechanisms of peripheral tolerance are anergy (functional
unresponsiveness), suppression by Tregs, and deletion (cell death)
(Fig. 15.4) . These mechanisms may be responsible for T cell
tolerance to tissue-speciﬁc self antigens, especially those that are
not abundant in the thymus. We do not know if tolerance to
diﬀerent self antigens is maintained by one or another mechanism
or if all of these mechanisms function cooperatively to prevent
autoimmunity. 
The 
same 
mechanisms 
may 
also 
induce
unresponsiveness to foreign antigens that are presented to the
immune system under tolerogenic conditions.
FIGURE 15.3  The function of AIRE in deletion of T
cells in the thymus. A, The autoimmune regulator
(AIRE) protein is part of a complex that regulates
the expression of tissue-restricted antigens
(TRAs) in medullary thymic epithelial cells
(MTECs). (Other proteins in this transcriptional
regulatory complex are not shown.) Peptides
derived from these antigens are displayed on the
MTEC and recognized by immature antigen-
specific T cells, leading to the deletion of many
self-reactive T cells. B, In the absence of
functional AIRE, these immature self-reactive T
cells are not eliminated; they can mature into
naive T cells that can be activated in secondary
lymphoid organs, generating effector T cells (not
shown) that enter tissues where the antigens
continue to be produced and cause injury.
Although only CD4+ T cells are shown, AIRE also
controls the deletion of CD8+ T cells.
Anergy (Functional Unresponsiveness)
Exposure of mature CD4 +   T cells to an antigen in the absence of
costimulation or innate immunity may make the cells incapable of
responding to that antigen. In this process, which is called anergy,
the self-reactive cells are not killed, but they become unresponsive
to the antigen. We previously introduced the concept that full
activation of T cells requires the recognition of the antigen by the
TCR (which provides signal 1) and recognition of costimulators,
mainly B7-1 and B7-2, by CD28 (signal 2) (see Chapter 9). Prolonged
signal 1 (i.e., antigen recognition) alone may lead to anergy. It is
likely that self antigens are continuously displayed to speciﬁc T
cells in the absence of innate immunity and strong costimulation.
Antigen-induced anergy has been demonstrated in a variety of
experimental models, including studies with T cell clones exposed
to antigens in vitro (which were the basis for the original deﬁnition
of anergy), and in experiments in which antigens are administered
to mice without adjuvants. Other studies have used transgenic mice
in which particular protein antigens are expressed throughout life
and are recognized by T cells in the absence of the inﬂammation
and innate immune responses that normally accompany exposure
to microbes. There is evidence that anergy is a mechanism of
tolerance to some self antigens in humans as well. Anergic cells
may survive for days or weeks in a quiescent state and then die.
Several mechanisms may function to induce and maintain the
anergic state (Fig. 15.5):
• TCR-induced signal transduction is blocked in anergic cells.
The mechanisms of this signaling block are not fully
known. In diﬀerent experimental models, it is aĴributable
to decreased TCR expression (perhaps because of increased
p
p
p
degradation; see later) and recruitment to the TCR complex
of inhibitory molecules such as tyrosine phosphatases.
• Self antigen recognition without costimulation may activate
cellular ubiquitin ligases, which ubiquitinate TCR-
associated proteins and target them for proteolytic
degradation in proteasomes or lysosomes. The net result is
loss of these signaling molecules and defective T cell
activation (see Fig. 7.22). One ubiquitin ligase that is
important in T cells is CBL-b (see Chapter 7). Mice in which
the gene encoding CBL-b is knocked out show spontaneous
T cell proliferation and manifestations of autoimmunity,
suggesting that this enzyme is involved in maintaining T
cell unresponsiveness to self antigens. It is not known why
self antigen recognition, which occurs typically without
strong costimulation, activates these ubiquitin ligases,
whereas foreign antigens that are recognized with
costimulation do so much less or not at all.
FIGURE 15.4  Mechanisms of peripheral T cell
tolerance.The signals involved in a normal
immune response (A) and the three major
mechanisms of peripheral T cell tolerance (B)
are illustrated. TCR, T cell receptor.
• When T cells recognize self antigens in the absence of innate
immune responses, they may engage inhibitory receptors of
the CD28 family, whose function is to terminate T cell
responses. The functions of the best-known inhibitory
receptors of T cells are described in the following section.
Regulation of T Cell Responses by Inhibitory Receptors
In Chapter 9, we introduced the general concept that the outcome
of antigen recognition by T cells is determined by a balance
between engagement of activating and inhibitory receptors at the
time of TCR recognition of antigen. Although many inhibitory
receptors have been described, the two whose physiologic role in
self-tolerance is best established are CTLA-4 and PD-1. These
receptors have been called coinhibitors, to contrast them with
costimulators. Studies of these inhibitory receptors have increased
our understanding of tolerance mechanisms and led to new
therapeutic approaches for manipulating immune responses.
CTLA-4
CTLA-4 (cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen-4, so named because of
how it was discovered) is a member of the CD28 receptor family
(see Fig. 9.5) and, like the activating receptor CD28, it binds to B7
molecules. The importance of CTLA-4 in tolerance induction is
illustrated by the ﬁnding that knockout mice lacking CTLA-4 and
people with loss-of-function mutations in the CTLA4 gene
(discussed in more detail below) develop inﬂammatory lesions
containing activated T cells and macrophages aﬀecting multiple
organs. These results indicate that defects in this one control
mechanism result in failure of self-tolerance. Polymorphisms in the
CTLA4 gene are also associated with several autoimmune diseases
in humans, including type 1 diabetes and Graves’ disease.
CTLA-4 functions as a competitive inhibitor of CD28 and reduces
the availability of B7 for the CD28 receptor (Fig. 15.6) . CTLA-4 has
an unusual mechanism of action. It is expressed constitutively at
high levels on Tregs and transiently on recently activated T cells,
and it prevents the activation of responding T cells. In other words,
CTLA-4 on one T cell (a Treg) can inhibit responses of other T cells.
Recall that CD28 and CTLA-4 recognize the same ligands, B7-1
(CD80) and B7-2 (CD86) (see Fig. 9.5). CTLA-4 has a 10- to 20-fold
higher aﬃnity for B7 than does CD28. The cytoplasmic tail of
CTLA-4 does not appear to have any signaling function; instead, it
contains a motif that connects it to clathrin, a protein involved in
receptor-mediated endocytosis. Because of this, CTLA-4 is an
endocytic receptor that binds to B7 molecules on APCs and
removes and ingests these molecules, a process that has been called
transendocytosis (in which one cell endocytoses a protein from
another cell). Therefore, when CTLA-4 is expressed on either Tregs
or activated T cells, it out-competes CD28 and reduces the amount
of B7 available on the APCs to provide costimulation via CD28. This
competitive inhibition is especially important when B7 levels on
APCs are low (as on resting APCs displaying self antigens). When
B7 levels increase, for example, after exposure to microbes, there is
relatively more engagement of the low-aﬃnity receptor CD28.
Because CTLA-4 limits the initial, costimulation-dependent
activation of T cells in secondary lymphoid organs, mutating or
blocking this receptor leads to severely dysregulated immune
responses with enlarged lymph nodes, lymphoproliferation, and
multiorgan inﬂammation.
FIGURE 15.5  Mechanisms of T cell anergy.T cell
responses are induced when the cells recognize
an antigen presented by a professional antigen-
presenting cell (APC) and activating receptors on
the T cells (such as CD28) recognize
costimulators on the APCs (such as B7). If the T
cell recognizes a self antigen without
costimulation, the T cell becomes unresponsive to
the antigen because of a block in signaling from
the T cell receptor (TCR) complex or engagement
of inhibitory receptors (such as cytotoxic T
lymphocyte antigen 4 [CTLA-4] and programmed
cell death protein-1 [PD-1]). The signaling block
may be the result of recruitment of phosphatases
to the TCR complex or the activation of ubiquitin
ligases that degrade signaling proteins. The T cell
remains viable but is unable to respond to the self
antigen. DC, Dendritic cell.
Mutations of even one allele of CTLA-4 cause systemic
inﬂammation 
involving 
multiple 
organs, 
with 
severe
lymphoproliferation. It is thought that haploinsuﬃciency reduces
the level of expressed CTLA-4 enough that it cannot compete
eﬀectively with CD28. Mutations aﬀecting a protein called LRBA
that is involved in the endocytosis and recycling of CTLA-4 cause a
similar systemic inﬂammatory disease, further emphasizing the
critical role of CTLA-4 traﬃcking in its inhibitory function. Because
these diseases are caused by excessive B7-CD28–mediated
costimulation 
resulting 
from 
failure 
of 
CTLA-4–mediated
competition, they can be treated by blocking B7 molecules with the
drug CTLA-4-Ig (see Fig. 9.7).
The realization that CTLA-4 limits, or acts as a checkpoint, in
immune responses has led to the idea that lymphocyte activation
can be promoted by reducing inhibition. Blocking CTLA-4 with
antibodies results in increased immune responses to tumors, a
process known as checkpoint blockade (see Chapter 18). Anti–
CTLA-4 antibody is now approved for the treatment of advanced
melanomas and other cancers. Predictably, many of the treated
patients 
develop 
manifestations 
of 
autoimmunity 
with
inﬂammation in various organs.
PD-1
Another inhibitory receptor of the CD28 family is PD-1
(programmed cell death protein 1, so called because it was
originally thought to be involved in programmed cell death, but
now is known not to have a role in T cell apoptosis). PD-1
recognizes two ligands, called PD-L1 and PD-L2; PD-L1 is expressed
on APCs and many other tissue cells, and PD-L2 is expressed
mainly on bone marrow–derived APCs. The receptor PD-1 is
expressed on antigen-activated T cells. Engagement of PD-1 by
either of its ligands leads to the phosphorylation of an
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motif (ITIM) and a
switch motif (ITSM) in the cytoplasmic tail (see Chapter 7). These
motifs bind the phosphatase SHP2, which removes phosphates
from various substrates (Fig. 15.7). Thus, PD-1 counteracts kinase-
dependent signals from the TCR-coreceptor complex and from
CD28 and other costimulatory receptors, resulting in inactivation of
the T cells. Mice in which PD-1 is knocked out develop
autoimmunity that is typically milder than that seen in CTLA-4
knockouts. PD-1 expression on T cells increases with antigen
stimulation, so it is especially important for controlling responses
to prolonged antigen exposure, as with self antigens, tumors, and
chronic infections. Checkpoint blockade with anti–PD-1 and anti–
PD-L1 antibodies is used to treat a wide variety of cancers, but it is
also associated with the development of autoimmune reactions (see
Chapter 18).
FIGURE 15.6  Mechanism of action of CTLA-4. A,
Cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4)
expressed on regulatory T cells (Tregs) or
activated T cells can inhibit the activation of
responding T cells on the same antigen-presenting
cells (APCs) (in trans). B, CTLA-4 on regulatory
or activated T cells binds to B7 molecules on
APCs and removes these molecules from the
surface of the APCs, making the B7 costimulators
unavailable to CD28 and blocking T cell activation.
This action of CTLA-4 is able to suppress immune
responses best when B7 levels are low, enabling
CTLA-4 to out-compete the lower-affinity receptor
CD28.
Although both CTLA-4 and PD-1 establish checkpoints in
immune responses, their roles may be complementary and not
identical. For example, PD-1 appears to be most important for
terminating the responses of eﬀector T cells, especially CD8+ cells,
in peripheral tissues, whereas CTLA-4, as discussed previously,
limits the initial activation of T cells in secondary lymphoid organs.
Also, the prinicipal function of CTLA-4 is to prevent responses to
self antigens, but PD-1 may have evolved to limit excessive
reactions against microbes, especially viruses, and reduce
immunopathology associated with these infections. Some of their
major diﬀerences are summarized in Table 15.1.
FIGURE 15.7  Mechanism of action of PD-
1.Engagement of its ligands, most often PD-L1,
by PD-1 (programmed cell death protein-1) on T
cells recruits a receptor-associated phosphatase,
SHP2, to an ITIM or ITSM in the cytoplasmic tail
of PD-1, which removes phosphates from other
proteins and inhibits kinase-dependent signals
from CD28 and the T cell receptor complex. Note
that only some signals from the TCR complex and
CD28 are shown. APC, Antigen-presenting cell;
ITAM, immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation
motif; ITIM, immunoreceptor tyrosine-based
inhibitory motif; ITSM, immunoreceptor tyrosine-
based switch motif; PD-1, programmed cell death
protein-1; TCR, T cell receptor.
Table 15.1
Actions and Functions of CTLA-4 and PD-1
CTLA-4
PD-1
Major site of
action
Secondary lymphoid
organs
Peripheral tissues
Stage of
immune
response
that is
inhibited
Induction (priming)
Eﬀector phase
Cell type that
is inhibited
CD4+ ≥ CD8+
CD8+ > CD4+
Main cellular
expression
Tregs, activated T cells
Activated T cells
Main signals
inhibited
Competitive inhibitor
of CD28
costimulation (by
binding to B7 with
high aﬃnity and
removing B7 from
APCs)
Signaling inhibitor of
CD28 and TCR:
Inhibits kinase-
dependent signals
from CD28 and
TCR by recruiting
SHP2
Principal
physiologic
role
(postulated)
Preventing
autoimmune
responses to self
antigens
Preventing excessive
(pathologic)
responses to
microbes
(especially viruses)
and some self
antigens
APCs, Antigen-presenting cells; CTLA-4, cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen 4; PD-1,
programmed cell death protein 1; TCR, T cell receptor; Tregs, regulatory T cells.
Several other inhibitory receptors have been identiﬁed, including
some belonging to the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor family
and others to the T cell immunoglobulin and mucin (TIM) family.
The signiﬁcance and biologic roles of these receptors are not as well
established as the mechanisms of action and functions of CTLA-4
and PD-1. There is great interest in deﬁning the roles of these
receptors in the regulation of immune responses and in targeting
these 
molecules 
therapeutically, 
especially 
for 
cancer
immunotherapy (see Chapter 18).
Suppression by Regulatory T Cells
The concept that some lymphocytes could control the responses of
other lymphocytes was proposed many years ago and was soon
followed by experimental demonstrations of populations of T
lymphocytes that suppressed immune responses. These initial
ﬁndings led to enormous interest in suppressor T cells, which
became one of the dominant topics of immunology research in the
1980s. However, this ﬁeld has had a somewhat checkered history,
mainly because aĴempts to deﬁne populations of suppressor cells
and their mechanisms of action were largely unsuccessful. In the
1990s, the idea had an impressive rebirth, with the application of
beĴer approaches to deﬁne, purify, and analyze populations of T
lymphocytes that inhibit immune responses. These cells are called
regulatory T cells (Tregs).
Regulatory T cells are a subset of CD4 +   T cells whose principal
function is to suppress immune responses (Fig. 15.8) . CD4+ Tregs
express high levels of the IL-2 receptor α chain (CD25) and the
transcription factor called FOXP3. FOXP3 is a member of the
forkhead family of transcription factors and is critical for the
development and function of most Tregs. The essential role of
FOXP3+ Tregs in maintaining self-tolerance and preventing
autoimmunity has been established by the analysis of inherited
diseases. A rare systemic autoimmune disease in humans called
IPEX (immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-
linked) syndrome is caused by loss-of-function mutations in the
FOXP3 gene, which result in a deﬁciency of Tregs. This disease is
fatal unless the children are given hematopoietic stem cell
transplants, which restore normal Tregs. Mice with spontaneous or
experimentally induced mutations in the foxp3 gene develop a
similar multisystem autoimmune disease associated with an
absence of CD25+ Tregs, and the disease can be prevented by
introducing normal Tregs. These observations have established the
importance of Tregs for maintaining self-tolerance. The recent
surge of interest in Tregs is because of an increasing appreciation
of their physiologic roles, as well as the possibility that defects in
these cells may result in various autoimmune diseases and,
conversely, that Tregs can be administered or expanded to treat
inﬂammatory diseases.
Phenotypic Markers and Heterogeneity of Regulatory T Cells
Although numerous T cell populations have been described as
possessing suppressive activity, the cell type whose regulatory role
is best established is CD4+ FOXP3+ CD25high. FOXP3 and CD25 are
essential for the generation, maintenance, and function of these
cells. These cells usually express low levels of the receptor for IL-7
(CD127), and as predicted from this paĴern of receptor expression,
they use IL-2 but not IL-7 as their growth and survival factor.
FOXP3+ Tregs typically express high levels of CTLA-4, which is also
required for their function. Demethylation of the FOXP3 gene locus
and of other loci containing genes that are expressed in these cells
serves to maintain a stable regulatory T cell phenotype, and these
epigenetic changes are now used to identify Tregs in basic and
clinical research. FOXP3+ Tregs are classiﬁed as thymic or
peripheral, based on where they develop (discussed next). There
also may be subsets of Tregs that are distinguished by history of
antigen response (naive, activated, and memory) or tissue residence
(lymphoid and nonlymphoid). Tregs that are located in peripheral
tissues, such as the intestines, lungs, skin, and fat, may have
functions that are unique to each tissue (discussed later). Tregs
have been described in the follicles of secondary lymphoid organs,
where they may inhibit antibody responses. In diﬀerent types of
immune responses, Tregs may be induced to express the same
chemokine receptors as eﬀector T cells. This is one way in which
Tregs colocalize in tissues with eﬀector cells, enabling the Tregs to
control diverse immune reactions in tissues.
Generation and Maintenance of Regulatory T Cells
Tregs are generated mainly by self antigen recognition in the
thymus and also by recognition of self and foreign antigens in
peripheral tissues. In the thymus, development of Tregs is one of
the fates of T cells commiĴed to the CD4 lineage that recognize self
antigens. In peripheral tissues, antigen recognition in the absence
of strong innate immune responses favors the generation of
regulatory cells from naive CD4+ T lymphocytes; Tregs can also
develop after inﬂammatory reactions. The majority of Tregs in
lymphoid tissues are thought to be derived from the thymus as a
consequence of self antigen expression. Although many markers
have been proposed to distinguish thymic from peripheral Tregs,
whether these markers can be used to reliably distinguish the two
subsets in lymphoid organs or blood of mice and humans has not
been established.
The generation, survival, and functional competence of Tregs are
dependent on the cytokine IL-2. Patients with homozygous
mutations in the IL-2 receptor α or β chain develop systemic
autoimmunity and have few functional Tregs. Mice in which the
gene for IL-2 or for the α or β chain of the IL-2 receptor is knocked
out also develop autoimmunity, manifested by inﬂammatory bowel
disease (IBD), autoimmune hemolytic anemia, and multiple
autoantibodies 
(including 
anti-erythrocyte 
and 
anti-DNA
antibodies). These mice have greatly reduced numbers of CD25+
FOXP3+ Tregs, and their disease can be corrected by injecting these
cells. IL-2 promotes diﬀerentiation of T cells in the thymus into the
regulatory subset and is required for the maintenance of this cell
population in the periphery. Because FOXP3+ Tregs do not produce
IL-2, this growth factor is provided by conventional T cells
responding to self or foreign antigens (Fig. 15.9). IL-2 activates the
transcription factor STAT5, which may enhance expression of
FOXP3 as well as other genes that are involved in the function of
Tregs. These results are the basis for ongoing clinical trials testing
the ability of IL-2 to promote Tregs in humans for the control of
graft-versus-host disease, autoimmune inﬂammation, and graft
rejection.
The generation of some Tregs requires the cytokine transforming
growth factor-β (TGF-β). Culture of naive T cells with activating
anti-TCR antibodies together with TGF-β (and IL-2, discussed
earlier) can induce the development of regulatory cells in vitro. In
mice, elimination of TGF-β or blocking of TGF-β signals in T cells
leads to a systemic inﬂammatory disease because of uncontrolled
leukocyte activation. TGF-β stimulates expression of FOXP3, and
this could be its major role in Treg development.
FIGURE 15.8  Regulatory T cells.Regulatory T cells
(Tregs) are generated by self antigen recognition
in the thymus (sometimes called natural regulatory
cells) and (probably to a lesser extent) by antigen
recognition in peripheral lymphoid organs (called
inducible or adaptive regulatory cells). The
development and survival of these Tregs require
interleukin-2 and the transcription factor FOXP3.
In peripheral tissues, Tregs suppress the
activation and effector functions of other self-
reactive and potentially pathogenic lymphocytes.
DC, Dendritic cell; NK, natural killer.
FIGURE 15.9  Role of interleukin-2 in the
maintenance of regulatory T cells.Interleukin-2 (IL-
2) produced by conventional T cells responding to
self or foreign antigens acts on regulatory T cells
(Tregs) recognizing the antigen on antigen-
presenting dendritic cells and promotes the
survival and function of the Tregs, enabling them
to control the responses of the conventional T
cells.
Mechanisms of Action of Regulatory T Cells
Tregs appear to suppress immune responses at multiple steps—at
the induction of naive T cell activation in lymphoid organs as well
as the eﬀector phase of these responses in tissues. They control T
cell responses mainly by inhibiting the stimulatory ability of
dendritic cells (DCs), and also by suppressing T cell activation.
Tregs may also suppress B cell activation and inhibit the
proliferation and diﬀerentiation of natural killer (NK) cells.
Although numerous mechanisms of suppression have been
proposed, the following are the best supported by available data.
• CTLA-4–mediated inhibition of costimulation. CTLA-4 on
Tregs binds to B7 molecules on APCs and removes these
molecules, resulting in reduced availability of B7 for CD28-
mediated costimulation (see Fig. 15.6).
• Production of the immunosuppressive cytokines IL-10 and
TGF-β. These cytokines are discussed below.
• Consumption of IL-2. Because of the high level of expression
of the IL-2 receptor, these cells may absorb IL-2 and deprive
other cell populations of this growth factor, resulting in
reduced proliferation and diﬀerentiation of other IL-2–
dependent cells.
Whether all regulatory cells work by all of these mechanisms or if
there are subpopulations that use diﬀerent mechanisms to control
immune responses has not been established. In fact, there is some
evidence in humans that two diﬀerent populations of Tregs can be
distinguished by the expression of FOXP3 or production of IL-10,
but this separation may not be absolute.
Inhibitory Cytokines Produced by Regulatory T Cells
TGF-β and IL-10 are involved in the generation and functions of
Tregs. These cytokines are produced by and act on many other cell
types in addition to regulatory cells. Here we describe the
properties and actions of these cytokines.
Transforming Growth Factor-β
TGF-β was discovered as a protein made by tumors that promoted
the survival of cancer cells in vitro. It is actually a family of closely
related molecules encoded by distinct genes, commonly designated
TGF-β1, TGF-β2, and TGF-β3. Cells of the immune system
synthesize mainly TGF-β1. TGF-β1 is produced by CD4+ Tregs,
activated macrophages, and many other cell types. The processing
of TGF-β, TGF-β receptors, and signaling downstream of these
receptors were described in Chapter 7.
TGF-β has many important and diverse roles in the immune
system:
• TGF-β inhibits the proliferation and eﬀector functions of T
cells and the activation of macrophages. TGF-β inhibits
classical macrophage activation but is one of the cytokines
secreted by alternatively activated macrophages (see
Chapter 10). TGF-β also suppresses the activation of other
cells, such as neutrophils and endothelial cells. By these
inhibitory actions, TGF-β functions to control immune and
inﬂammatory responses.
• TGF-β regulates the diﬀerentiation of functionally distinct
subsets of T cells. As described earlier, TGF-β stimulates the
development of peripheral FOXP3+ Tregs, best established
in vitro. In combination with cytokines produced during
innate immune responses, such as IL-1 and IL-6, TGF-β
promotes the development of the Th17 subset of CD4+ T
cells by virtue of its ability to induce the transcription factor
RORγt (see Chapter 10). The ability of TGF-β to suppress
immune and inﬂammatory responses, in part by generating
Tregs, and to promote the development of proinﬂammatory
Th17 cells in the presence of other cytokines, is an
interesting example of how a single cytokine can have
diverse and sometimes opposing actions depending on the
context in which it is produced. TGF-β can also inhibit
development of Th1 and Th2 subsets.
• TGF-β stimulates production of immunoglobulin A (IgA)
antibodies by inducing B cells to switch to this isotype. IgA
is the major antibody isotype required for mucosal
immunity (see Chapter 14).
• TGF-β promotes tissue repair after local immune and
inﬂammatory reactions subside. This function is mediated
mainly by the ability of TGF-β to stimulate collagen
synthesis and matrix-modifying enzyme production by
macrophages and ﬁbroblasts and by promoting
angiogenesis. This cytokine may play a pathologic role in
diseases in which ﬁbrosis is an important component, such
as pulmonary ﬁbrosis and systemic sclerosis.
Interleukin-10
IL-10 is an inhibitor of activated macrophages and DCs and is thus
involved in the control of innate immune reactions and cell-
mediated immunity. It is a member of a family of heterodimeric
cytokines that include IL-22, and others. The IL-10 receptor belongs
to the type II cytokine receptor family (similar to the receptor for
IFNs) and consists of two chains, which associate with the Janus
family kinases JAK1 and TYK2 and activate STAT3. IL-10 is
produced by many immune cell populations, including activated
macrophages and DCs, Tregs, and Th1 and Th2 cells. Because it is
both produced by and inhibits macrophages and DCs, it functions
as a negative feedback regulator. IL-10 is also produced by some B
lymphocytes, which have been shown to have immune suppressive
functions and have been called regulatory B cells.
The biologic eﬀects of IL-10 result from its ability to inhibit many
of the functions of activated macrophages and DCs.
• IL-10 inhibits the production of IL-12 by activated DCs and
macrophages. Because IL-12 is a critical stimulus for IFN-γ
secretion, which plays an important role in innate and
adaptive cell-mediated immune reactions against
intracellular microbes, IL-10 suppresses all such reactions.
In fact, IL-10 was ﬁrst identiﬁed as a cytokine that inhibited
IFN-γ production.
• IL-10 inhibits the expression of costimulators and class II
MHC molecules on DCs and macrophages. Because of these
actions, IL-10 inhibits T cell activation and terminates cell-
mediated immune reactions.
Infants who have homozygous loss-of-function mutations in the
IL10 gene or in the gene for the IL-10 receptor develop severe colitis
before the age of 1 year. Knockout mice lacking IL-10 in all cells or
only in Tregs also develop colitis, probably as a result of
uncontrolled activation of lymphocytes and macrophages reacting
to enteric microbes. Because of these ﬁndings, it is thought that this
cytokine is especially important for controlling inﬂammatory
reactions in mucosal tissues, particularly the gastrointestinal tract
(see Chapter 14).
The Epstein-Barr virus contains a gene homologous to human IL-
10, and viral IL-10 has the same activities as the natural cytokine.
This raises the intriguing possibility that the virus has acquired the
IL-10–like gene during its evolution, giving it the ability to inhibit
host immunity and thus a survival advantage in the infected host.
Roles of Regulatory T Cells in Self-Tolerance and Autoimmunity
The elucidation of the genetic basis of IPEX syndrome and the
similar disease in mice caused by mutations in the foxp3 gene,
described earlier, is convincing proof of the importance of Tregs in
maintaining self-tolerance and homeostasis in the immune system.
Numerous aĴempts are being made to identify defects in the
development or function of Tregs in more common autoimmune
and inﬂammatory diseases in humans such as IBD, type 1 diabetes,
and multiple sclerosis (MS), as well as in allergic disorders. Defects
in Tregs or resistance of eﬀector cells to suppression by Tregs may
contribute to the pathogenesis of these diseases. However, it has
proved diﬃcult to deﬁnitively establish the role of Treg defects in
these common diseases, in part because deﬁning and quantifying
functional Tregs in humans is challenging.
There is also potential for expanding Tregs in culture and
injecting them back into patients to control pathologic immune
responses. Clinical trials of Treg transfer are ongoing in aĴempts to
treat 
transplant 
rejection, 
graft-versus-host 
disease, 
and
autoimmune and other inﬂammatory disorders. In addition, clinical
trials are underway to expand these cells in patients by
administering the cytokine IL-2 in doses or forms that
preferentially bind to CD25 and thus activate Tregs.
In addition to their importance for controlling autoimmunity,
Tregs have been shown to serve other roles. Subpopulations of
Tregs with unique transcriptional signatures are present in many
tissues and appear to perform functions that are especially
beneﬁcial for those tissues. Tregs that reside in skin, muscle, and
organs such as the lung promote tissue repair and the proliferation
and diﬀerentiation of stem cells, thus helping to restore tissue
integrity after inﬂammatory reactions resolve. Adipose tissue Tregs
control fat metabolism. Tregs are also involved in maintaining fetal
tolerance and preventing the rejection of fetuses and play a role in
preventing inﬂammatory responses to commensal microbes (see
Chapter 14).
Deletion of T Cells by Apoptotic Cell Death
T lymphocytes that recognize self antigens with high aﬃnity or are
repeatedly stimulated by antigens may die by apoptosis. There are
two major pathways of apoptosis (Fig. 15.10), both of which have
been implicated in peripheral deletion of mature T cells.
• The mitochondrial (or intrinsic) pathway is regulated by the
BCL-2 family of proteins, named after the founding
member, BCL-2, which was discovered as an oncogene in a
B cell lymphoma and shown to inhibit apoptosis. Some
members of this family are pro-apoptotic and others are
anti-apoptotic. The pathway is initiated when cytoplasmic
proteins of the BCL-2 family that belong to the BH3-only
subfamily (so called because they contain one domain that
is homologous to the third conserved domain of BCL-2) are
induced or activated as a result of growth factor deprivation,
noxious stimuli, DNA damage, or certain types of receptor-
mediated signaling (e.g., strong signals delivered by self
antigens in immature lymphocytes). BH3-only proteins are
sensors of cell stress that bind to and inﬂuence death
eﬀectors and regulators. In lymphocytes, the most
important of these sensors is a protein called BIM.
Activated BIM binds to two pro-apoptotic eﬀector proteins
of the BCL-2 family called BAX and BAK, which oligomerize
and insert into the outer mitochondrial membrane, leading
to increased mitochondrial permeability. Growth factors
and other survival signals induce the expression of anti-
apoptotic members of the BCL-2 family, such as BCL-2 and
BCL-XL, which function as inhibitors of apoptosis by
blocking BAX and BAK and thus maintaining intact
mitochondria. BH3-only proteins also antagonize BCL-2 and
BCL-XL. When cells are deprived of survival signals, the
mitochondria become leaky because of the actions of the
BH3-only protein sensors and BAX and BAK eﬀectors and
the relative deﬁciency of anti-apoptotic proteins such as
BCL-2 and BCL-XL. The result is that many mitochondrial
components, including cytochrome c, leak out into the
cytosol and activate cytosolic enzymes called caspases.
Cytochrome c binds to a cytosolic protein called APAF-1,
which then oligomerizes and activates procaspase-9,
yielding active caspase-9. Caspase-9 in turn cleaves and
thereby activates downstream caspases that induce nuclear
DNA fragmentation and other changes that culminate in
apoptotic death.
FIGURE 15.10  Pathways of
apoptosis.Apoptosis is induced by the
mitochondrial and death receptor pathways,
described in the text, which culminate in
fragmentation of the dead cell and
phagocytosis of apoptotic bodies. TNF,
Tumor necrosis factor.
• In the death receptor (or extrinsic) pathway, cell surface
receptors of the TNF receptor superfamily are engaged by
their TNF superfamily ligands. The receptors oligomerize
and activate cytoplasmic adaptor proteins, which assemble
procaspase-8, which cleaves itself when oligomerized and
produces active caspase-8. The active caspase-8 cleaves
downstream caspases, again resulting in apoptosis. In T
cells the most important death receptor is FAS (CD95), and
its ligand is FAS ligand (FASL). FAS is a member of the TNF
receptor family, and FASL is homologous to TNF. In many
cell types, caspase-8 cleaves and activates a BH3-only
protein called BID that binds to BAX and BAK and induces
apoptosis via the mitochondrial pathway. Thus, the
mitochondrial pathway may serve to amplify death receptor
signaling.
Table 15.2
Factors That Determine the Immunogenicity and
Tolerogenicity of Protein Antigens
Features That
Favor Stimulation
of Immune
Responses
Features That Favor
Tolerance
Persistence
Short-lived
(eliminated by
immune
response)
Prolonged, leading to
persistent antigen
receptor engagement
Portal of
entry;
location
Subcutaneous,
intradermal;
absence from
generative
organs
Intravenous, mucosal;
presence in
generative organs
Presence of
adjuvants
Antigens with
adjuvants:
Induce
costimulators
and cytokines
Antigens without
adjuvants: Low levels
of costimulators and
cytokines
Properties of
APCs
Mature dendritic
cells: High
levels of
costimulators
Immature (resting)
dendritic cells: Low
levels of
costimulators and
cytokines
APCs, Antigen-presenting cells.
In cells undergoing apoptosis, fragments of the nucleus and
cytoplasm break oﬀ in membrane-bound structures called
apoptotic bodies. There are also biochemical changes in the plasma
membrane, 
including 
the 
exposure 
of 
lipids 
such 
as
phosphatidylserine, which is normally on the inner face of the
plasma membrane. These alterations are recognized by receptors
on phagocytes, and apoptotic bodies and cells are rapidly engulfed
and eliminated, without ever having elicited a host inﬂammatory
response. This process is called eﬀerocytosis. Furthermore,
phagocytosis of apoptotic cells may induce the production of
antiinﬂammatory mediators by macrophages.
The best evidence for the involvement of the two apoptotic
pathways in the elimination of mature self-reactive lymphocytes is
that genetic ablation of either in mice results in systemic
autoimmunity, and the disease is more severe if both pathways are
disabled. Mutations of FAS, FASL, or downstream caspases cause a
human 
autoimmune 
disease 
called 
autoimmune
lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS). These two death pathways
may function in diﬀerent ways to maintain self-tolerance.
• T cells that recognize self antigens in the absence of
costimulation may induce apoptosis by the mitochondrial
pathway. In normal immune responses, the responding
lymphocytes receive signals from the TCR, costimulators,
and growth factors. These signals stimulate the expression
of anti-apoptotic proteins of the BCL-2 family (BCL-2, BCL-
XL) and thus prevent apoptosis and promote cell survival,
the necessary prelude to proliferation. When T cells avidly
recognize self antigens, they may activate BIM, which
triggers death by the mitochondrial pathway, as described
earlier. At the same time, because of the relative lack of
costimulation and growth factors, the anti-apoptotic
members of the BCL-2 family remain at low levels, and the
actions of the eﬀectors BAX and BAK are thus not
counteracted. The BIM-dependent mitochondrial pathway
of apoptosis is also involved in negative selection of self-
reactive T cells in the thymus (described earlier) and in the
contraction phase (decline) of immune responses after the
initiating antigen has been eliminated (see Chapter 9).
• Repeated stimulation of T cells results in coexpression of
the death receptor FAS and its ligand FASL, and
engagement of FAS triggers apoptotic death. When T cells
are repeatedly activated, both FAS and FASL are expressed
on the cell surface, and binding of the ligand to the receptor
activates a cascade of caspases, which ultimately cause the
apoptotic death of the cells. The same pathway of apoptosis
may be involved in the elimination of self-reactive B
lymphocytes also in the periphery (discussed later).
Factors That Determine the Tolerogenicity of
Self Antigens
Studies with a variety of experimental models have shown that
many features of protein antigens determine whether these
antigens will induce T cell activation or tolerance (Table 15.2). Self
antigens have several properties that make them tolerogenic. These
antigens are expressed in generative lymphoid organs, where they
are recognized by immature lymphocytes. In peripheral tissues, self
antigens engage antigen receptors of speciﬁc lymphocytes for
prolonged periods and without inﬂammation or innate immunity.
The nature of the DC that displays antigens to T lymphocytes is
an important determinant of the subsequent response. DCs that are
resident in lymphoid organs and nonlymphoid tissues may present
self antigens to T lymphocytes and maintain tolerance. Tissue DCs
are normally in a resting (immature) state and express low levels of
costimulators; some of them may traﬃc at a low rate from epithelia
to secondary lymphoid organs even at steady state (in the absence
of infection or inﬂammation). Such APCs may be constantly
presenting self antigens without providing strong costimulation,
and T cells that recognize these antigens become anergic or
diﬀerentiate 
into 
Tregs 
instead 
of 
eﬀector 
and 
memory
lymphocytes. By contrast, DCs that are activated by microbes are
the principal APCs for initiating T cell responses (see Chapter 6).
As we will discuss later, local infections and inﬂammation may
activate resident DCs, leading to increased expression of
costimulators, breakdown of tolerance, and autoimmune reactions
against tissue antigens. There is great interest in manipulating the
properties of DCs as a way of enhancing or inhibiting immune
responses for therapeutic purposes.
Our understanding of the mechanisms that link the signals that a
T cell receives at the time of antigen recognition with the fate of
that T cell remains incomplete. These concepts are based largely on
experimental models in which antigens are administered to mice or
are produced by transgenes expressed in mice. One of the
continuing challenges in this ﬁeld is to deﬁne the mechanisms by
which various natural (normally expressed) self antigens induce
tolerance, especially in humans.
B Lymphocyte Tolerance
Tolerance in B lymphocytes is necessary for maintaining
unresponsiveness to T-independent self antigens, such as
polysaccharides and lipids. B cell tolerance also plays a role in
preventing antibody responses to protein antigens. Experimental
studies have revealed multiple mechanisms by which encounter
with self antigens may abort B cell maturation and activation.
Central B Cell Tolerance
During their maturation in the bone marrow, B lymphocytes ﬁrst
express IgM as their antigen receptor and are functionally
immature at this stage (see Chapter 8). If these B lymphocytes
recognize self antigens in the bone marrow with high aﬃnity, they
either change their speciﬁcity or are deleted (Fig. 15.11).
• Receptor editing. If immature B cells recognize self antigens
that are present at high concentration in the bone marrow,
and especially if the antigen is displayed in multivalent
form (e.g., on cell surfaces), many antigen receptors on each
B cell are cross-linked, thus delivering strong signals to the
cells. One consequence of such signaling is that the
immature B cells reactivate their RAG1 and RAG2 genes and
initiate a new round of VJ recombination in the Ig κ light
chain gene locus (see Chapter 8). A Vκ segment upstream
of the already rearranged VκJκ unit is joined to a
downstream Jκ. As a result, the previously rearranged VκJκ
exon in the self-reactive immature B cell is removed, and a
new Ig light chain is expressed, thus creating a B cell
receptor (BCR) with a new speciﬁcity. This process is called
receptor editing and is an important mechanism for
eliminating self-reactivity from the mature B cell repertoire.
If the edited light chain rearrangement is nonproductive,
additional Vκ-to-Jκ rearrangements will be made in the
same locus, and if these fail, the process may proceed at the
κ locus on the other chromosome; if that is nonproductive,
rearrangements at the λ light chain loci may follow. A B cell
expressing a λ light chain is likely a cell that has undergone
receptor editing. It is estimated that among peripheral
blood B cells in humans, as many as one-quarter to one-half
of all the cells and the majority of λ-expressing cells have
undergone receptor editing during their maturation.
• Deletion. Strong recognition of self antigens by
immature/transitional B cells in the bone marrow or soon
after these cells emerge from the bone marrow may lead to
apoptosis of the B cells. This is presumably similar to
apoptosis in T cells, when high-aﬃnity antigen recognition
in the thymus triggers the mitochondrial pathway of
apoptosis, but the mechanisms are not well deﬁned. It is
likely that self-reactive B cells ﬁrst try to change their
speciﬁcity and die if receptor editing fails.
FIGURE 15.11  Central tolerance in B cells. A,
Immature B cells that recognize self antigens
in the bone marrow with high avidity (e.g.,
multivalent arrays of antigens on cells) die by
apoptosis or change the specificity of their
antigen receptors (receptor editing, which
involves only light chains but is illustrated as a
change in the antigen-binding region of the
receptor). B, Weak recognition of self
antigens in the bone marrow may lead to
anergy (functional inactivation) of the B cells.
FIGURE 15.12  Peripheral tolerance in B cells.B
cells that encounter self antigens in peripheral
tissues become anergic or die by apoptosis.
In some situations, recognition of self
antigens may trigger inhibitory receptors that
prevent B cell activation.
• Anergy. If developing B cells recognize self antigens weakly
(e.g., if the antigen is soluble and does not cross-link many
antigen receptors or if the BCRs recognize the antigen with
low aﬃnity), the cells become functionally unresponsive
(anergic) and exit the bone marrow in this unresponsive
state. Anergy is due to downregulation of antigen receptor
expression and a block in antigen receptor signaling.
Peripheral B Cell Tolerance
Mature B lymphocytes that recognize self antigens in peripheral
tissues in the absence of speciﬁc helper T cells may be rendered
functionally unresponsive or die by apoptosis (Fig. 15.12). Signals
from helper T cells may be absent if these T cells are deleted or
anergic (in the case of protein antigens) or if the self antigens are
nonprotein antigens. Because self antigens do not elicit innate
immune responses, B cells will also not be activated via
complement receptors or paĴern recognition receptors. Thus, as in
T cells, antigen recognition without additional stimuli results in
tolerance. 
Peripheral 
tolerance 
mechanisms 
also 
eliminate
autoreactive B cell clones that may be generated as an unintended
consequence of somatic mutation in germinal centers.
Several mechanisms of peripheral tolerance in B cells have been
described.
• Anergy. Some self-reactive B cells that are repeatedly
stimulated by self antigens become unresponsive to further
activation. Anergic B cells require higher than normal levels
of the growth factor BAFF (B-cell activating factor, also
called BLys [B lymphocyte stimulator]) for survival, and
they cannot compete with normal naive B cells for BAFF. As
a result, the B cells that have encountered self antigens have
a shortened life span and are eliminated more rapidly than
cells that have not recognized self antigens.
• Deletion. B cells that bind with high avidity to self antigens
in the periphery may also undergo apoptotic death by the
mitochondrial pathway. Deletion of B cells speciﬁc for
protein antigens may occur outside the bone marrow at the
transitional B cell stages found in the spleen and the blood.
Transitional B cells are cells that are in the process of
maturing in the periphery into follicular B cells. A large
fraction of transitional B cells may be autoreactive, and
most of them are deleted and do not mature into follicular
B cells. The mechanisms of deletion at the transitional B cell
stage are not well deﬁned. Somatic mutation of Ig genes
during the germinal center reaction may also lead to the
emergence of self-reactive B cells (see Chapter 12). Some of
these autoreactive B cells may be deleted by the FAS
pathway.
• Signaling by inhibitory receptors. B cells that recognize self
antigens may be prevented from responding by the
engagement of various inhibitory receptors. The function of
these inhibitory receptors is to set a threshold for B cell
activation, which allows responses to foreign antigens
because these typically elicit strong signals from the
combination of BCR, coreceptors, innate immune receptors,
and helper T cells (for protein antigens), but does not allow
responses to self antigens, which engage only the BCR. This
mechanism of peripheral tolerance was revealed by studies
showing that mice with defects in the tyrosine phosphatase
SHP1, the tyrosine kinase LYN, and the inhibitory receptors
FcγRIIB and CD22 develop autoimmunity. CD22, also
known as Siglec-2, binds to sialic acid that decorates sugar
side chains of proteins on the B cell surface and dampens
BCR signaling. Immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory
motifs (ITIMs) in the cytoplasmic tail of CD22 are
phosphorylated by LYN, and this inhibitory receptor then
recruits SHP1, thus aĴenuating BCR signaling. How exactly
CD22 contributes to B cell tolerance is not fully understood.
• Regulation of B cells by Tregs. A specialized subset of Tregs,
called T follicular regulatory (Tfr) cells, enter lymphoid
follicles and contribute to the aĴenuation of T cell help to
germinal center B cells during antibody responses. Defects
in regulatory T cells have also been shown to result in
increased numbers of TĢ cells being generated outside the
follicle at the boundary between the B cell zone and the T
cell zone. Overall, Tregs outside the follicle and Tfr cells in
the germinal center contribute together to limit TĢ cell
numbers and activity and thus prevent promiscuous B cell
activation. Predictably, deﬁciency of Tregs is associated with
autoantibody production.
Tolerance to Commensal Microbes and Other
Foreign Antigens
Commensal microbes are abundant in the gut, skin, and other
tissues but do not elicit immune responses despite being foreign.
There are several reasons for this lack of immunogenicity. Many of
these microbes cannot invade epithelial barriers and therefore may
not be accessible to the adaptive immune system. These microbes
also induce and activate Tregs, which prevent the development of
eﬀector and memory cells (see Chapter 14).
Foreign antigens may be administered in ways that preferentially
induce tolerance rather than immune responses. In general, protein
antigens administered with adjuvants favor immunity, whereas
repeated doses of antigens administered without adjuvants tend to
induce tolerance. The likely reason for this is that adjuvants
stimulate innate immune responses and the expression of
costimulators on APCs, and in the absence of these second signals,
T cells that recognize the antigen may become anergic or die or may
diﬀerentiate into Tregs. Many other features of antigens, and how
they are administered, may inﬂuence the balance between
immunity and tolerance (see Table 15.2).
The oral administration of a protein antigen often leads to
suppression of systemic humoral and cell-mediated immune
responses to immunization with the same antigen. This
phenomenon, called oral tolerance, was discussed in Chapter 14.
Therapeutic Tolerance Induction
Understanding how to induce tolerance by antigen administration
is the key to developing antigen-speciﬁc tolerance as a treatment
strategy for immunologic diseases. Numerous clinical studies are
under way to induce tolerance in autoimmune diseases and
allergies in which the relevant antigen is known. The autoimmune
diseases include type 1 diabetes (in which a major self antigen is
insulin), MS (myelin basic protein), and rheumatoid arthritis
(citrullinated peptides). Several strategies are being tried.
• Repeated administration of small doses of
immunodominant peptides derived from the self antigen,
in aqueous form without adjuvants. It is expected that the
antigen will be recognized in the absence of costimulation
and will induce peripheral T cell anergy or deletion or
preferentially activate Tregs, but the cellular consequence of
antigen administration remains unknown in these clinical
studies. It is also unclear how eﬀective this approach will be
in inhibiting ongoing immune responses in patients. This
approach has been used for many years to treat allergies
(the process called desensitization or peptide
immunotherapy, see Chapter 20). It is eﬀective in a subset
of allergic patients, but how desensitization works is also
not established.
• Administration of peptides derived from self antigens
coupled to nonimmunogenic substrates such as
nanoparticles and erythrocyte membranes. The idea is
similar to aqueous antigen administration, described
previously.
• Transfer or activation of Tregs has been mentioned
previously.
• Costimulatory blockade refers to blocking B7 molecules
using the drug CTLA4-Ig (see Chapter 9). It is likely this
treatment inhibits immune responses but does not induce
long-lived tolerance.
Despite the promise of these approaches, there has so far been
liĴle success in preventing immune responses against autoantigens
in patients with ongoing autoimmune diseases. Deﬁning the
mechanisms by which the diﬀerent strategies may be working will
require analysis of antigen-speciﬁc lymphocytes, for which the
technology is still developing.
Mechanisms of Autoimmunity
The possibility that an individual’s immune system may react
against autologous antigens and cause tissue injury was
appreciated by immunologists from the time that the speciﬁcity of
the immune system for foreign antigens was recognized. In the
early 1900s, Paul Ehrlich coined the rather melodramatic phrase
horror autotoxicus (the horror of self-toxicity) to describe the body’s
fear of self-destruction by the immune system. Autoimmunity is an
important cause of disease in humans, estimated to aﬀect at least
2% to 5% of the U.S. population, and the incidence of many
autoimmune diseases seems to be rising. The term autoimmunity is
often erroneously used for any disease in which immune reactions
accompany tissue injury, even though it may be diﬃcult or
impossible to establish a role for immune responses against
particular self antigens in causing these disorders. Because
inﬂammation is a prominent component of these disorders, they
are sometimes grouped under immune-mediated inﬂammatory
diseases, which does not imply that the pathologic response is
directed against self antigens (see Chapter 19).
The fundamental questions about autoimmunity are how self-
tolerance fails and how self-reactive lymphocytes are activated.
Answers to these questions are needed to understand the cause
and pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases, which is a major
challenge in immunology. Our understanding of autoimmunity has
improved greatly during the past two decades, mainly because of
the development of informative animal models of these diseases,
the identiﬁcation of genes that may predispose to autoimmunity,
and improved methods for analyzing immune responses in
humans.
The factors that contribute to the development of autoimmunity
are genetic susceptibility and environmental triggers, such as
infections and local tissue injury. Susceptibility genes may disrupt
self-tolerance mechanisms, and infection or necrosis in tissues
promotes the inﬂux of autoreactive lymphocytes and activation of
these cells, resulting in tissue injury (Fig. 15.13). Infections and
tissue injury may also alter the way in which self antigens are
displayed to the immune system and induce production of pro-
inﬂammatory cytokines, leading to failure of self-tolerance and
activation of self-reactive lymphocytes. The roles of these factors in
the development of autoimmunity are discussed later. Other factors
such as changes in the host microbiome may play roles in
pathogenesis and are being actively studied, but this ﬁeld of
inquiry is still in its infancy.
General Features of Autoimmune Disorders
Autoimmune diseases may be systemic or organ speciﬁc, depending
on the distribution of the autoantigens that are recognized. For
example, the formation of circulating immune complexes composed
of self antigens and speciﬁc antibodies typically produces systemic
diseases, such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). In contrast,
autoantibody and T cell responses against self antigens with
restricted tissue distribution lead to organ-speciﬁc diseases, such as
myasthenia gravis aﬀecting muscle function, type 1 diabetes
aﬀecting insulin production by the pancreas, and MS aﬀecting
myelinated nerve function.
FIGURE 15.13  Postulated mechanisms of
autoimmunity.In this proposed model of an organ-
specific T cell–mediated autoimmune disease,
various genetic loci may confer susceptibility to
autoimmunity, in part by influencing the
maintenance of self-tolerance. Environmental
triggers, such as infections and other
inflammatory stimuli, promote the influx of
lymphocytes into tissues and the activation of self-
reactive T cells, resulting in tissue injury. APCs,
Antigen-presenting cells.
Various eﬀector mechanisms are responsible for tissue injury in
diﬀerent autoimmune diseases. These mechanisms include immune
complexes, 
circulating 
autoantibodies, 
and 
autoreactive 
T
lymphocytes and are discussed in Chapter 19. The clinical and
pathologic features of the disease are usually determined by the
nature of the dominant autoimmune response.
Autoimmune diseases tend to be chronic, progressive, and self-
perpetuating. The reasons for these features are that the self
antigens that trigger these reactions are persistent, and once an
immune response starts, many ampliﬁcation mechanisms are
activated that perpetuate the response. In addition, a response
initiated against one self antigen that injures tissues may result in
the release and alterations of other tissue antigens, activation of
lymphocytes speciﬁc for these other antigens, and exacerbation of
the disease. This phenomenon is called epitope spreading, and it
may explain why once an autoimmune disease has developed, it
may become prolonged and self-perpetuating.
Immunologic Abnormalities Leading to
Autoimmunity
Several immunologic aberrations have been associated with the
development of autoimmunity in humans and experimental
models. The main such abnormalities are the following:
• Defective self-tolerance. Inadequate elimination or regulation
of T or B cells, leading to an imbalance between lymphocyte
activation and control, is the underlying cause of all
autoimmune diseases. The potential for autoimmunity exists
in all individuals because some of the clones of developing
lymphocytes may express receptors speciﬁc for self
antigens, and not all of these clones are deleted during their
maturation, so many self-reactive lymphocytes are present
in healthy individuals. Also, many self antigens are readily
accessible to lymphocytes. As discussed earlier, tolerance to
self antigens is normally maintained by selection processes
that prevent the maturation of some self antigen–speciﬁc
lymphocytes and by mechanisms that inactivate or delete
self-reactive lymphocytes that do mature. Loss of self-
tolerance may result if self-reactive lymphocytes are not
deleted or inactivated and if APCs are activated so that self
antigens are presented to the immune system in an
immunogenic manner. Experimental models and some
results from analyses of human diseases have shown that
any of the following mechanisms may contribute to the
failure of self-tolerance:
○ Defects in deletion (negative selection) of T or B cells or
receptor editing in B cells during the maturation of
these cells in the generative lymphoid organs
○ Defective numbers or functions of regulatory T
lymphocytes
○ Defective apoptosis of mature self-reactive lymphocytes
○ Inadequate function of inhibitory receptors
• Abnormal display of self antigens. Abnormalities may
include structural changes in self antigens resulting from
enzymatic modiﬁcations or from cellular stress or injury. If
these changes lead to the display of antigenic epitopes that
are not present normally, the immune system may not be
tolerant to these “neoantigens,” thus allowing anti-self
responses to develop. Examples include citrullination of
various self peptides in rheumatoid arthritis and post-
translational modiﬁcations of islet proteins in type 1
diabetes.
• Inﬂammation or an initial innate immune response. As we
have discussed in previous chapters, the innate immune
response is a strong stimulus for the activation of
p
g
lymphocytes and the generation of adaptive immune
responses. Infections or cell injury may elicit local innate
immune reactions with inﬂammation. These may contribute
to the development of autoimmune disease, perhaps by
activating APCs to express increased levels of
costimulators, which overcome regulatory mechanisms and
result in excessive T cell activation. Cytokines made during
innate immune responses are also capable of activating T
and B lymphocytes. An example is the production of type I
IFN associated with SLE and other autoimmune diseases.
Much recent aĴention has focused on the role of T cells in
autoimmunity for two main reasons. First, helper T cells are the key
regulators of both cell-mediated and humoral immune responses to
proteins, and most self antigens implicated in autoimmune
diseases are proteins. Second, the risk for developing several
autoimmune diseases is associated with the inheritance of certain
MHC alleles (the HLA [human leukocyte antigen] complex in
humans), and the function of MHC molecules is to present peptide
antigens to T cells. Failure of self-tolerance in T lymphocytes may
result in autoimmune diseases in which tissue damage is caused by
cell-mediated immune reactions. Helper T cell abnormalities may
also lead to autoantibody production because helper T cells are
necessary for the production of high-aﬃnity antibodies against
protein antigens.
In the following section, we describe the general principles of the
pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases, with an emphasis on
susceptibility genes, infections, and other factors that contribute to
the development of autoimmunity. We will describe the
pathogenesis and features of some illustrative autoimmune
diseases in Chapter 19.
Genetic Basis of Autoimmunity
From the earliest studies of autoimmune diseases in patients and
experimental animals, it has been appreciated that these diseases
have a strong genetic component. For example, type 1 diabetes
shows a concordance of 35% to 50% in monozygotic twins and 5%
to 6% in dizygotic twins, and other autoimmune diseases show
similar evidence of a genetic contribution. Linkage analyses in
families, 
genome-wide 
association 
studies, 
and 
large-scale
sequencing eﬀorts are revealing new information about the genes
that may play causal roles in the development of autoimmunity and
chronic inﬂammatory disorders.
Most autoimmune diseases are complex polygenic traits in which
aﬀected individuals inherit multiple genetic polymorphisms that
contribute to disease susceptibility, and these genes act with
environmental factors to cause the diseases. Some of these
polymorphisms are associated with several autoimmune diseases,
suggesting that the associated genes inﬂuence general mechanisms
of immune regulation and self-tolerance. Other loci are associated
with particular diseases, suggesting that they may aﬀect organ
damage or autoreactive lymphocytes of particular speciﬁcities. Each
genetic polymorphism makes a small contribution to the
development of particular autoimmune diseases and is also found
in healthy individuals but at a lower frequency than in patients with
the diseases. It is postulated that in individual patients, multiple
such polymorphisms are coinherited and together account for
development of the disease. Understanding the interplay of
multiple genes with one another and with environmental factors is
one of the continuing challenges in the ﬁeld.
The best-characterized genes associated with autoimmune
diseases and our current understanding of how they may
contribute to loss of self-tolerance are described here.
Association of MHC Alleles With Autoimmunity
Among the genes that are associated with autoimmunity, the
strongest associations are with MHC genes. In fact, in many
autoimmune diseases, such as type 1 diabetes, 20 or 30 disease-
associated genes have been identiﬁed; in most of these diseases,
the HLA locus alone contributes half or more of the genetic
susceptibility. HLA typing of large groups of patients with various
autoimmune diseases has shown that some HLA alleles occur at
higher frequency in these patients than in the general population.
From such studies, one can calculate the odds ratio for
development of a disease in individuals who inherit various HLA
alleles (often referred to as the relative risk) (Table 15.3). The
strongest such association is between ankylosing spondylitis, an
inﬂammatory and presumably autoimmune disease of vertebral
joints, and the class I HLA allele B27. Individuals who are HLA-B27
positive are over 100 times more likely to develop ankylosing
spondylitis than individuals who are B27-negative. Neither the
mechanism of this disease nor the basis of its association with
HLA-B27 is known. The association of class II HLA-DR and HLA-
DQ alleles with autoimmune diseases has received great aĴention,
mainly because class II MHC genes are more frequently associated
with autoimmune diseases (as well other immune-mediated
disorders) than are class I MHC genes. Class II MHC molecules are
involved in the selection and activation of CD4+ T cells, and CD4+ T
cells regulate all immune responses to protein antigens.
Table 15.3
AS, Ankylosing spondylitis; RA, rheumatoid arthritis; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus;
T1D, type 1 diabetes.
a  The odds ratio approximates values of increased risk for the disease associated with
inheritance of particular HLA alleles. The data are from populations of European ancestry.
Alleles of individual major histocompatibility complex genes (e.g., DRB1) are indicated by four
numbers (e.g., 0301), based on serologic and molecular typing.
b  Anti-CCP Ab, antibodies directed against cyclic citrullinated peptides. Data are from patients
who test positive for these antibodies in the serum.
c  SE refers to shared epitope, so called because it is a consensus sequence in the DRB1
protein (positions 70–74) present in multiple DRB1 alleles.
d  Celiac disease is an immunologic reaction to gliadin, a protein in gluten, and not an
autoimmune disease.
Courtesy Dr. Michelle Fernando, Imperial College, London.
Several features of the association of HLA alleles with
autoimmune diseases are noteworthy.
• An HLA-disease association may be identiﬁed by serologic
typing of one HLA locus, but the actual association may be
with other alleles that are linked to the typed allele and
inherited together. For example, individuals with a
particular HLA-DR allele (hypothetically DR3) may show a
higher probability of inheriting a particular HLA-DQ allele
(hypothetically DQ5) than the probability of inheriting
these alleles separately and randomly (i.e., at equilibrium)
in the population. Such inheritance is an example of linkage
disequilibrium. A disease may be found to be DR3
associated by HLA typing, but the causal association may
actually be with the coinherited DQ5. This realization has
emphasized the concept of extended HLA haplotypes,
which refers to sets of linked genes, both classical HLA and
adjacent non-HLA genes, that tend to be inherited together
as a single unit.
• In many autoimmune diseases, the disease-associated
nucleotide polymorphisms encode amino acids in the
peptide-binding clefts of the MHC molecules. This
observation is not surprising because polymorphic residues
of MHC molecules are located within and adjacent to the
clefts, and the structure of the clefts is the key determinant
of both functions of MHC molecules, namely, antigen
presentation and recognition by T cells (see Chapter 6).
• Disease-associated HLA sequences are found in healthy
individuals. In fact, if all individuals bearing a particular
disease-associated HLA allele are monitored prospectively,
most will never develop the disease. Therefore, expression
of a particular HLA gene is not by itself the cause or
predictor of any autoimmune disease, but it may be one of
several factors that contribute to autoimmunity.
• Inheritance of certain HLA alleles confers protection against
developing some autoimmune diseases, such as type 1
diabetes and rheumatoid arthritis.
The mechanisms underlying the association of diﬀerent HLA
alleles with various autoimmune diseases are still not clear. In
diseases in which particular MHC alleles increase the risk, the
disease-associated MHC molecule may present a self peptide and
activate pathogenic T cells, and this has been established in a few
cases. But a key question has not been answered in most cases:
whether a disease-associated HLA molecule presents the relevant
self antigen diﬀerently from HLA molecules that are not associated
with the disease. When a particular allele is shown to be protective,
it is hypothesized that this allele might induce negative selection of
some potentially pathogenic T cells, or it might promote the
development of Tregs, but there is no clear evidence in support of
either hypothesis.
Polymorphisms in Non-HLA Genes Associated With
Autoimmunity
The technique of genome-wide association studies has led to the
putative identiﬁcation of nucleotide polymorphisms (variants) of
several genes that are associated with autoimmune diseases, and
this has been extended by more recent genome sequencing eﬀorts.
Before the genes that are most clearly validated are discussed, it is
important to summarize some of the general features of these
genes.
• As stated earlier, it is likely that combinations of multiple
inherited genetic polymorphisms interacting with
environmental factors induce the immunologic
abnormalities that lead to autoimmunity.
• Many of the polymorphisms associated with various
autoimmune diseases are in genes that inﬂuence the
development and regulation of immune responses.
Although this conclusion appears predictable, it has
reinforced the usefulness of the approaches being used to
identify autoimmunity-associated genes.
• Diﬀerent polymorphisms may protect against disease
development or increase the incidence of the disease. The
statistical methods used for genome-wide association
studies have revealed both types of associations.
• Most disease-associated polymorphisms are located in
noncoding regions of genes. This suggests that many of the
polymorphisms may aﬀect the expression of the encoded
proteins.
Some of the many genes associated with human autoimmune
diseases, which have been deﬁned by linkage analyses, genome-
wide association studies, and whole genome sequencing, are listed
in Table 15.4, and a few are brieﬂy described next.
• PTPN22. A variant of the protein tyrosine phosphatase
PTPN22, in which arginine at position 620 is replaced with a
tryptophan, is associated with rheumatoid arthritis, type 1
diabetes, autoimmune thyroiditis, and other autoimmune
diseases. The disease-associated variant causes complex
signaling alterations in multiple immune cell populations.
Precisely how these changes lead to autoimmunity is not
known.
• NOD2. Polymorphisms in this gene are associated with
Crohn’s disease, one type of IBD. NOD2 is a cytoplasmic
sensor of bacterial peptidoglycans (see Chapter 4) and is
expressed in multiple cell types, including intestinal
epithelial cells. It is postulated that the disease-associated
polymorphism reduces the function of NOD2, so it cannot
provide eﬀective defense against certain intestinal
microbes. As a result, these microbes are able to traverse
the epithelium and initiate a chronic inﬂammatory reaction
in the intestinal wall, which is a hallmark of IBD (see
Chapter 19). Crohn’s disease may be an unregulated
response to commensal microbes that has features of
autoimmune diseases.
• Complement proteins. Genetic deﬁciencies of several
complement proteins, including C1q, C2, and C4 (see
Chapter 13), are associated with SLE. The postulated
mechanism of this association is that complement
activation promotes the clearance of circulating immune
complexes and apoptotic cell bodies, and in the absence of
complement proteins, these complexes accumulate in the
blood and are deposited in tissues and the antigens of dead
cells persist. There is also some evidence that complement
activation increases signaling in B cells and promotes
tolerance, but how or even if the complement system is
activated by self antigens is unclear.
• IL-23 receptor (IL-23R). Some polymorphisms in the
receptor for IL-23 are associated with increased
susceptibility to IBD and the skin disease psoriasis,
whereas other polymorphisms protect against development
of these diseases. IL-23 is one of the cytokines involved in
the development of Th17 cells, which stimulate
inﬂammatory reactions (see Chapter 10).
• CD25 (IL-2Rα). Polymorphisms aﬀecting the expression or
function of CD25, the α chain of the IL-2 receptor, are
associated with MS, type 1 diabetes, and other autoimmune
diseases. These changes in CD25 likely aﬀect the generation
or function of Tregs, although there is no deﬁnitive
evidence for a causal link between the CD25 abnormality,
Treg defects, and the autoimmune disease.
• Fc γ RIIB. A polymorphism altering an isoleucine to a
threonine in the transmembrane domain of this inhibitory
Fc receptor impairs inhibitory signaling and is associated
with SLE in humans. Genetic deletion of this receptor in
mice also results in a lupus-like autoimmune disease. The
likely mechanism of the disease is defective antibody-
mediated feedback inhibition of B cells (see Chapter 12).
• ATG16L1. A loss-of-function polymorphism in this gene,
which replaces a threonine in position 300 with an alanine,
is associated with Crohn’s disease. ATG16L1 is one of a
family of proteins involved in autophagy, a cellular
response to infection, nutrient deprivation, and other forms
of stress. How this polymorphism contributes to IBD is not
known; some possible mechanisms are discussed in
Chapter 19.
• Insulin. Polymorphisms in the insulin gene that encode
variable numbers of repeat sequences are associated with
type 1 diabetes. These polymorphisms may aﬀect the
thymic expression of insulin. It is postulated that if the
protein is expressed at low levels in the thymus because of a
genetic polymorphism, developing T cells speciﬁc for
insulin may not be negatively selected. These cells survive
y
g
y
in the mature immune repertoire and are capable of
aĴacking insulin-producing islet β cells and causing
diabetes.
Although many genetic associations with autoimmune diseases
have been reported, a continuing challenge is to correlate the
genetic polymorphisms with the pathogenesis of the diseases.
Inherited Single-Gene (Mendelian) Abnormalities That Cause
Autoimmunity
Studies with mouse models and patients have identiﬁed several
genes that strongly inﬂuence the maintenance of tolerance to self
antigens (Table 15.5). Unlike the complex polymorphisms described
previously, these single-gene defects are examples of Mendelian
disorders in which the mutation is rare but has a high penetrance,
so that most individuals carrying the mutation are aﬀected. We
mentioned many of these genes earlier in the chapter, when we
discussed the mechanisms of self-tolerance. Although these genes
are associated with rare autoimmune diseases, their identiﬁcation
has provided valuable information about the importance of various
mechanisms in the maintenance of self-tolerance. The proteins
encoded by these genes contribute to central tolerance (AIRE),
generation and function of Tregs (FOXP3, IL2, IL2R), anergy and the
function of Tregs (CTLA4), peripheral deletion of T and B
lymphocytes (FAS, FASL), and regulation of pathogenic T cells in
mucosal tissues (IL10, IL10R). None of these mutations is seen in
common autoimmune diseases.
Table 15.4
The table lists some of the non-HLA gene loci in which polymorphisms are associated with
various common autoimmune diseases. The encoded proteins are indicated when the gene
name is not identical to the protein. Selected examples are discussed in the text.
AITD, Autoimmune thyroid disease; AS, ankylosing spondylitis; BCRs, B cell receptors; CD,
Crohn’s disease; GD, Graves’ disease; IL, interleukin; MHC, major histocompatibility complex;
MS, multiple sclerosis; PSA, psoriatic arthritis; PSO, psoriasis; RA, rheumatoid arthritis; SLE,
systemic lupus erythematosus; T1D, type 1 diabetes; TCRs, T cell receptors.
Modiﬁed from Gregersen PK, Olsson LM. Recent advances in the
genetics of autoimmune disease. Annu Rev Immunol. 2009;27:363–
391.
Table 15.5
The roles of these mutations in causing autoimmunity have been established by inherited
diseases in humans and gene knockouts in mice.
AIRE, Autoimmune regulator gene; ALPS, autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome; APS,
autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome; IL-2, interleukin-2; IPEX, immune dysregulation,
polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked syndrome; SHP-1, SH2-containing phosphatase 1;
SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; Tregs, regulatory T cells.
Role of Infections in Autoimmunity
Viral and bacterial infections may contribute to the development and
exacerbation of autoimmunity. In patients and in some animal
models, the onset of autoimmune diseases is often associated with
or preceded by infections. In most of these cases, the infectious
microorganism is not present in lesions and is not even detectable
in the individual when autoimmunity develops. Therefore, the
lesions of autoimmunity are not due to the infection itself but
result from host immune responses that may be triggered or
dysregulated by the microbe.
Infections may promote the development of autoimmunity by
two principal mechanisms (Fig. 15.14).
• Infections of particular tissues may induce local innate
immune responses that recruit leukocytes into the tissues
and result in the activation of tissue APCs. These APCs
begin to express costimulators and secrete T cell–activating
cytokines, resulting in the breakdown of T cell tolerance.
Thus, the infection results in the activation of T cells that
are speciﬁc for self antigens and not only for the infectious
pathogen. The importance of aberrant expression of
costimulators is suggested by experimental evidence that
immunization of mice with self antigens together with
strong adjuvants (which mimic microbes) results in the
breakdown of self-tolerance and the development of
autoimmune disease. In other experimental models, viral
antigens expressed in tissues such as islet β cells induce T
cell tolerance, but systemic infection of the mice with the
virus results in the failure of tolerance and autoimmune
destruction of the insulin-producing cells. Microbes may
also engage Toll-like receptors (TLRs) on DCs, leading to
the production of costimulators and lymphocyte-activating
cytokines, and on autoreactive B cells, leading to
autoantibody production. A role of TLR signaling in
autoimmunity has been demonstrated in mouse models of
lupus.
• Infectious microbes may contain antigens that cross-react
with self antigens, so immune responses to the microbes
may result in reactions against self antigens. This
phenomenon is called molecular mimicry because the
antigens of the microbe cross-react with, or mimic, self
antigens. One example of an immunologic cross-reaction
between microbial and self antigens is rheumatic fever,
which develops after streptococcal infections and is caused
by anti-streptococcal antibodies that cross-react with
myocardial proteins. These antibodies are deposited in the
heart and cause myocarditis. DNA sequencing has revealed
numerous short stretches of homologies between
myocardial proteins and streptococcal proteins. However,
the signiﬁcance of limited homologies between microbial
and self antigens in common autoimmune diseases remains
to be established.
FIGURE 15.14  Role of infections in the
development of autoimmunity. A, Normally,
encounter of a mature self-reactive T cell with
a self antigen presented by a costimulator-
deficient resting tissue antigen-presenting
cells (APCs) results in peripheral tolerance by
anergy. (Other possible mechanisms of self-
tolerance are not shown.) B, Microbes may
activate the APCs to express costimulators,
and when these APCs present self antigens
the self-reactive T cells are activated rather
than rendered tolerant. C, Some microbial
antigens may cross-react with self antigens
(molecular mimicry). Therefore, immune
responses initiated by the microbes may
activate T cells specific for self antigens.
DCs, Dendritic cells.
Some infections may protect against the development of
autoimmunity. Epidemiologic studies suggest that reducing
infections increases the incidence of type 1 diabetes and MS, and
experimental studies show that diabetes in nonobese diabetic mice
is greatly retarded if the mice are infected. It seems paradoxical that
infections can be triggers of autoimmunity and also inhibit
autoimmune diseases. How they may reduce the incidence of
autoimmune diseases is unknown.
The intestinal and cutaneous microbiome may inﬂuence the
development of autoimmune diseases. As we discussed in Chapter
14, humans are colonized by commensal microbes that may have
signiﬁcant eﬀects on the maturation and activation of the immune
system. This idea is supported by the ﬁnding that alterations in the
microbiome aﬀect the incidence and severity of autoimmune
diseases in experimental models. It is less clear if changes in the
human microbiome aﬀect the incidence of autoimmune diseases,
mainly because of inherent variations and complexity in the
microbiomes of individuals.
Other Factors in Autoimmunity
The development of autoimmunity is related to several factors in
addition to susceptibility genes and infections.
• Anatomic alterations in tissues, caused by inﬂammation
(possibly secondary to infections), ischemic injury, or
trauma, may lead to the exposure of self antigens that are
normally concealed from the immune system. Such
sequestered antigens may not have induced self-tolerance.
Therefore, if previously hidden self antigens are released,
they can interact with immunocompetent lymphocytes and
induce speciﬁc immune responses. Examples of
anatomically sequestered antigens in so-called immune-
privileged tissues include intraocular and testicular
proteins (see Chapter 14). Post-traumatic uveitis and
orchitis, which can be bilateral even when the trauma is
unilateral, are thought to be due to autoimmune responses
against self antigens that are released from their normal
locations by trauma.
FIGURE 15.15  Gender distribution of major
autoimmune diseases.The percentages are
approximations based on incidence data until
the year 2000. Included is an inflammatory
disease (sarcoidosis) that is not thought to be
autoimmune. SLE, Systemic lupus
erythematosus. 
From Whitacre CC. Sex differences in autoimmune diseases.
Nat Immunol. 2001;2:777. With permission of the
publishers.
• Gender plays a role in several autoimmune diseases. Many
autoimmune diseases have a higher incidence in women
than in men (Fig. 15.15). For example, SLE aﬀects women
about 10 times more frequently than men. The lupus-like
disease of (NZB × NZW)F1 mice develops only in females
and is retarded by androgen treatment. Whether this
female predominance results from the inﬂuence of sex
hormones or other gender-related factors is not known.
Autoimmune diseases are among the most diﬃcult scientiﬁc and
clinical problems in immunology. The current knowledge of
pathogenic mechanisms remains incomplete, so theories and
hypotheses continue to outnumber facts. The application of new
technical advances and the rapidly improving understanding of
self-tolerance will, it is hoped, lead to clearer and more deﬁnitive
answers to the enigmas of autoimmunity.
Summary
• Immunologic tolerance is unresponsiveness to an antigen
induced by the exposure of speciﬁc lymphocytes to that
antigen. Tolerance to self antigens is a fundamental
property of the normal immune system, and the failure of
self-tolerance leads to autoimmune diseases. Antigens may
be administered in ways that induce tolerance rather than
immunity, and this may be exploited for the prevention and
treatment of transplant rejection and autoimmune and
allergic diseases.
• Central tolerance is induced in the generative lymphoid
organs (thymus and bone marrow) when immature
lymphocytes encounter self antigens present in these
organs. Peripheral tolerance occurs when mature
lymphocytes recognize self antigens in peripheral tissues
under particular conditions.
• In T lymphocytes, central tolerance occurs when immature
thymocytes with high-aﬃnity receptors for self antigens
recognize these antigens in the thymus. Some immature T
cells that encounter self antigens in the thymus die
(negative selection), and others develop into FOXP3+
regulatory T lymphocytes (Tregs) that function to control
responses to self antigens in peripheral tissues.
• Several mechanisms account for peripheral tolerance in
mature T cells. In CD4+ T cells, anergy is induced by
antigen recognition without adequate costimulation or by
engagement of inhibitory receptors such as CTLA-4
(cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen 4) and PD-1 (programmed
cell death protein-1). Tregs inhibit immune responses by
multiple mechanisms. T cells that encounter self antigens
without other stimuli or that are repeatedly stimulated may
die by apoptosis.
• In B lymphocytes, central tolerance is induced when
immature B cells recognize multivalent self antigens in the
bone marrow. The result is the acquisition of a new
speciﬁcity, called receptor editing, or apoptotic death of the
immature B cells. Mature B cells that recognize self antigens
in the periphery in the absence of T cell help may be
rendered anergic and ultimately die by apoptosis or become
functionally unresponsive because of the engagement of
inhibitory receptors.
• Autoimmunity results from inadequate self-tolerance or
regulation of lymphocytes. Autoimmune reactions may be
triggered by environmental stimuli, such as infections, in
genetically susceptible individuals.
• Most autoimmune diseases are polygenic, and numerous
susceptibility genes contribute to disease development. The
greatest contribution is from major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) genes; other genes are thought to inﬂuence
the selection or regulation of self-reactive lymphocytes.
• Infections may predispose to autoimmunity by several
mechanisms, including enhanced expression of
costimulators in tissues and cross reactions between
microbial antigens and self antigens. Some infections may
protect individuals from autoimmunity, by unknown
mechanisms.
Selected Readings
∗Indicates publications of historical interest, generally reporting
the discovery of a phenomenon or process that was later shown to
be of fundamental importance in the immune system. Many (but
not all) of these discoveries led to Nobel Prizes for the
discoverer(s). The nature of the discovery is summarized brieﬂy in
each reference.
Immunologic Tolerance and General Mechanisms
∗Billingham RE, Brent L, Medawar PB. Actively acquired tolerance of foreign cells. Nature.
1953;172:603–606. (The discovery that exposure of neonatal animals to cells from other
animals induced a state of long-lived immunologic tolerance. Peter Medawar received the
Nobel Prize for this work. See 
hĴps://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/1960/medawar/lecture .)
Richards D.M, Kyewski B, Feuerer M. Re-examining the nature and function of self-reactive
T cells.  Trends Immunol . 2016;37:114–125.
Schwarĵ R.H. Historical overview of immunological tolerance.  Cold Spring Harb Perspect
Biol . 2012;4:a006908.
von Boehmer H, Melchers F. Checkpoints in lymphocyte development and autoimmune
disease.  Nat Immunol . 2010;11:14–20.
Yi J, Kawabe T, Sprent J. New insights on T-cell self-tolerance.  Curr Opin Immunol
. 2019;63:14–20.
Central Tolerance
Anderson M.S, Su M.A. Aire expands: new roles in immune tolerance and beyond.  Nat
Rev Immunol . 2016;16:247–258.
Cheng M, Anderson M.S. Thymic tolerance as a key brake on autoimmunity.  Nat Immunol
. 2018;19:659–664.
Klein L, Robey E.A, Hsieh C.S. Central CD4(+) T cell tolerance: deletion versus regulatory T
cell diﬀerentiation.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2019;19:7–18.
Nemazee D. Mechanisms of central tolerance for B cells.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2017;17:281–
294.
Stritesky G.L, Jameson S.C, Hogquist K.A. Selection of self-reactive T cells in the thymus. 
Annu Rev Immunol . 2012;30:95–114.
Anergy and Inhibitory Receptors
Anderson A.C, Joller N, Kuchroo V.K. LAG-3, TIM-3, and TIGIT: co-inhibitory receptors
with specialized functions in immune regulation.  Immunity . 2016;44:989–1004.
∗Jenkins M.K, Schwarĵ R.H. Antigen presentation by chemically modiﬁed splenocytes
induces antigen-speciﬁc T cell unresponsiveness in vitro and in vivo.  J Exp Med
. 1987;165:302–319 (The discovery that chemically modiﬁed antigen-presenting cells, now
known to be deﬁcient in costimulators, induce T cell anergy..
Okazaki T, Chikuma S, Iwai Y, et al. A rheostat for immune responses: the unique
properties of PD-1 and their advantages for clinical application.  Nat Immunol
. 2013;14:1212–1218.
Schildberg F.A, Klein S.R, Freeman G.J, Sharpe A.H. Coinhibitory pathways in the B7-
CD28 ligand-receptor family.  Immunity . 2016;44:955–972.
Sharpe A.H, Pauken K.E. The diverse functions of the PD-1 inhibitory pathway.  Nat Rev
Immunol . 2018;18:153–167.
Walker L.S, Sansom D.M. Confusing signals: recent progress in CTLA-4 biology.  Trends
Immunol . 2015;36:63–70.
Zhang Q, Vignali D.A. Co-stimulatory and co-inhibitory pathways in autoimmunity. 
Immunity . 2016;44:1034–1051.
Regulatory T Cells
Bilate A.M, Lafaille J.J. Induced CD4+FoxP3+ regulatory T cells in immune tolerance.  Annu
Rev Immunol . 2012;30:733–758.
Campbell D.J. Control of regulatory T cell migration, function, and homeostasis.  J Immunol
. 2015;195:2507–2513.
Chaudhry A, Rudensky A.Y. Control of inﬂammation by integration of environmental cues
by regulatory T cells.  J Clin Invest . 2013;123:939–944.
Deshmukh H, Way S.S. Immunological basis for recurrent fetal loss and pregnancy
complications.  Annu Rev Pathol . 2019;14:185–210.
Dominguez-Villar M, Haﬂer D.A. Regulatory T cells in autoimmune disease.  Nat Immunol
. 2018;19:665–673.
Georgiev P, Charbonnier L.M, Chatila T.A. Regulatory T cells: the many faces of FoxP3.  J
Clin Immunol . 2019;39:623–640.
Kalekar L.A, Mueller D.L. Relationship between CD4 regulatory T cells and anergy in vivo. 
J Immunol . 2017;198:2527–2533.
Klaĵmann D, Abbas A.K. The promise of low-dose interleukin-2 therapy for autoimmune
and inﬂammatory diseases.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2015;15:283–294.
Panduro M, Benoist C, Mathis D. Tissue Tregs.  Annu Rev Immunol . 2016;34:609–633.
Raﬃn C, Vo L.T, Bluestone J.A. Treg cell-based therapies: challenges and perspectives.  Nat
Rev Immunol . 2020;20:158–172.
Ramsdell F, Ziegler S.F. FoxP3 and scurfy: how it all began.  Nat Rev Immunol
. 2014;14:343–349.
Roncarolo M.G, Gregori S, BaccheĴa R, et al. The biology of T regulatory type 1 cells and
their therapeutic application in immune-mediated diseases.  Immunity . 2018;49:1004–
1019.
Rosenblum M.D, Way S.S, Abbas A.K. Regulatory T cell memory.  Nat Rev Immunol
. 2016;16:90–101.
Sakaguchi S, Mikami N, Wing J.B, et al. Regulatory T cells and human disease.  Annu Rev
Immunol . 2020;38:541–566.
∗Sakaguchi S, Sakaguchi N, Asano M, et al. Immunologic self-tolerance maintained by
activated T cells expressing IL-2 receptor alpha-chains (CD25): breakdown of a single
mechanism of self-tolerance causes various autoimmune diseases.  J Immunol
. 1995;155:1151–1164 (The demonstration that CD4+ T cells expressing high levels of CD25
were essential for maintaining self-tolerance, giving birth to the ﬁeld of regulatory T cells..
Savage P.A, Klawon D.E.J, Miller C.H. Regulatory T cell development.  Annu Rev Immunol
. 2020.
Wing J.B, Tanaka A, Sakaguchi S. Human FoxP3(+) regulatory T cell heterogeneity and
function in autoimmunity and cancer.  Immunity . 2019;50:302–316.
Apoptosis
Carrington E.M, Tarlinton D.M, Gray D.H, et al. The life and death of immune cell types:
the role of Bcl-2 anti-apoptotic molecules.  Immunol Cell Biol . 2017;95:870–877.
Griﬃth T.S, Ferguson T.A. Cell death in the maintenance and abrogation of tolerance: the
ﬁve Ws of dying cells.  Immunity . 2011;35:456–466.
Nagata S. Apoptosis and clearance of apoptotic cells.  Annu Rev Immunol . 2018;36:489–517.
Rieux-Laucat F, Magerus-Chatinet A, Neven B. The autoimmune lymphoproliferative
syndrome with defective Fas or Fas-ligand functions.  J Clin Immunol . 2018;38:558–568.
Speĵ J, Presser A.G, Sarosiek K.A. T cells and regulated cell death: kill or be killed.  Int Rev
Cell Mol Biol . 2019;342:27–71.
Mechanisms of Autoimmunity: General Concepts
Banchereau R, Cepika A.M, Banchereau J, Pascual V. Understanding human autoimmunity
and autoinﬂammation through transcriptomics.  Annu Rev Immunol . 2017;35:337–370.
Bluestone J.A, Bour-Jordan H, Cheng M, Anderson M. T cells in the control of organ-speciﬁc
autoimmunity.  J Clin Invest . 2015;125:2250–2260.
Rosen A, Casciola-Rosen L. Autoantigens as partners in initiation and propagation of
autoimmune rheumatic diseases.  Annu Rev Immunol . 2016;34:395–420.
Rosenblum M.D, Remedios K.A, Abbas A.K. Mechanisms of human autoimmunity.  J Clin
Invest . 2015;125:2228–2233.
Rubin S.J.S, Bloom M.S, Robinson W.H. B cell checkpoints in autoimmune rheumatic
diseases.  Nat Rev Rheumatol . 2019;15:303–315.
Suurmond J, Diamond B. Autoantibodies in systemic autoimmune diseases: speciﬁcity and
pathogenicity.  J Clin Invest . 2015;125:2194–2202.
Theoﬁlopoulos A.N, Kono D.H, Baccala R. The multiple pathways to autoimmunity.  Nat
Immunol . 2017;18:716–724.
Mechanisms of Autoimmunity: Genetics
Cheng MH, Anderson MS. Monogenic autoimmunity. Annu Rev Immunol. 201230:393–427.
Dendrou C.A, Petersen J, Rossjohn J, Fugger L. HLA variation and disease.  Nat Rev
Immunol . 2018;18:325–339.
Inshaw J.R.J, Cutler A.J, Burren O.S, et al. Approaches and advances in the genetic causes of
autoimmune disease and their implications.  Nat Immunol . 2018;19:674–684.
Lenardo M, Lo B, Lucas C.L. Genomics of immune diseases and new therapies.  Annu Rev
Immunol . 2016;34:121–149.
Marson A, Housley W.J, Haﬂer D.A. Genetic basis of autoimmunity.  J Clin Invest
. 2015;125:2234–2241.
Zenewicz L.A, Abraham C, Flavell R.A, Cho J.H. Unraveling the genetics of autoimmunity. 
Cell . 2010;140:791–797.
Mechanisms of Autoimmunity: Environmental Factors
Bach J.F. The hygiene hypothesis in autoimmunity: the role of pathogens and commensals. 
Nat Rev Immunol . 2018;18:105–120.
Belkaid Y, Hand T.W. Role of the microbiota in immunity and inﬂammation.  Cell
. 2014;157:121–141.
Haase S, Haghikia A, Wilck N, et al. Impacts of microbiome metabolites on immune
regulation and autoimmunity.  Immunology . 2018;154:230–238.
Palm N.W, de Zoete M.R, Flavell R.A. Immune-microbiota interactions in health and
disease.  Clin Immunol . 2015;159:122–127.
Rose N.R. Negative selection, epitope mimicry and autoimmunity.  Curr Opin Immunol
. 2017;49:51–55.
Chapter 16: Immunity to
Microbes 
Overview of Immune Responses to Microbes,
Immunity to Extracellular Bacteria,
Innate Immunity to Extracellular Bacteria,
Adaptive Immunity to Extracellular Bacteria,
Injurious Effects of Immune Responses to
Extracellular Bacteria,
Immune Evasion by Extracellular Bacteria,
Immunity to Intracellular Bacteria,
Innate Immunity to Intracellular Bacteria,
Adaptive Immunity to Intracellular Bacteria,
Immune Evasion by Intracellular Bacteria,
Immunity to Fungi,
Innate Immunity to Fungi,
Adaptive Immunity to Fungi,
Immunity to Viruses,
Innate Immunity to Viruses,
Adaptive Immunity to Viruses,
Immune Evasion by Viruses,
Immunity to Parasites,
Innate Immunity to Parasites,
Adaptive Immunity to Parasites,
Immune Evasion by Parasites,
Strategies for Vaccine Development,
Attenuated and Inactivated Bacterial and Viral
Vaccines,
Purified Antigen (Subunit) Vaccines,
Synthetic Antigen Vaccines,
Live Viral Vaccines Involving Recombinant
Viruses,
DNA Vaccines,
mRNA Vaccines,
Adjuvants and Immunomodulators,
Passive Immunization,
Summary,
In the preceding chapters, we have referred to protection against
infections as the major physiologic function of the immune system
and discussed immune responses in the context of responses to
microbes. In this chapter, we will integrate this information and
discuss the main features of immunity to diﬀerent types of
pathogenic microorganisms, as well as the mechanisms microbes
use to resist immune defenses.
The development of an infectious disease in an individual
involves complex interactions between the microbe and the host.
The key events during infection include entry of the microbe,
invasion and colonization of host tissues, evasion of host immunity,
and tissue injury or functional impairment. Microbes produce
disease by killing the host cells they infect or releasing toxins that
can cause tissue damage and functional derangements in
neighboring or distant cells and tissues that are not infected. In
addition, microbes often cause disease by stimulating innate and
adaptive immune responses that kill the microbes, but also may
injure and impair the function of normal tissues. Many features of
microorganisms determine their virulence, and many diverse
mechanisms contribute to the pathogenesis of infectious diseases.
The topic of microbial pathogenesis is beyond the scope of this
book. Our discussion will focus on host immune responses to
pathogenic microorganisms.
Overview of Immune Responses to Microbes
Microbes can cause disease of varying severity and chronicity (Fig.
16.1). In many instances, an infection is asymptomatic and resolves
without intervention. A typical host immune response is rapidly
triggered by the infection, wanes as the infection is cleared, and
leaves memory cells that can provide long-term protection.
Recurrent illnesses occur when the host response cannot eradicate
the microbe and may even contribute to the disease. Although
antimicrobial host defense reactions are numerous and varied,
there are several important general features of immunity to
microbes.
Defense against microbes is mediated by the eﬀector mechanisms
of innate and adaptive immunity. The innate immune system
provides early defense, and the adaptive immune system provides a
more sustained and stronger response as well as protection against
repeat infection by the same microbe. Many pathogenic microbes
have evolved to resist innate immunity, and protection against such
infections is critically dependent on adaptive immune responses.
Adaptive responses are eﬀective against even virulent microbes
because they generate large numbers of eﬀector cells and antibody
molecules that function to eliminate the microbes and memory
cells that protect the individual from repeated infections. However,
it typically takes several days for adaptive immune responses to
develop fully (the time needed for naive lymphocyte proliferation
and diﬀerentiation into eﬀector cells), and innate immunity
provides critical defense during this window.
FIGURE 16.1  The progression and outcome of
infections.Most infections have an incubation
period followed by disease that may be short-
lived if the host response is effective or
progressive or chronic if the response does not
adequately control the infection. 
Modified from Engleberg NC, DiRita V, Dermody TS, eds.
Schaechter’s Mechanisms of Microbial Disease. 5th ed. Baltimore,
MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013.
The immune system responds in specialized and distinct ways to
diﬀerent types of microbes to combat these infectious agents most
eﬀectively. Diﬀerent microbes require diﬀerent mechanisms for
elimination, and the adaptive immune system has evolved to
respond in the optimal way to a vast diversity of microbes. The
generation of diﬀerent subsets of eﬀector CD4+ T cells (see Chapter
10) and the production of diﬀerent isotypes of antibodies (see
Chapter 12) are excellent examples of the specialization of adaptive
immunity.
The survival and pathogenicity of microbes in a host are critically
inﬂuenced by the ability of the microbes to evade or resist the
eﬀector mechanisms of immunity. As we will see later in this
chapter, microorganisms have developed a variety of mechanisms
for surviving in the face of powerful immunologic defenses.
Infectious microbes and the immune system have co-evolved and
are engaged in a constant struggle for survival. The balance
between host immune responses and microbial strategies for
resisting immunity often determines the outcome of infections.
Some microbes establish latent, or persistent, infections in which
the immune response controls but does not eliminate the microbe.
Several viruses, especially DNA viruses of the herpesvirus and
poxvirus families, and some intracellular bacteria are capable of
establishing latent infections. In latent viral infections, the viral
DNA persists in the genome of infected cells but no infectious
virus is produced. In persistent bacterial infections, such as
tuberculosis, the bacteria may survive within the phagocytic
vesicles of infected macrophages. In all of these situations, some
latent microbes will on occasion become activated and start
replicating, especially if the immune system is weakened for any
reason.
In many infections, tissue injury and disease may be caused by the
host response to the microbe rather than by the microbe itself.
Immunity is necessary for host survival but also has the potential
for causing injury to the host.
Inherited and acquired defects in innate and adaptive immunity
are important causes of susceptibility to infections. Common
acquired 
causes 
of 
immunodeﬁciency 
include 
human
immunodeﬁciency 
virus 
(HIV) 
infection 
and 
therapeutic
immunosuppression 
by 
drugs 
to 
treat 
inﬂammatory 
and
autoimmune diseases or prevent transplant rejection. Although
less 
common, 
there 
are 
a 
large 
number 
of 
inherited
immunodeﬁciency syndromes caused by mutations in single genes
whose major clinical consequence is increased infections. In
addition, subtle and poorly deﬁned defects in host defenses may
underlie common infections. We will describe immunodeﬁciencies
in detail in Chapter 21. Aging individuals also show increased
susceptibility to infection, presumably because of reduced adaptive
immune responses. Paradoxically, with age there may be increased
inﬂammation without overt triggers.
Infections in the population elicit immune responses that establish
herd immunity, which protects against the spread of the infection.
Conversely, newly emerging infections are able to spread in part
because of the absence of herd immunity, resulting in epidemics
and pandemics. Most of these new infections are caused by viruses
that develop novel strains because of reassortment between the
genomes of existing human strains and animal strains. (This
process is discussed in more detail later, when we consider how
inﬂuenza viruses escape from immune defense.) The most
devastating pandemic in recent history was caused by the inﬂuenza
virus in 1918 to 1920, estimated to have killed 20 to 50 million
people in Western Europe and other regions of the world. More
recently, widespread infections have been caused by the
coronavirus that caused severe acute respiratory distress syndrome
(SARS) in 2002; a new inﬂuenza strain in 2009; the coronavirus that
caused Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome (MERS), which
emerged in 2012; the Zika virus in 2015 (which causes neurologic
defects in newborns); and the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 from 2019
onward (which causes the disease called COVID-19). The rapid
spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, which has caused over 2 million
deaths by early 2021 and major disruptions in societies worldwide,
demonstrates the extreme danger of emerging infections in
populations that lack preexisting immunity.
Analysis of immune responses is a valuable clinical assay for
infections. The most useful test is measurement of serum
antibodies speciﬁc for particular microbes. This is helpful for
detecting infections in which the microbe cannot be cultured, is not
g
detectable in the blood by molecular assays, or is present in tissues
that 
are 
not 
readily 
accessible. 
The 
presence 
of 
IgM
(immunoglobulin M) antibodies is indicative of recent infection,
whereas the presence of only IgG suggests past infection, reﬂecting
the sequence of antibody isotype production (IgM followed by IgG)
in response to any immunization (see Chapter 12). Other tests
include assays for T cell responses, such as tests for skin reactions
to microbial antigens and cytokine (e.g., interferon-γ [IFN-γ])
release after activation of peripheral blood cells with antigens, used
to detect infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
TABLE 16.1
ADP, Adenosine diphosphate; AIDS, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; cAMP, cyclic
adenosine monophosphate; CTL, cytotoxic T lymphocyte; HIV, human immunodeficiency
virus; LPS, lipopolysaccharide.
This table was compiled with the assistance of Dr. Arlene Sharpe, Department of Pathology,
Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
a  Examples of pathogenic microbes of different classes are listed, with brief summaries of
known or postulated mechanisms of tissue injury and disease. Facultative intracellular
bacteria can live inside or outside cells, whereas obligate intracellular organisms can live and
replicate only inside cells. Examples of parasites are listed in Table 16.4.
In this chapter, we will consider the main features of immunity to
ﬁve categories of pathogenic microorganisms: extracellular bacteria,
intracellular 
bacteria, 
fungi, 
viruses, 
and 
protozoan 
and
multicellular parasites (Table 16.1; see also Table 16.4 later in the
chapter). This separation provides a useful context for discussing
immunity because the dominant immune responses to these types
of infections are diﬀerent. We use the terms extracellular and
intracellular bacteria to refer to where the organisms survive and
replicate; even extracellular bacteria become intracellular when
they are ingested into phagocytes, but they do not survive inside
phagocytes. Our discussion of the immune responses to these
microbes illustrates the physiologic signiﬁcance of the eﬀector
functions of lymphocytes discussed in earlier chapters.
Immunity to Extracellular Bacteria
Extracellular bacteria are capable of replicating outside host cells,
for example, in the blood, in connective tissues, and in tissue spaces
such as the lumens of the airways and gastrointestinal tract. Many
diﬀerent species of extracellular bacteria are pathogenic, and
disease is caused by two principal mechanisms. First, these bacteria
induce inﬂammation, which results in tissue injury at the site of
infection. Second, bacteria produce toxins, which have diverse
pathologic eﬀects. The toxins include an endotoxin, which is the
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) complex in the cell wall of gram-negative
bacteria, and exotoxins, which are secreted by many types of
bacteria. Endotoxin activates macrophages and other cells and
stimulates the production of cytokines that mediate host defense
and also can cause disease. Many exotoxins are cytotoxic and kill
host cells, and others cause disease by various mechanisms. For
instance, diphtheria toxin shuts down protein synthesis in infected
cells, cholera toxin interferes with ion and water transport, tetanus
toxin inhibits neuromuscular transmission, and anthrax toxin
disrupts several critical biochemical signaling pathways in infected
cells.
Innate Immunity to Extracellular Bacteria
The principal mechanisms of innate immunity to extracellular
bacteria are phagocytosis, complement activation, and the
inﬂammatory response.
• Activation of phagocytes and inﬂammation. Extracellular
bacteria are eﬃciently killed by phagocytes (neutrophils
and macrophages) because these microbes have not
adapted to surviving inside these cells. Therefore,
recruitment and activation of phagocytes to the site of
infection, which is part of the inﬂammatory response, is the
major defense mechanism against these microbes.
Phagocytes are recruited and activated in response to
bacterial products, which act directly on the phagocytes and
also induce secretion of cytokines that act on the cells.
Tissue-resident dendritic cells (DCs) and macrophages that
are activated by the microbes secrete cytokines that
promote leukocyte inﬁltration into sites of infection.
Recruited neutrophils and blood monocyte–derived
macrophages, as well as tissue-resident macrophages, use
surface receptors, including mannose receptors and
scavenger receptors, to recognize extracellular bacteria, and
they use Fc receptors and complement receptors to
recognize bacteria opsonized with antibodies and
complement proteins, respectively. Microbial products
activate Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and other paĴern
recognition receptors in phagocytes and other cells. Some
of these receptors function mainly to promote the
phagocytosis of the microbes (e.g., mannose receptors,
scavenger receptors); others stimulate the microbicidal
activities of the phagocytes (mainly TLRs); and yet others
promote both phagocytosis and activation of the phagocytes
(Fc and complement receptors) (see Chapter 4). The
activated phagocytes ingest microbes and destroy them
mainly in phagolysosomes.
• Complement activation. Bacteria provide a surface for
complement activation by the alternative pathway (see
Chapters 4 and 13). Bacteria express mannose on their
surface that binds to mannose-binding lectin, or N-acetyl
compounds that bind to ﬁcolins, both of which activate
complement by the lectin pathway (see Chapter 4). One
p
y
p
y
p
result of complement activation is opsonization and
enhanced phagocytosis of the bacteria. In addition, the
membrane aĴack complex (MAC) generated by
complement activation lyses bacteria, especially Neisseria
species, which are particularly susceptible to lysis because
of their thin cell walls, and complement by-products
stimulate inﬂammatory responses by recruiting and
activating leukocytes.
• Innate lymphoid cells (ILCs), γδ T cells, and NKT cells have
all been described in infections, mostly in experimental
models, but their role in host defense, especially in
humans, is not established.
Adaptive Immunity to Extracellular Bacteria
Humoral immunity is a major protective immune response against
extracellular bacteria, and it functions to block infection, to
eliminate the microbes, and to neutralize their toxins (Fig. 16.2A) .
Antibody responses against extracellular bacteria are directed
against cell wall antigens and toxins, which may be polysaccharides
or proteins. The polysaccharides are T-independent antigens that
elicit antibody responses but do not activate T cells. Therefore,
humoral immunity is the principal mechanism of defense against
polysaccharide-rich encapsulated bacteria. For these microbes,
including Streptococcus pneumoniae, Neisseria species, and others, the
spleen plays a major role in both production of the antibodies and
phagocytic clearance of the opsonized bacteria. People whose
spleens are either surgically removed because of trauma or other
reasons or are damaged in hematologic disorders are at increased
risk for severe infections by these encapsulated bacteria. Protein
antigens, which are present in or secreted by most bacteria, elicit
more potent isotype-switched, high-aﬃnity antibodies, as well as
cell-mediated immunity. The eﬀector mechanisms used by
antibodies 
to 
combat 
infections 
include 
neutralization,
opsonization and phagocytosis, and activation of complement by
the classical pathway (see Chapter 13). Neutralization is mediated
by high-aﬃnity IgG, IgM, and IgA isotypes, the laĴer mainly in the
lumens of mucosal organs. Opsonization is mediated by the IgG1
and IgG3 subclasses of IgG, and complement activation is initiated
by IgM, IgG1, and IgG3.
FIGURE 16.2  Adaptive immune responses to
extracellular microbes.Adaptive immune
responses to extracellular microbes such as
bacteria and their toxins consist of antibody
production (A) and the activation of CD4+ helper T
cells, which work by secreted cytokines (B) and
CD40-ligand (not shown). Antibodies neutralize
and eliminate microbes and toxins by several
mechanisms. Helper T cells produce cytokines
that stimulate inflammation, macrophage
activation, and B cell responses. DC, Dendritic
cell; IFN-γ, interferon-gamma; IL, interleukin; TNF,
tumor necrosis factor.
The protein antigens of extracellular bacteria also activate CD4 +  
helper T cells, which produce cytokines and express cell surface
molecules that induce local inﬂammation, enhance the phagocytic
and microbicidal activities of macrophages and neutrophils, and
stimulate antibody production (Fig. 16.2B) . Th17 responses induced
by these microbes recruit neutrophils and monocytes and thus
promote local inﬂammation at sites of bacterial infection. Patients
with genetic defects in Th17 development and those who make
neutralizing autoantibodies speciﬁc for IL-17 have increased
susceptibility to extracellular bacterial and fungal infections and
develop multiple skin abscesses.
Injurious Effects of Immune Responses to
Extracellular Bacteria
The principal injurious consequences of host responses to
extracellular bacteria are inﬂammation and sepsis. The same
reactions of neutrophils and macrophages that function to
eradicate the infection also cause tissue damage by local production
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and lysosomal enzymes. These
inﬂammatory reactions are usually self-limited and controlled.
Cytokines secreted by leukocytes in response to bacterial products
also stimulate the production of acute-phase proteins and cause the
systemic manifestations of the infection (see Chapter 4). Sepsis is a
pathologic consequence of severe, local or disseminated infection
by some gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria, as well as some
fungi. Sepsis typically manifests clinically with abnormalities in
tissue blood perfusion, coagulation, metabolism, and organ
function. Septic shock is the most severe and frequently fatal form
of sepsis, characterized by circulatory collapse (shock) and
disseminated intravascular coagulation. The early phase of bacterial
sepsis is caused by cytokines produced by macrophages that are
activated by bacterial cell wall components, including LPS and
peptidoglycans. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF), IL-6, and IL-1 are the
principal cytokine mediators of sepsis, but IFN-γ and IL-12 may
also contribute (see Chapter 4). This early burst of large amounts of
cytokines is sometimes called a cytokine storm. There is some
evidence that in LPS-induced sepsis, activation of a noncanonical
inﬂammasome pathway causes cell death and release of
inﬂammatory mediators (the process called pyroptosis, see Chapter
4), and this is essential for development of the disease.
FIGURE 16.3  Polyclonal activation of T cells by
bacterial superantigens. A, Conventional microbial
T cell antigens, composed of a peptide bound to
the peptide-binding groove of a major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecule, are
recognized by a very small fraction of T cells in
any one individual, and only these T cells are
activated to become effector T cells that protect
against the microbe. B, In contrast, a
superantigen binds to class II MHC molecules
outside the peptide-binding groove, in an allele-
nonspecfic manner, and simultaneously binds to
the variable region of many different T cell
receptor (TCR) β chains, regardless of the
peptide specificity of the TCR. Different
superantigens bind to TCRs of different Vβ
families. Because many T cells express a TCR β
chain from a particular Vβ family, superantigens
can activate a large number of T cells. In the
example shown, the superantigen staphylococcal
enterotoxin B (SEB) binds to human leukocyte
antigen (HLA)-DR and the V regions of TCRs
belonging to the Vβ3 family. Other superantigens
may bind different class II MHC molecules and
TCRs of different Vβ families. APC, Antigen-
presenting cell.
Certain bacterial toxins stimulate all T cells that express
members of a particular T cell receptor (TCR) Vβ gene family. Such
toxins are called superantigens because, like the typical antigens T
cells recognize, they bind to TCRs and to class II major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules (although not to the
peptide-binding clefts), but they activate many more clones of T
cells than do conventional peptide antigens (Fig. 16.3). Their
importance lies in their ability to activate many T cells, with the
subsequent production of large amounts of cytokines that can also
cause a sepsis-like systemic inﬂammatory response syndrome.
A late complication of the humoral immune response to bacterial
infection may be the generation of disease-producing antibodies.
The best-deﬁned examples are two rare sequelae of streptococcal
infections of the throat or skin that are manifested weeks or even
months after the infections are controlled. Rheumatic fever is a
sequel to pharyngeal infection with group A β-hemolytic
streptococci. Infection leads to the production of antibodies and
activation of T cells speciﬁc for bacterial cell wall proteins. Some of
these antibodies and T cells cross-react with myocardial proteins
and cause inﬂammation aﬀecting the heart muscle (myocarditis)
and the valves (endocarditis). Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
is a sequel to infection of the skin or throat with nephritogenic
strains of group A β-hemolytic streptococci. Antibodies produced
against these bacteria form complexes with bacterial antigen, which
may be deposited in kidney glomeruli and cause nephritis.
Immune Evasion by Extracellular Bacteria
The virulence of extracellular bacteria has been linked to a number
of mechanisms that enable the microbes to resist innate immunity
(Table 16.2). Bacteria with polysaccharide-rich capsules resist
phagocytosis and are therefore more virulent than homologous
strains lacking a capsule. The capsules of many pathogenic gram-
positive and gram-negative bacteria contain sialic acid residues that
inhibit complement activation by the alternative pathway.
A mechanism used by bacteria to evade humoral immunity is
variation of surface antigens (Fig. 16.4) . Some surface antigens of
bacteria, such as gonococci and Escherichia coli, are contained in
their pili, which are the structures responsible for bacterial
adhesion to host cells. The major antigen of the pili is a protein
called pilin. The pilin genes of gonococci undergo extensive gene
conversion, because of which the progeny of one organism can
produce up to 106 antigenically distinct pilin molecules. This ability
to alter antigens helps the bacteria to evade aĴack by pilin-speciﬁc
antibodies, although its principal signiﬁcance for the bacteria may
be to select for pili that are more adherent to host cells so that the
bacteria are more virulent. Changes in the production of
glycosidases 
lead 
to 
chemical 
alterations 
in 
surface
oligosaccharides, which enable the bacteria to evade humoral
immune responses against these antigens. Bacteria also release
surface antigens in membrane blebs, which may divert antibodies
away from the microbes themselves.
TABLE 16.2
Immunity to Intracellular Bacteria
Intracellular bacteria are those that are ingested by macrophages
but are able to survive and even replicate within these cells.
Because these microbes ﬁnd a niche where they are inaccessible to
circulating antibodies, their elimination requires the mechanisms
of cell-mediated immunity (Fig. 16.5). As we will discuss later in
this section, in many intracellular bacterial infections the host
response also causes tissue injury. Most bacteria do not infect
nonphagocytic cells as do viruses. Therefore, a primary mechanism
of host defense against such bacteria is to activate phagocytes to
destroy 
the 
ingested 
microbes. 
Some 
bacteria 
do 
infect
nonphagocytic cells, including RickeĴsia species that infect
endothelial cells and Chlamydia species that infect epithelial cells.
A mechanism of defense against these bacteria is killing of infected
cells by cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs).
Innate Immunity to Intracellular Bacteria
The innate immune response to intracellular bacteria is mediated
mainly by phagocytes and NK cells. Phagocytes, initially neutrophils
and later macrophages, ingest and aĴempt to destroy these
microbes, but pathogenic intracellular bacteria are resistant to
degradation within phagocytes. Products of these bacteria are
recognized by TLRs and cytoplasmic proteins of the NOD-like
receptor (NLR) family, resulting in activation of the phagocytes (see
Chapter 4). Bacterial DNA and cyclic dinucleotides produced by the
bacteria in the cytosol stimulate type I IFN responses through the
STING pathway.
FIGURE 16.4  Mechanisms of immune evasion in
bacteria.Shown are the multiple mechanisms used
by one bacterial species, Neisseria, to evade
humoral immunity. Ig, Immunoglobulin.
FIGURE 16.5  Innate and adaptive immunity to
intracellular bacteria.The innate immune response
to intracellular bacteria consists of phagocytes
and natural killer (NK) cells, interactions among
which are mediated by cytokines (interleukin-12
[IL-12] and interferon-γ [IFN-γ]). The typical
adaptive immune response to these microbes is
cell-mediated immunity, in which T cells activate
phagocytes to eliminate the microbes. Innate
immunity may control bacterial growth, but
elimination of the bacteria requires adaptive
immunity. These principles are based largely on
analysis of Listeria monocytogenes infection in
mice; the numbers of viable bacteria shown on the
y-axis are relative values of bacterial colonies that
can be grown from the tissues of infected mice.
Intracellular bacteria activate NK cells by inducing expression of
NK cell–activating ligands on infected cells and by stimulating DC
and macrophage production of IL-12 and IL-15, both of which are
NK cell–activating cytokines. The NK cells produce IFN-γ, which in
turn 
activates 
macrophages 
and 
promotes 
killing 
of 
the
phagocytosed bacteria. Thus, NK cells provide an early defense
against these microbes, before the development of adaptive
immunity. In fact, mice with severe combined immunodeﬁciency,
which lack T and B cells, are able to transiently control infection
with the intracellular bacterium Listeria monocytogenes by NK cell–
derived IFN-γ production. However, innate immunity usually fails
to eradicate these infections, and eradication requires adaptive cell-
mediated immunity.
The ability of type 1 ILCs to defend against intracellular bacteria
has been demonstrated in mouse models. These ILCs secrete IFN-γ
and TNF, which activate macrophages and help to clear
intracellular pathogens.
Adaptive Immunity to Intracellular Bacteria
The major protective immune response against intracellular bacteria
is T cell–mediated recruitment and activation of phagocytes (cell-
mediated immunity). Individuals with deﬁcient cell-mediated
immunity, such as patients with AIDS (acquired immunodeﬁciency
syndrome), 
are 
extremely 
susceptible 
to 
infections 
with
intracellular bacteria (as well as intracellular fungi and viruses).
Many of the important features of cell-mediated immunity were
established in the 1950s based on studies of immune responses to
the intracellular bacterium L. monocytogenes in mice. This form of
immunity could be adoptively transferred to naive animals with
lymphocytes but not with serum from infected or immunized
animals (see Fig. 10.3).
As we discussed in Chapters 10 and 11, T cells provide defense
against infections by two types of reactions: CD4+ Th1 cells activate
phagocytes through the actions of CD40 ligand and IFN-γ,
resulting in killing of microbes that are ingested by phagocytes into
phagolysosomes, and CD8+ CTLs kill infected cells, eliminating
microbes that escape the killing mechanisms of phagocytes. CD4+ T
cells diﬀerentiate into Th1 eﬀectors under the inﬂuence of IL-12,
which is produced by macrophages and DCs. The T cells express
CD40 ligand and secrete IFN-γ, and these two stimuli activate
macrophages to produce several microbicidal substances, including
nitric oxide, lysosomal enzymes, and ROS. These substances are
produced mainly within phagolysosomes and thus target microbes
ingested into the vesicles. The importance of IL-12 and IFN-γ in
immunity to intracellular bacteria has been demonstrated in
experimental models and in congenital immunodeﬁciencies. For
instance, individuals with inherited mutations in receptors for IFN-
γ or IL-12 are highly susceptible to infections with normally
avirulent mycobacteria (see Chapter 21).
Numerous cytokines in addition to IFN-γ play important roles in
defense against intracellular bacteria such as M. tuberculosis. TNF,
produced by activated macrophages and other cells, recruits and
activates mononuclear phagocytes to combat mycobacteria; this is
why patients with rheumatoid arthritis and other autoimmune
diseases who are treated with TNF antagonists become susceptible
to mycobacterial infections.
In some infections, the bacteria escape from vesicles and enter
the cytoplasm of infected cells. For instance, Listeria produces a
protein that creates holes in the phagosomal membrane and
enables the bacteria to escape into the cytosol, thus evading the
microbicidal 
mechanisms 
of 
the 
phagocytes 
(which 
are
concentrated in the phagolysosomes). For eradication of such
infections, the infected cells have to be killed by CTLs, which
recognize cytosolic peptides displayed by class I MHC molecules.
Thus, the eﬀectors of cell-mediated immunity, namely CD4+ T cells
that activate macrophages and CD8+ CTLs, function cooperatively
in defense against intracellular bacteria (Fig. 16.6).
FIGURE 16.6  Cooperation of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells
in defense against intracellular
microbes.Intracellular bacteria such as L.
monocytogenes are phagocytosed by
macrophages and may survive in phagosomes
and escape into the cytoplasm. CD4+ T cells
respond to class II major histocompatibility
complex (MHC)-associated peptide antigens
derived from the intravesicular bacteria. These T
cells produce interferon-γ (IFN-γ) and express
CD40 ligand, which activates macrophages to
destroy the microbes in phagosomes. CD8+ T
cells respond to class I–associated peptides
derived from cytosolic antigens and kill the
infected cells. CTL, Cytologic T cell.
The macrophage activation that occurs in response to intracellular
microbes is capable of causing tissue injury. This injury may be the
result of delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) reactions to microbial
protein antigens (see Chapter 19). Because intracellular bacteria
have evolved to resist killing within phagocytes, they often persist
for long periods and cause chronic T cell and macrophage
activation, which may result in the formation of granulomas
surrounding the microbes (see Fig. 19.8). The histologic hallmark of
infection with some intracellular bacteria is granulomatous
inﬂammation. This type of inﬂammatory reaction may serve to
localize and prevent spread of the microbes, but it is also associated
with severe functional impairment caused by tissue necrosis and
ﬁbrosis. In fact, necrotizing granulomas and the ﬁbrosis (scarring)
that accompanies granulomatous inﬂammation are important
causes of tissue injury and clinical disease in tuberculosis.
Individuals who have been previously infected with M. tuberculosis
show cutaneous DTH reactions to skin challenge with a bacterial
antigen preparation (puriﬁed protein derivative [PPD]). This is the
basis of a commonly used skin test to detect previous infection.
Diﬀerences among individuals in the paĴerns of T cell responses to
intracellular microbes are important determinants of disease
progression and clinical outcome. Leprosy, which is caused by
Mycobacterium leprae, is considered an example of the relationship
between the type of T cell response and disease outcome in
humans. There are two polar forms of leprosy, the lepromatous and
tuberculoid forms, although many patients fall into less clear
intermediate groups. In lepromatous leprosy, patients have high
speciﬁc antibody titers but weak cell-mediated responses to M.
leprae antigens. Mycobacteria proliferate within macrophages and
are detectable in large numbers. The bacterial growth and
persistent but inadequate macrophage activation result in
destructive lesions in the skin and underlying tissue. In contrast,
patients with tuberculoid leprosy have strong cell-mediated
immunity but low antibody levels. This paĴern of immunity is
reﬂected in granulomas that form around nerves and produce
peripheral sensory nerve defects and secondary traumatic skin
lesions but with less tissue destruction and a paucity of bacteria in
the lesions. One possible reason for the diﬀerences in these two
forms of disease caused by the same organism may be that there
are diﬀerent paĴerns of T cell diﬀerentiation and cytokine
production in individuals. Some studies indicate that patients with
the tuberculoid form of the disease produce IFN-γ and IL-2 in
lesions (indicative of Th1 cell activation), whereas patients with
lepromatous leprosy produce less IFN-γ and may exhibit weak cell-
mediated immunity and failure to control bacterial spread. The role
of Th1- and Th2-derived cytokines in determining the outcome of
infection has been most clearly demonstrated in infection by the
protozoan parasite Leishmania major in diﬀerent strains of inbred
mice (discussed later in this chapter).
Immune Evasion by Intracellular Bacteria
Intracellular bacteria have developed various strategies to resist
elimination by phagocytes (see Table 16.2). These include inhibiting
phagolysosome fusion or escaping into the cytosol, and directly
scavenging or inactivating microbicidal substances, such as ROS.
The outcome of infection by these organisms often depends on
whether the T cell–stimulated antimicrobial mechanisms of
macrophages or microbial resistance to killing gain the upper hand.
Resistance to phagocyte-mediated elimination is also the reason
that such bacteria tend to cause chronic infections that are diﬃcult
to eradicate. Some of these infections, notably tuberculosis, may
last for years. The bacteria survive in a quiescent latent state within
phagocytes and often become active, especially if the immune
system is compromised.
Immunity to Fungi
Fungal infections, also called mycoses, are important causes of
morbidity and mortality in humans. Some fungal infections are
endemic, and these infections are usually caused by fungi that are
present in the environment and whose spores enter humans. Other
fungal infections are said to be opportunistic because the etiologic
agents cause mild or no disease in healthy individuals but may
infect and cause severe disease in immunodeﬁcient persons.
Compromised immunity is the most important predisposing factor
for fungal infections that cause serious illness. Neutrophil
deﬁciency as a result of bone marrow suppression or damage is
frequently associated with such infections. Opportunistic fungal
infections are also associated with immunodeﬁciency caused by
HIV and by therapy for disseminated cancer and transplant
rejection.
Diﬀerent fungi infect humans and may live outside of cells in
many tissues or within phagocytes. Therefore, the immune
responses to these microbes are often combinations of the
responses to extracellular and intracellular microbes.
Innate Immunity to Fungi
The principal mediators of innate immunity against fungi are
phagocytes and the complement system (Fig. 16.7) . Phagocytosis by
neutrophils and macrophages is important for controlling fungal
infections in tissues. These phagocytes detect fungal molecules by a
variety of paĴern recognition receptors, including TLRs and lectins
such as Dectin and mannose receptors (see Chapter 4). Neutrophils
seem to be especially important in defense against predominantly
extracellular fungi, and disseminated fungal infections are frequent
complications of conditions associated with neutropenia, such as
leukemias and cancer therapies that compromise bone marrow
function. Neutrophils and macrophages liberate fungicidal
substances, such as ROS and lysosomal enzymes, and phagocytose
fungi for intracellular killing.
Complement activation is mainly involved in defense against
fungi that enter the bloodstream, such as Candida organisms. Fungi
may activate the alternative or lectin complement pathways.
Complement products opsonize fungi for phagocytosis but may not
directly lyse fungi because of their thick cell walls, which resist
killing by the MAC.
Adaptive Immunity to Fungi
Th17 cells play a critical role in adaptive immunity to extracellular
fungal infections in tissues (see Fig. 16-7) . Fungi such as Candida
frequently infect epithelial tissues such as the skin and the
oropharyngeal mucosa; other fungi often infect the gastrointestinal
tract. In all of these locations, fungi induce Th17 responses, in large
part because fungal carbohydrates stimulate DCs and macrophages
by receptors such as Dectin to liberate cytokines that promote Th17
diﬀerentiation (see Chapter 10). Th17 cells recruit neutrophils that
phagocytose and destroy the fungi. Predictably, the most
prominent complication of inherited mutations aﬀecting Th17
development is chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis.
Th1-mediated cellular immunity is an important defense
mechanism against intracellular fungal infections.  Histoplasma
capsulatum, a facultative intracellular parasite that lives in
macrophages, is eliminated by the same cellular mechanisms that
are eﬀective against intracellular bacteria. CD4+ Th1 and CD8+ T
cells cooperate to eliminate the yeast forms of Cryptococcus
neoformans, which tend to colonize the lungs and brain in
immunodeﬁcient hosts. Pneumocystis jiroveci is another intracellular
fungus that causes serious infections in individuals with defective
cell–mediated immunity, such as patients with AIDS; bone marrow
failure, often resulting from leukemias; and inherited deﬁciency in
CD40-ligand (see Chapter 21).
Th2 responses are thought to be ineﬀective at clearing fungi and
may cause harm. In Aspergillus infection of the airways, Th2
responses against the fungus cause a serious inﬂammatory reaction
called allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis.
LiĴle is known about how fungi evade host immunity. Virulent
strains of C. neoformans inhibit the production of cytokines, such as
TNF and IL-12 by macrophages, and stimulate production of IL-10,
thus inhibiting macrophage activation.
Immunity to Viruses
Viruses are obligatory intracellular microorganisms that use
components of the nucleic acid and protein synthetic machinery of
the host to replicate. Viruses typically infect various cell types by
receptor-mediated endocytosis after binding to normal cell surface
molecules. Viruses can cause tissue injury and disease by any of
several mechanisms. Viral replication interferes with normal
cellular protein synthesis and function and leads to injury and
ultimately death of the infected cell. This result is one type of
cytopathic eﬀect of viruses, and the infection is said to be lytic
because the infected cell is lysed. Viruses can stimulate
inﬂammatory responses that cause damage to tissues. Viruses may
also cause latent infections, discussed later.
FIGURE 16.7  Role of innate immunity and Th17
cells in defense against fungal infection.Dendritic
cells (DCs) and macrophages (not shown)
recognize fungal glucans and liberate cytokines
that stimulate innate lymphoid cells (ILC3s)
resident in the tissues to release cytokines, mainly
interleukin-17 (IL-17), which recruit neutrophils
and induce the production of antimicrobial
peptides that protect against the infection.
Cytokines may directly recruit neutrophils as well.
The DCs also stimulate the differentiation of naive
fungal antigen-specific CD4+ T cells into Th17
cells in draining lymph nodes, and the Th17 cells
migrate back to the site of infection. Granulocyte-
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)
produced by the ILCs (and perhaps Th17 cells)
may contribute to recruitment of neutrophils. CLR,
C-type lectin receptor (e.g., dectin-1); TGF-β,
transforming growth factor-β; TLR, Toll-like
receptor.
Innate and adaptive immune responses to viruses are aimed at
blocking infection and eliminating infected cells (Fig. 16.8).
Innate Immunity to Viruses
The principal mechanisms of innate immunity against viruses are
inhibition of infection by type I IFNs and NK cell–mediated killing of
infected cells. Infection by many viruses is associated with
production of type I IFNs by infected cells and by plasmacytoid
DCs and macrophages responding to viral products (see Chapter 4).
Several biochemical pathways trigger IFN production. These
include recognition of viral RNA and DNA by endosomal TLRs and
activation of cytoplasmic RIG-like receptors and the STING
pathway by viral RNA and DNA, respectively (Fig. 16.9). These
pathways converge on the activation of protein kinases, which in
turn activate the IRF transcription factors that stimulate IFN gene
transcription. Type I IFNs inhibit viral replication in both infected
and uninfected cells. The mechanisms by which these cytokines
block viral replication were discussed in Chapter 4 (see Fig. 4.18).
Type I IFNs also stimulate the production of other host proteins
that interfere with viral replication and are called restriction factors.
The role of restriction factors in defense against viruses is best
understood for HIV (see Chapter 21).
NK cells kill virus-infected cells and are an important mechanism
of 
immunity 
against 
viruses, 
especially 
DNA 
viruses
(herpesviruses, human papilloma virus [HPV], and others) early in
the course of infection before adaptive immune responses have
developed. Class I MHC expression is often shut oﬀ in virus-
infected cells as an escape mechanism from CTLs. This enables NK
cells to kill the infected cells because the absence of class I releases
NK cells from a normal state of inhibition (see Fig. 4.10). Viral
infection may also stimulate expression of activating NK cell
ligands on the infected cells.
Adaptive Immunity to Viruses
Adaptive immunity against viral infections is mediated by
antibodies that block virus binding and entry into host cells and by
CTLs, which eliminate the infection by killing infected cells (see Fig.
16.8) . The most eﬀective antibodies are high-aﬃnity antibodies
produced in T-dependent germinal center reactions (see Chapter
12). Antibodies are eﬀective against viruses only during the
extracellular stage of the lives of these microbes. Viruses will be
extracellular when they ﬁrst enter the body before they infect host
cells, or when they are released from infected cells by virus
budding or if the infected cells die. Antiviral antibodies bind to
viral envelope or capsid antigens and function mainly as
neutralizing antibodies to prevent virus aĴachment and entry into
host cells. Thus, antibodies prevent both initial infection and cell-
to-cell spread. Secreted antibodies, especially of the IgA isotype,
are important for neutralizing viruses within the respiratory and
intestinal tracts. Oral immunization against poliovirus works by
inducing mucosal immunity. In addition to neutralization,
antibodies may opsonize viral particles and promote their clearance
by phagocytes. Complement activation may also participate in
antibody-mediated 
viral 
immunity, 
mainly 
by 
promoting
phagocytosis and possibly by direct lysis of viruses with lipid
envelopes.
FIGURE 16.8  Innate and adaptive immune
responses against viruses. A, Kinetics of innate
and adaptive immune responses to a virus
infection. B, Mechanisms by which innate and
adaptive immunity prevent and eradicate virus
infections. Innate immunity is mediated by type 1
interferons (IFNs), which prevent infection, and
natural killer (NK) cells, which eliminate infected
cells. Adaptive immunity is mediated by antibodies
and cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), which block
infection and kill infected cells, respectively.
The importance of humoral immunity in defense against viral
infections is supported by the observation that resistance to a
particular virus, induced by either infection or vaccination, is often
speciﬁc for the serologic (antibody-deﬁned) type of the virus. An
example is inﬂuenza virus, in which exposure to one serologic type
does not confer resistance to other serotypes of the virus.
Neutralizing antibodies block viral infection of cells and spread of
viruses from cell to cell, but after the viruses enter cells and begin
to replicate intracellularly, they are inaccessible to antibodies.
Therefore, humoral immunity induced by previous infection or
vaccination is able to protect individuals from viral infection but
cannot by itself eradicate established infection.
Elimination of viruses that reside within cells is mediated by
CTLs, which kill the infected cells. As we have mentioned in
previous chapters, the principal physiologic function of CTLs is
surveillance against viral infection. Most virus-speciﬁc CTLs are
CD8+ T cells that recognize cytosolic, usually endogenously
synthesized, viral peptides presented by class I MHC molecules. If
the infected cell is a tissue cell and not an antigen-presenting cell
(APC), such as a DC, the infected cell or viral proteins released
from the cell may be phagocytosed by the DC, which processes the
viral antigens and presents them to naive CD8+ T cells to initiate
the antiviral T cell response. We described this process of cross-
presentation, or cross-priming, in Chapter 6 (see Fig. 6.14). Full
diﬀerentiation of CD8+ CTLs often requires cytokines produced by
CD4+ helper cells or costimulators expressed on APCs (see Chapter
11). As discussed in Chapters 9 and 11, CD8+ T cells undergo
massive proliferation during viral infection, and most of the
proliferating cells are speciﬁc for only a few viral peptides. The
activated T cells diﬀerentiate into eﬀector CTLs, which can kill any
infected nucleated cell that is producing viral antigens in the
cytosol and presenting peptides from these antigens on cell surface
class I MHC molecules. The antiviral eﬀects of CTLs are mainly due
to killing of infected cells, but other mechanisms include activation
of nucleases within infected cells that degrade viral genomes and
secretion of cytokines, such as IFN-γ, which activates phagocytes.
FIGURE 16.9  Production of type I interferons.Viral
nucleic acids in infected cells activate numerous
pathways that lead to the production of antiviral
type I interferons (IFNs). If viruses enter the cell
by endocytosis, viral RNA and DNA can bind to
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) in the endosomal
membrane, which induces signals that activate
IFN response factors (IRFs) and type I IFN gene
expression. During viral replication, viral RNA in
the cytosol can activate retinoic acid–inducible
gene (RIG)-like receptors, such as melanoma
differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5) and
RIG-1, and viral dsDNA can activate the cGAS-
STING pathway, both leading to IRF activation
and type I IFN gene expression. ds, Double
stranded; cGAS, cyclic guanosine
monophosphate–adenosine monophosphate;
STING, stimulator of IFN genes.
Many lines of experimental and clinical evidence support the
importance of CTLs in defense against viral infection. Susceptibility
to such infections is increased in patients and animals deﬁcient in T
lymphocytes. Humans and experimental animals can be protected
against some virus infections by adoptive transfer of virus-speciﬁc,
class I–restricted CTLs. Viruses have developed numerous
strategies to escape aĴack by CD8+ CTLs. These include blocking
the processing and presentation of antigens by the class I MHC
pathway and shuĴing down CD8+ T cell responses by inducing the
phenomenon of exhaustion. These evasion mechanisms are
discussed later in the chapter.
In latent infections, viral DNA persists in host cells, but the virus
does not replicate or kill infected cells. Latency is a feature of
infections by several viruses, especially DNA viruses of the
herpesvirus and poxvirus families. In latent viral infections, the
viral DNA may be integrated into the DNA of infected cells, but no
infectious virus is produced. The host immune response controls
but does not eliminate the infection. If the host’s immune system
becomes defective for any reason, the virus may be reactivated,
causing signiﬁcant clinical disease. Examples include shingles due
to reactivation of latent varicella infection and cold sores due to
reactivation of latent herpes simplex virus.
In some viral infections, tissue injury may be caused by CTLs.
Some degree of immunopathology accompanies host responses to
many, perhaps most, virus infections. An experimental model of a
disease in which the pathologic condition is primarily due to the
host immune response is lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
(LCMV) infection in mice, which induces inﬂammation of the
spinal cord meninges. LCMV infects meningeal cells, but it is
noncytopathic and does not injure the infected cells directly. The
virus stimulates the development of virus-speciﬁc CTLs that kill
infected meningeal cells during a physiologic aĴempt to eradicate
the infection. Therefore, meningitis develops in normal mice with
intact immune systems, but T cell–deﬁcient mice do not develop
disease and instead become carriers of the virus. This observation
appears to contradict the usual situation, in which immunodeﬁcient
individuals are more susceptible to infectious diseases than are
normal individuals. Hepatitis B virus infection in humans has the
unusual feature that immunodeﬁcient persons who become
infected often do not develop the disease but become carriers who
can transmit the infection to otherwise healthy persons. The livers
of patients with acute and chronic active hepatitis contain large
numbers of CD8+ T cells, and hepatitis virus–speciﬁc, class I MHC–
restricted CTLs can be isolated from liver biopsy specimens and
propagated in vitro. These ﬁndings support the view that the CTL
response is the main cause of tissue injury in viral hepatitis.
SARS-CoV-2 sometimes induces a systemic inﬂammatory
reaction 
that 
contributes 
to 
the 
pathology 
and 
clinical
manifestations of COVID-19. The inﬂammation is associated with
increased production of numerous cytokines. In some patients, the
inﬂammation is severe and life-threatening. Severe disease is
characterized by largely myeloid cell–driven inﬂammation, with
exuberant monocyte activation and cytokine production induced by
viral RNA and possibly products of dead cells. Often, there is
severe lymphopenia with decreased T cell numbers. The
contribution of adaptive immune cells to inﬂammation in this
disease is not well established, nor is it known why this particular
coronavirus has a propensity to elicit such a reaction. It is also not
clear why severe disease is seen in older individuals, especially in
men with preexisting conditions such as type 2 diabetes.
Immune responses to viral infections may be involved in
producing disease in other ways. Antiviral antibodies may promote
activation of macrophages and other myeloid cells through binding
to Fc receptors and even enhance the entry of viruses into host
cells. This reaction, called antibody-mediated enhancement, has
been postulated to increase lung inﬂammation associated with
some virus infections, such as coronaviruses, dengue, and
respiratory syncytial virus. A consequence of persistent infection
with some viruses, such as hepatitis B, is the formation of
circulating immune complexes composed of viral antigens and
speciﬁc antibodies (see Chapter 19). These complexes are deposited
in blood vessels and lead to systemic vasculitis. Some coronaviruses
that cause severe life-threatening disease may induce endothelial
damage and activate coagulation, thus inducing local thrombus
formation and tissue damage. Some viral proteins contain amino
acid sequences that are also present in some self antigens. It has
been postulated that because of this molecular mimicry, antiviral
immunity can lead to immune responses against self antigens.
Immune Evasion by Viruses
Viruses have evolved numerous mechanisms for evading host
immunity (Table 16.3).
• Viruses can alter their antigens and are thus no longer
targets of immune responses. The antigens aﬀected are most
commonly surface glycoproteins that are recognized by
antibodies, but T cell epitopes may also undergo variation.
The principal mechanisms of antigenic variation are point
mutations and reassortment of RNA genomes (in RNA
viruses), leading to antigenic drift and antigenic shift. These
processes are of great importance in the spread of inﬂuenza
virus. The two major antigens of the virus are the trimeric
viral hemagglutinin (the viral spike protein) and
neuraminidase. Viral genomes undergo mutations in the
genes that encode these surface proteins, and the variation
that occurs as a result is called antigenic drift. Alternatively,
the segmented RNA genomes of various strains of
inﬂuenza viruses that normally inhabit diﬀerent host
species can recombine in host cells, and these reassorted
viruses can diﬀer quite dramatically from prevalent strains
(Fig. 16.10). Reassortment of viral genes results in major
changes in antigenic structure called antigenic shift, which
creates distinct viruses such as the avian ﬂu or the swine ﬂu
viruses. Because of antigenic variation, a virus may become
resistant to immunity generated in the population by
previous infections. The inﬂuenza pandemics that occurred
in 1918, 1957, and 1968 were due to diﬀerent strains of the
virus, and the H1N1 pandemic of 2009 was due to a strain in
which the strands of the RNA genome were reassorted
among strains endemic in pigs, fowl, and humans. Subtler
viral variants arise more frequently. There are so many
serotypes of rhinovirus that vaccination against the
common cold may not be a feasible preventive strategy.
HIV-1, which causes AIDS, is also capable of tremendous
antigenic variation because of a high error rate in reverse
transcription of its RNA genome during viral reproduction
(see Chapter 21). In these situations, prophylactic
vaccination may have to be directed against invariant viral
proteins.
TABLE 16.3
Representative examples of different mechanisms used by viruses to resist host
immunity are listed.
CMV, Cytomegalovirus; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; HCV, hepatitis C virus; HIV, human
immunodeficiency virus; HSV, Herpes simplex virus; IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin;
MHC, major histocompatibility complex; NK cells, natural killer cells; TAP, transporter
associated with antigen processing.
• Some viruses inhibit the ability of the host to induce the
antiviral state. The coronaviruses SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV,
and SARS-CoV-2 can all shut oﬀ the host type I IFN
response. Among the proteins produced by SARS-CoV-2, 10
of 29 are dedicated to dampening or preventing host type I
IFN production. They do so by various means. Some viral
proteins modify viral RNA to make it more closely
resemble host mRNA (by adding a version of a 7-methyl
guanosine cap and by adding a 2’O-methy group to the
ribose in the next nucleotide). This prevents recognition by
RIG-I and MDA-5 (see Chapter 4). Other proteins aĴenuate
the translation of host type I IFNs.
The importance of type I IFN as an antiviral mechanism is
further highlighted by the observation that individuals who
make autoantibodies against their own type I IFN or have
genetic defects aﬀecting IFN production or signaling are at
increased risk for developing severe COVID-19 following
infection with SARS-CoV-2.
• Some viruses inhibit class I MHC – associated presentation
of cytosolic protein antigens. Viruses make a variety of
proteins that block diﬀerent steps in antigen processing,
transport, and presentation (Fig. 16.11). Inhibition of
antigen presentation blocks the assembly and expression of
stable class I MHC molecules and the display of viral
peptides. As a result, cells infected by such viruses cannot
be recognized or killed by CD8+ CTLs. As discussed earlier,
NK cells are activated by infected cells, especially in the
absence of class I MHC molecules. Some viruses may
produce proteins that act as ligands for NK cell inhibitory
receptors and thus inhibit NK cell activation.
FIGURE 16.10  Generation of new influenza
virus strains by genetic recombination
(antigenic shift).The genome of the influenza
virus is composed of eight separate RNA
strands, which allows genetic recombination
by reassortment of the segments in various
hosts, such as pigs (not shown), birds, or
humans, that are simultaneously infected with
two different strains. These genetic
reassortments create new viruses that are
antigenically distinct from their precursors
and thus are able to evade immune detection
in large numbers of newly infected hosts. The
H1N1 influenza virus, which was responsible
for the pandemic of 2009, was generated by
reassortment of swine, avian, and human
viruses in pigs and then passed back to
humans. HA, Hemagglutinin; NA,
neuraminidase.
• Some viruses produce molecules that inhibit the eﬀector
phase of immune responses. Poxviruses encode molecules
that are secreted by infected cells and bind to several
cytokines, including IFN-γ, TNF, IL-1, IL-18, and
chemokines. The secreted cytokine-binding proteins may
function as competitive antagonists of the cytokines.
Epstein-Barr virus produces a protein that is homologous to
the cytokine IL-10, which inhibits activation of macrophages
and DCs and may thus suppress cell-mediated immunity.
These examples probably represent a small fraction of
immunosuppressive viral molecules. Identiﬁcation of these
molecules raises the intriguing possibility that viruses have
acquired genes encoding endogenous inhibitors of immune
responses during their passage through human hosts and
have thus evolved to infect and colonize humans.
• Some chronic viral infections are associated with failure of
CTL responses, called exhaustion, which allows viral
persistence. Studies of a chronic infection with LCMV in
mice have shown that this type of immune deﬁcit may
result from persistent antigen stimulation leading to
upregulation of T cell inhibitory receptors, such as PD-1
(programmed cell death protein 1) (see Fig. 11.3). There is
evidence for CD8+ T cell exhaustion in chronic human viral
infections, including HIV and hepatitis virus infection. The
physiologic importance of PD-1–mediated T cell inhibition
may be that it limits pathology caused by strong immune
responses to viruses.
• Viruses may infect and either kill or inactivate
immunocompetent cells. The obvious example is HIV, which
survives by infecting and eliminating CD4+ T cells, the key
inducers of immune responses to protein antigens.
Immunity to Parasites
Parasites include single-celled protozoa, complex multicellular
worms (helminths), and ectoparasites (e.g., ticks and mites).
Parasitic infections are major health problems, particularly in
lower-income countries. It is estimated that approximately 30% of
the world’s population suﬀers from parasitic infestations. There are
approximately 200 million new malaria cases each year worldwide
and approximately 400,000 deaths annually. The magnitude of this
public health problem is the principal reason for the great interest
in 
immunity 
to 
parasites 
and 
for 
the 
development 
of
immunoparasitology as a distinct branch of immunology.
Most parasites go through complex life cycles, part of which
occurs in humans (or other vertebrates) and part of which occurs in
intermediate hosts, such as ﬂies, ticks, and snails. Humans are
usually infected by bites from infected intermediate hosts or by
sharing a particular habitat with an intermediate host. For instance,
malaria and trypanosomiasis are transmiĴed by insect bites, and
schistosomiasis is transmiĴed by exposure to water in which
infected snails reside. Many parasitic infections are chronic because
of weak innate immunity and the ability of parasites to evade or
resist elimination by adaptive immune responses. Furthermore,
many antiparasitic drugs are not eﬀective at killing the organisms.
Individuals living in endemic areas require repeated chemotherapy
because of continued exposure, and such treatment is often not
possible because of expense and logistic problems.
Innate Immunity to Parasites
Although diﬀerent protozoan and helminthic parasites have been
shown to activate diﬀerent mechanisms of innate immunity, these
organisms are often able to survive and replicate in their hosts
because they are well adapted to resisting host defenses. The
principal innate immune response to protozoa is phagocytosis, but
many of these parasites are resistant to phagocytic killing and may
even replicate within macrophages. Some protozoa express surface
molecules that are recognized by TLRs and activate phagocytes.
Plasmodium species (the protozoa that are responsible for malaria),
Toxoplasma gondii (the agent that causes toxoplasmosis), and
Cryptosporidium species (a major cause of diarrheal disease in HIV-
infected patients) all express glycolipids that can activate TLR2 and
TLR4. Eosinophils contribute to the innate response to helminths
by releasing granule contents that are capable of destroying worm
integuments. Phagocytes may also aĴack helminthic parasites and
secrete microbicidal substances to kill organisms. However, many
helminths have thick integuments that make them resistant to the
cytocidal mechanisms of neutrophils and macrophages, and they
are too large to be ingested by these phagocytes. Some protozoa
and helminths activate the alternative pathway of complement, but
they have also developed eﬀective strategies for evading the
complement system.
FIGURE 16.11  Mechanisms by which viruses inhibit
recognition by CD8+ T cells and NK cells.The
pathway of class I major histocompatibility
complex (MHC)-associated antigen presentation
is shown, with examples of viruses that block
different steps in this pathway. In addition to
interfering with recognition by CD8+ T cells, some
viruses produce “decoy” MHC molecules that
engage inhibitory receptors of NK cells. CMV,
Cytomegalovirus; CTL, cytotoxic T lymphocyte;
EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; ER, endoplasmic
reticulum; HSV, herpes simplex virus; TAP,
transporter associated with antigen processing.
TABLE 16.4
a  Selected examples of parasites and immune responses to them are listed.
Adaptive Immunity to Parasites
Diﬀerent protozoa and helminths vary greatly in their structural
and 
biochemical 
properties, 
life 
cycles, 
and 
pathogenic
mechanisms. It is therefore not surprising that diﬀerent parasites
elicit distinct adaptive immune responses (Table 16.4). Some
pathogenic protozoa have evolved to survive within host cells, so
protective immunity against these organisms is mediated by
mechanisms similar to those that eliminate intracellular bacteria
and viruses. In contrast, metazoa such as helminths survive in
extracellular tissues, and their elimination often depends on special
types of antibody responses.
The principal defense mechanism against protozoa that survive
within macrophages is cell-mediated immunity, particularly
macrophage activation by Th1 cell–derived cytokines. Infection of
mice with L. major, a protozoan that survives within the endosomes
of macrophages, illustrates how dominance of Th1 or Th2
responses determines disease resistance or susceptibility (Fig.
16.12). Resistance to the infection is associated with activation of
leishmania-speciﬁc Th1 cells, which produce IFN-γ and thereby
activate macrophages to destroy intracellular parasites. Conversely,
activation of Th2 cells by the protozoa results in increased parasite
survival and exacerbation of lesions because Th2 cytokines inhibit
classical macrophage activation. Most inbred strains of mice are
resistant to infection with L. major, but inbred BALB/c and some
related strains of mice are highly susceptible and die if they are
infected with high doses of parasites. The resistant strains produce
large amounts of IFN-γ in response to leishmanial antigens,
whereas the strains that are susceptible to fatal leishmaniasis
produce more IL-4 in response to the parasite. Promoting the Th1
response or inhibiting the Th2 response in susceptible strains
increases their resistance to the infection. The mechanisms of this
striking diﬀerence between strains of mice are not deﬁned.
FIGURE 16.12  Role of T cells and cytokines in
determining the outcome of infections.Naive CD4+
T lymphocytes may differentiate into Th1 cells,
which activate phagocytes to kill ingested
microbes, and Th2 cells, which inhibit this classical
pathway of macrophage activation. The balance
between these two T cell subsets may influence
the outcome of infections, as illustrated by
Leishmania infection in mice—most mouse strains
develop Th1 responses against the parasite and
effectively clear the organisms, but BALB/c mice
develop strong Th2 responses and succumb to
the infection. IFN, Interferon; IL, interleukin; TNF,
tumor necrosis factor.
Protozoa that replicate inside various host cells and lyse these
cells stimulate speciﬁc antibody and CTL responses, similar to
cytopathic viruses. An example of such an organism is the malaria
parasite, which resides mainly in red blood cells and in hepatocytes
during its life cycle. It was thought for many years that antibodies
were the major protective mechanism against malaria, and early
aĴempts at vaccinating against this infection focused on generating
protective antibodies. It is now apparent that the CTL response
against parasites residing in hepatocytes is an important defense
against the spread of this intracellular protozoan. The cytokine
IFN-γ has been shown to be protective in many protozoal
infections, including malaria, toxoplasmosis, and cryptosporidiosis.
Defense against many helminthic infections is mediated by the
activation of Th2 cells, which results in production of IgE antibodies
and activation of eosinophils. Helminths stimulate diﬀerentiation of
naive CD4+ T cells to the Th2 subset of eﬀector cells, which secrete
IL-4 and IL-5. IL-4 stimulates the production of IgE, which binds to
the Fcε receptor of mast cells, and IL-5 activates eosinophils. The
combined actions of mast cells and eosinophils also contribute to
expulsion of the parasites from the intestine, although exactly how
they contribute remains poorly deﬁned. The expulsion of some
intestinal nematodes may be due to Th2–dependent mechanisms
that do not require IgE, such as increased mucus production and
peristalsis caused by Th2 cytokines.
Adaptive immune responses to parasites can also contribute to
tissue 
injury. 
Some 
parasites 
and 
their 
products 
induce
granulomatous responses with concomitant ﬁbrosis. Schistosoma
mansoni eggs deposited in the liver stimulate CD4+ T cells, which in
turn activate macrophages and induce DTH reactions. DTH
reactions result in the formation of granulomas around the eggs; an
unusual feature of these granulomas, especially in mice, is their
association with Th2 responses. (Granulomas are generally induced
by Th1 responses against persistent antigens; see Chapter 19.) Such
Th2-induced granulomas serve to contain the schistosome eggs, but
severe ﬁbrosis associated with this chronic cell-mediated immune
response leads to cirrhosis, disruption of venous blood ﬂow in the
liver, and portal hypertension. In lymphatic ﬁlariasis, lodging of the
parasites in lymphatic vessels leads to chronic cell-mediated
immune reactions and ultimately to ﬁbrosis. This results in
lymphatic obstruction and severe lymphedema. Chronic and
persistent parasitic infestations are often associated with the
formation of complexes of parasite antigens and speciﬁc antibodies.
The complexes can be deposited in blood vessels and kidney
glomeruli and produce vasculitis and nephritis, respectively (see
Chapter 19). Immune complex disease is a complication of
schistosomiasis and malaria.
Immune Evasion by Parasites
Parasites 
evade 
protective 
immunity 
by 
reducing 
their
immunogenicity and by inhibiting host immune responses. Diﬀerent
parasites have developed remarkably eﬀective ways of resisting
immunity (Table 16.5).
TABLE 16.5
Mechanisms of Immune Evasion by Parasites
Mechanism of Immune Evasion
Examples
Antigenic variation
Trypanosomes, Plasmodium
Acquired resistance to
complement, cytotoxic T
lymphocytes
Schistosomes
Inhibition of host immune
responses
Filaria (secondary to lymphatic
obstruction), trypanosomes
Antigen shedding
Entamoeba
• Parasites change their surface antigens during their life
cycle in vertebrate hosts. Two forms of antigenic variation
are well deﬁned. The ﬁrst is a stage-speciﬁc change in
antigen expression, such that the mature tissue stages of
parasites produce antigens diﬀerent from those of the
infective stages. For example, the infective sporozoite stage
of malaria parasites is antigenically distinct from the
merozoites that reside in the host and are responsible for
chronic infection. By the time the immune system has
responded to infection by sporozoites, the parasite has
diﬀerentiated, expresses new antigens, and is no longer a
target for immune elimination. A more remarkable example
of antigenic variation in parasites is the continuous
variation of major surface antigens seen in African
trypanosomes, such as Trypanosoma brucei and Trypanosoma
rhodesiense. Continuous antigenic variation in trypanosomes
is mainly due to changes in expression of the genes
encoding the major surface antigen. Infected patients show
waves of blood parasitemia, and each wave consists of
parasites expressing a surface antigen that is diﬀerent from
the preceding wave. Thus, by the time the host produces
antibodies against the parasite, an antigenically diﬀerent
organism has grown out. More than 100 such waves of
parasitemia can occur in a single infection. One
consequence of antigenic variation in parasites is that it is
diﬃcult to eﬀectively vaccinate individuals against these
infections.
• Parasites become resistant to immune eﬀector mechanisms
during their residence in vertebrate hosts. Perhaps the best
examples are schistosome larvae, which travel to the lungs
of infected animals and during this migration develop a
tegument that is resistant to damage by complement and
by CTLs.
• Protozoan parasites may conceal themselves from the
immune system either by living inside host cells or by
developing cysts that are resistant to immune eﬀectors.
p
g y
Some helminthic parasites reside in intestinal lumens and
are sheltered from cell-mediated immune eﬀector
mechanisms. Parasites may also shed their antigenic coats,
either spontaneously or after binding speciﬁc antibodies.
Shedding of antigens renders the parasites resistant to
subsequent antibody-mediated aĴack. Entamoeba histolytica
is a protozoan parasite that sheds antigens and can also
convert to a cyst form in the lumen of the large intestine.
• Parasites inhibit host immune responses by multiple
mechanisms. T cell anergy to parasite antigens has been
observed in severe schistosomiasis involving the liver and
spleen and in ﬁlarial infections. The mechanisms of
immunologic unresponsiveness in these infections are not
well understood. In lymphatic ﬁlariasis, infection of lymph
nodes with subsequent architectural disruption may
contribute to deﬁcient immunity. Some parasites, such as
Leishmania, stimulate the development of regulatory T cells,
which suppress the immune response enough to allow
persistence of the parasites. More nonspeciﬁc and
generalized immunosuppression is observed in malaria and
African trypanosomiasis. This immune deﬁciency has been
aĴributed to the production of immunosuppressive
cytokines by activated macrophages and T cells and defects
in T cell activation.
The consequences of parasitic infestations for health and
economic development are devastating. AĴempts to develop
eﬀective vaccines against these infections have been actively
pursued for many years. Although the progress has been slow,
elucidation of the fundamental mechanisms of immune responses
to and immune evasion by parasites holds promise for the future.
Strategies for Vaccine Development
The birth of immunology as a science dates from Edward Jenner’s
successful vaccination against smallpox in 1796. The importance of
prophylactic immunization against infectious diseases is best
illustrated by the fact that worldwide programs of vaccination have
led to the complete or nearly complete eradication of many of these
diseases in many countries (see Table 1.1). The fundamental
principle of vaccination is to administer a killed or aĴenuated form
of an infectious agent, or a component of a microbe, that does not
cause disease but elicits an immune response that provides
protection against infection by the live, pathogenic microbe.
The success of vaccination in eradicating infectious disease
depends on several properties of the microbes. Vaccines are most
eﬀective if the infectious agent does not establish latency, does not
undergo antigenic variation, and does not interfere with the host
immune response. It is diﬃcult to eﬀectively vaccinate against
microbes such as HIV, which establishes latent infection, is highly
variable, and inhibits host immunity. Vaccines are also most
eﬀective against infections that are limited to human hosts and do
not have animal reservoirs.
Most vaccines in use today work by inducing humoral immunity.
Antibodies are the only immune mechanism that prevents
infections, by neutralizing and clearing microbes before they gain
their foothold in the host. The best vaccines are those that stimulate
the development of long-lived plasma cells that produce high-
aﬃnity antibodies and memory B cells. These aspects of humoral
immune responses are best induced in the germinal center reaction
(see Chapter 12), which requires help provided by protein antigen–
speciﬁc CD4+ T follicular helper (TĢ) cells.
There are major challenges in developing eﬀective vaccines
against several important infections. The immunologic correlates of
protection are often poorly deﬁned. Fundamental questions about
how to maximally stimulate durable memory, eﬀective TĢ cells,
and long-lived plasma cells remain unresolved. Clinical experience
has taught us that the longevity of vaccine-induced protection
varies greatly, being lifelong with hepatitis B antigen vaccines and
quite short with many others. The reasons for this critical diﬀerence
are unknown. It is hoped that continuing advances in basic
immunology and in methods for analyzing immune responses in
humans will lead to answers to these questions that will put vaccine
development on a strong foundation of mechanisms and basic
understanding.
In the following section, we will summarize the approaches to
vaccination that have been tried (Table 16.6) and their major value
and limitations.
Attenuated and Inactivated Bacterial and
Viral Vaccines
Some of the earliest (ﬁrst generation) and most eﬀective vaccines
are composed of intact microbes that are treated in such a way that
they are aĴenuated or killed so they can no longer cause disease
while retaining their immunogenicity. The great advantage of
aĴenuated microbial vaccines is that they elicit many of the innate
and adaptive immune responses (both humoral and cell-mediated)
that the pathogenic microbe would, and they are therefore the ideal
way of inducing protective immunity. Live, aĴenuated bacteria were
ﬁrst shown by Louis Pasteur to confer speciﬁc immunity. The
aĴenuated or killed bacterial vaccines currently in use generally
induce limited protection and are eﬀective for only short periods.
Live, aĴenuated viral vaccines are usually more eﬀective; polio,
measles, and yellow fever are three good examples. The earliest
approach for producing such aĴenuated viruses was repeated
passage in cell culture. More recently, temperature-sensitive and
gene deletion mutants have been generated to create aĴenuated
viruses. Viral vaccines often induce long-lasting speciﬁc immunity,
so immunization of children is suﬃcient for lifelong protection.
The major concern with aĴenuated viral or bacterial vaccines is
safety. The live-aĴenuated oral polio vaccine has nearly eradicated
the disease, but in rare cases the virus in the vaccine is reactivated
and itself causes paralytic polio. In fact, the success of worldwide
vaccination is creating the problem that the vaccine-induced
disease, although rare, could become more frequent than the
naturally acquired disease. This potential problem may have to be
tackled by reverting to the killed virus vaccine to complete the
eradication program.
TABLE 16.6
Vaccine Approaches a
Type of
Vaccine
Examples
Live
aĴenuated
or killed
bacteria
Bacillus CalmeĴe-Guérin, cholera
Live
aĴenuated
or killed
viruses
Polio, inﬂuenza, rabies
Subunit
(antigen)
vaccines
Tetanus toxoid, diphtheria toxoid
Conjugate
vaccines
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae, pneumococcus
Synthetic
vaccines
Hepatitis (recombinant proteins)
Viral vectors
Clinical trials of human SARS-CoV-2 spike
protein made by human and chimpanzee
adenovirus vectors
DNA vaccines
Clinical trials ongoing for several infections
mRNA
vaccines
Approved for COVID-19
a  The table lists selected examples of vaccines in use as of December 2020.
A widely used inactivated vaccine of considerable public health
importance is the inﬂuenza vaccine. Inﬂuenza viruses grown in
chicken eggs are used in two types of vaccines. The most common
gg
yp
vaccine is a trivalent inactivated (killed) vaccine that is used in the
ﬂu shot that is given intramuscularly. Three of the most frequently
encountered inﬂuenza strains are selected every year and
incorporated in this vaccine. A second type of inﬂuenza vaccine
involves the same three strains, but the vaccine is made up of live
aĴenuated viruses and is used as a nasal spray. Two of the major
limitations of current inﬂuenza vaccines is that they do not induce
broadly neutralizing antibodies that recognize multiple strains of
the virus and antibody-mediated protection is short lived.
Purified Antigen (Subunit) Vaccines
These second-generation vaccines were produced to eliminate the
safety concerns associated with aĴenuated microbes. Subunit
vaccines are composed of antigens puriﬁed from microbes or
inactivated toxins and are usually administered with an adjuvant.
One eﬀective use of puriﬁed antigens as vaccines is for the
prevention of diseases caused by bacterial toxins. Toxins can be
rendered harmless without loss of immunogenicity, and such
toxoids induce strong antibody responses. Diphtheria and tetanus
are two infections whose life-threatening consequences have been
largely controlled because of immunization of children with toxoid
preparations. Vaccines composed of bacterial polysaccharide
antigens are used against pneumococcus and Haemophilus
inﬂuenzae. Because polysaccharides are T-independent antigens,
they tend to elicit low-aﬃnity antibody responses and are poorly
immunogenic in infants (who do not mount strong T cell–
independent antibody responses). High-aﬃnity antibody responses
may be generated against polysaccharide antigens even in infants
by coupling the polysaccharides to proteins to form conjugate
vaccines (Fig. 16.13). These vaccines elicit helper T cells to simulate
germinal center reactions, which would not occur with simple
polysaccharide vaccines. Such vaccines work like hapten-carrier
conjugates and are a practical application of the principle of T and
B cell cooperation (see Chapter 12). The currently used H.
inﬂuenzae, 
pneumococcal, 
and 
meningococcal 
vaccines 
are
conjugate vaccines. Puriﬁed protein vaccines stimulate helper T
cells and antibody responses, but they do not generate potent
CTLs. The reason for poor CTL development is that exogenous
proteins (and peptides) usually enter the class II MHC pathway of
antigen presentation (except in the special situation of cross-
presentation). As a result, protein vaccines are not recognized
eﬃciently by class I MHC–restricted CD8+ T cells.
Synthetic Antigen Vaccines
A goal of vaccine research has been to identify the most
immunogenic microbial antigens or epitopes, to synthesize these in
the laboratory, and to use the synthetic antigens as vaccines. It is
possible to deduce the protein sequences of microbial antigens
from nucleotide sequence data and to prepare large quantities of
proteins by recombinant DNA technology. Vaccines made of
recombinant DNA–derived antigens are now in use for hepatitis B
virus and HPV. In the case of the most widely used HPV vaccine,
which was developed to prevent cancers caused by the virus,
recombinant viral proteins from four strains (HPV 6, 11, 16, and 18)
are made in yeast and combined with an adjuvant. HPV 6 and 11 are
common causes of warts, and HPV 16 and 18 are the HPV strains
most often linked to cervical cancer.
FIGURE 16.13  Conjugate vaccines.Conjugates of
bacterial polysaccharides and a protein carrier (in
this case, tetanus toxoid [TT]) induce potent high-
affinity antibody responses because the protein
carrier recruits helper T cells into the reaction.
Note that the antibody produced is specific for the
polysaccharide. IgG, Immunoglobulin G; Tfh, T
follicular helper.
Live Viral Vaccines Involving Recombinant
Viruses
Another approach for vaccine development is to introduce genes
encoding microbial antigens into a noncytopathic virus and to
infect individuals with this virus. Thus, the virus serves as a source
of the antigen in an inoculated individual. The great advantage of
viral vectors is that they, like other live viruses, induce the full
complement of 
immune responses, including strong CTL
responses. This technique has been used most commonly with
vaccinia virus vectors, and more recently with canarypox viral
vectors, which are not pathogenic in humans. Inoculation of such
recombinant viruses into many species of animals induces both
humoral and cell-mediated immunity against the antigen produced
by the foreign gene (and, of course, against antigens of the viral
vectors as well). A potential problem with recombinant viruses is
that the viruses may infect host cells, and even though they are not
pathogenic, they may produce antigens that stimulate CTL
responses that kill the infected host cells. Also, the nonpathogenic
virus could recombine with host viruses or gene sequences and
become virulent. These safety concerns have limited widespread
use of viral vectors for vaccine delivery. One approach that
overcomes many of these issues and concerns is the use of live
recombinant hybrid vaccines that are non-replicating. 
An
adenovirus 26 vector (humans generally lack antibodies to this
adenovirus) and a chimpanzee adenovirus vector have been used to
generate vaccines to a number of viruses, including Ebola virus,
Zika virus, and SARS-CoV-2. Non-replicating adenoviruses infect
numerous host cells and thus produce a signiﬁcant amount of the
viral antigen.
DNA Vaccines
An interesting method of vaccination was developed on the basis of
an unexpected observation. Inoculation of a plasmid containing
complementary DNA (cDNA) encoding a protein antigen leads to
humoral and cell-mediated immune responses to the antigen. It is
likely that APCs, such as DCs, are transfected by the plasmid and
the cDNA is transcribed and translated into immunogenic protein
that elicits speciﬁc responses. Bacterial plasmids are rich in
unmethylated CpG nucleotides that are recognized by TLR9 in DCs
and other cells, thereby eliciting an innate immune response that
enhances adaptive immunity (see Chapter 4). Therefore, plasmid
DNA vaccines could be eﬀective even when administered without
adjuvants. The ability to store DNA without refrigeration for use in
the ﬁeld also makes this technique promising. However, DNA
vaccines have not been as eﬀective as hoped in clinical trials, mainly
because the ﬁrst generation of these vaccines did not produce
adequate amounts of the immunogen. Studies with newer vectors
for DNA vaccination are currently in progress.
mRNA Vaccines
Another relatively recent mode of vaccination uses messenger RNA
(mRNA) encoding microbial antigens. The main advantages of
mRNA vaccines are the ease with which they can be rapidly
developed, the ability to bypass the need for the large-scale
manufacture and puriﬁcation of protein antigens (thereby greatly
reducing the cost), and the ability to combine mRNAs encoding
many diﬀerent protein antigens from a pathogen into a single
vaccine. Although initial aĴempts to use mRNA were unsuccessful,
largely because of stability issues, a number of recent advances
have made mRNA vaccination a practical modality. One major
advance is modiﬁcations of the mRNA itself. These modiﬁcations
include addition of a synthetic 5’ cap and a long poly A-tail to
increase stability, altering 5’ and 3’ untranslated regions of the
mRNA to enhance both translation and stability, and codon
optimization of the coding portions to enhance translatability.
Current mRNA vaccines for COVID-19 retain some ability to
activate innate immunity by triggering RNA sensors. The mRNA is
encapsulated in lipid nanoparticles that facilitate uptake by cells,
including dendritic cells, and also function as an adjuvant. Another
approach to mRNA vaccines, not yet in clinical use, involves linking
the mRNA to a modiﬁed alphavirus RNA genome that allows for
self-replication, thus allowing many copies of the vaccine to be
generated in recipient cells.
Adjuvants and Immunomodulators
The initiation of T cell–dependent immune responses against
protein antigens requires that the antigens be administered with
adjuvants. Most adjuvants elicit innate immune responses, with
increased expression of costimulators and production of cytokines,
such as IL-12, that stimulate T cell growth and diﬀerentiation. Heat-
killed bacteria are powerful adjuvants that are commonly used in
experimental animals. However, the severe local inﬂammation that
such bacteria trigger precludes their use as adjuvants in humans.
Much eﬀort is currently being devoted to development of safe and
eﬀective adjuvants for clinical use. Only a few are approved for
patients: aluminum hydroxide gel (which appears to promote
mostly B cell responses); a bacterial product, monophosphoryl lipid
A, alone or with aluminum salt; and a lipid formulation called
squalene 
that 
may 
activate 
phagocytes. 
Recently, 
CG-rich
oligonucleotides (CpG DNA) have been approved as an adjuvant
for hepatitis B vaccines; by activating TLR9, these agents elicit
potent innate immune reactions. An alternative to adjuvants is to
administer natural substances that stimulate T cell responses
together with antigens. As mentioned, plasmid DNA and some
mRNA formulations have intrinsic adjuvant-like activities, and it is
possible to incorporate costimulators (e.g., B7 molecules) or
cytokines into plasmid DNA vaccines. These interesting ideas
remain experimental.
Passive Immunization
Protective 
immunity 
also 
can 
be 
conferred 
by 
passive
immunization, for instance, by transfer of speciﬁc antibodies. In
the clinical situation, passive immunization is most commonly used
for rapid treatment of potentially fatal diseases caused by toxins,
such as tetanus, and for protection from rabies, hepatitis, and
SARS-CoV-2. Antibodies against snake venom can be lifesaving
when administered after poisonous snakebites. Convalescent
plasma has been used in cases of Ebola and COVID-19.
Recombinant monoclonal neutralizing antibodies are now utilized
as a therapy for COVID-19. Passive immunity, using current
approaches, is short-lived because the host does not respond to the
immunization, and protection lasts only as long as the injected
antibody persists. Moreover, passive immunization does not induce
memory, so an immunized individual is not protected against
subsequent exposure to the toxin or microbe. However, based on
the successful identiﬁcation of human broadly neutralizing
monoclonal antibodies against pathogens, such as HIV and the ﬂu
virus, newer aĴempts for long-term passive immunization using a
process called vectored immunoprophylaxis have been developed.
In this approach, adeno-associated viral vectors are used to
introduce cloned human Ig heavy and light chain genes for a
neutralizing antibody into human subjects. The goal is to have
injected 
humans 
synthesize 
a 
speciﬁc 
protective 
broadly
neutralizing antibody for an extended period. Clinical trials have
been initiated.
Summary
• The interaction of the immune system with infectious
organisms is a dynamic interplay of host mechanisms
aimed at eliminating infections and microbial strategies
designed to permit survival in the face of powerful
defenses. Diﬀerent types of infectious agents stimulate
distinct types of immune responses and have evolved
unique mechanisms for evading immunity. In some
infections, the immune response is the cause of tissue
injury and disease.
• Innate immunity against extracellular bacteria is mediated
by phagocytes and the complement system (the alternative
and lectin pathways).
• The principal adaptive immune response against
extracellular bacteria consists of speciﬁc antibodies that
opsonize the bacteria for phagocytosis and activate the
complement system. Toxins produced by such bacteria are
neutralized by speciﬁc antibodies. Some bacterial toxins are
powerful inducers of cytokine production, and cytokines
account for much of the systemic disease associated with
severe, disseminated infections with these microbes.
• Innate immunity against intracellular bacteria is mediated
mainly by macrophages. However, intracellular bacteria are
capable of surviving and replicating within host cells,
including phagocytes, because they have developed
mechanisms for resisting degradation within phagocytes.
• Adaptive immunity against intracellular bacteria is
principally cell-mediated and consists of activation of
macrophages by CD4+ T cells, as well as killing of infected
cells by CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs). The
characteristic pathologic response to infection by
intracellular bacteria is granulomatous inﬂammation.
• Protective responses to fungi consist of innate immunity,
mediated by neutrophils and macrophages; adaptive cell-
mediated immunity, mainly involving Th17 cells; and
humoral immunity. Fungi are usually readily eliminated by
phagocytes, because of which disseminated fungal
infections are seen mostly in immunodeﬁcient persons.
• Innate immunity against viruses is mediated by type I
interferons and natural killer cells. Neutralizing antibodies
protect against virus entry into cells early in the course of
infection and later if the viruses are released from killed
infected cells. The major defense mechanism against
established infection is CTL-mediated killing of infected
cells. CTLs may contribute to tissue injury even when the
infectious virus is not harmful by itself. Viruses evade
immune responses involving by antigenic variation,
blocking type I IFN production or action, inhibition of
antigen presentation, inactivation of T cells, and production
of immunosuppressive molecules.
• Parasites such as protozoa and helminths give rise to
chronic and persistent infections because innate immunity
against them is weak and parasites have evolved multiple
mechanisms for evading and resisting speciﬁc immunity.
The structural and antigenic diversity of pathogenic
parasites is reﬂected in the heterogeneity of the adaptive
immune responses that they elicit. Protozoa that live within
host cells are destroyed by cell-mediated immunity,
whereas helminths are eliminated by eosinophil-mediated
killing. Parasites evade the immune system by varying their
antigens during residence in vertebrate hosts, by acquiring
resistance to immune eﬀector mechanisms, and by masking
and shedding their surface antigens.
• Vaccination is a powerful strategy for preventing infections.
The most eﬀective vaccines are those that stimulate the
production of high-aﬃnity antibodies and memory cells.
Many approaches for vaccination are in clinical use and
being tried for various infections.
Selected Readings
General Principles
AĴanasio J, Wherry E.J. Costimulatory and coinhibitory receptor pathways in infectious
disease.  Immunity . 2016;44:1052–1068.
Bucciol G, Moens L, Bosch B, et al. Lessons learned from the study of human inborn errors
of innate immunity.  J Allergy Clin Immunol . 2019;143:507–527.
Casanova J.L, Abel L. Human genetics of infectious diseases: unique insights into
immunological redundancy.  Semin Immunol . 2018;36:1–12.
Ermert D, Ram S, Laabei M. The hijackers guide to escaping complement: lessons learned
from pathogens.  Mol Immunol . 2019;114:49–61.
Honda K, LiĴman D.R. The microbiota in adaptive immune homeostasis and disease. 
Nature . 2016;535:75–84.
Lauvau G, Loke P, Hohl T.M. Monocyte-mediated defense against bacteria, fungi, and
parasites.  Semin Immunol . 2015;27:397–409.
Mandl J.N, Torabi-Parizi P, Germain R.N. Visualization and dynamic analysis of host-
pathogen interactions.  Curr Opin Immunol . 2014;29:8–15.
Immunity to Extracellular and Intracellular Bacteria
Curtis M.M, Way S.S. Interleukin-17 in host defence against bacterial, mycobacterial and
fungal pathogens.  Immunology . 2009;126:177–185.
Kaufmann S.H.E, Dorhoi A. Molecular determinants in phagocyte-bacteria interactions. 
Immunity . 2016;44:476–491.
Lin P.L, Flynn J.L. The end of the binary era: revisiting the spectrum of tuberculosis.  J
Immunol . 2018;201:2541–2548.
Immunity to Viruses
Berry R, Watson G.M, Jonjic S, et al. Modulation of innate and adaptive immunity by
cytomegaloviruses.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2020;20:113–127.
Jeyanathan M, AĤhami S, Smaill F. Immunological considerations for COVID-19 vaccine
strategies.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2020;20:615–632.
Kahan S.M, Wherry E.J, Zajac A.J. T cell exhaustion during persistent viral infections. 
Virology . 2015;479–480:180–193.
Mandl J.N, Ahmed R, Barreiro L.B, et al. Reservoir host immune responses to emerging
zoonotic viruses.  Cell . 2015;160:20–35.
Merad M, Martin JC. Pathologic inﬂammation in patients with COVID-19: a key role for
monocytes and macrophages.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2020;20:355–362.
Pfeiﬀer J.K, Virgin H.W. Viral immunity: transkingdom control of viral infection and
immunity in the mammalian intestine.  Science . 2016;351 :10.1126/science.aad5872
aad5872.
Sariol A, Perlman S. Lessons for COVID-19 immunity from other coronavirus infections. 
Immunity . 2020;53:248–263.
Schuren A.B, Costa A.I, Wierĵ E.J. Recent advances in viral evasion of the MAH class I
processing pathway.  Curr Opin Immunol . 2016;40:43–50.
SeĴe A, CroĴy S. Adaptive immunity to SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19.  Cell . 2021.
Swain S.L, McKinstry K.K, StruĴ T.M. Expanding roles for CD4(+) T cells in immunity to
viruses.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2012;12:136–148.
Tay M.Z, Poh C.M, Renia L. The trinity of COVID-19: immunity, inﬂammation, and clinical
intervention.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2020;20:363–374.
Virgin H.W, Wherry E.J, Ahmed R. Redeﬁning chronic viral infection.  Cell . 2009;138:30–
50.
Wan Z, Zhou Z, Liu Y, et al. Regulatory T cells and T helper 17 cells in viral infection.  Scand
J Immunol . 2020;91:e12873.
Immunity to Fungi
Netea M.G, Joosten L.A, van der Meer J.W, et al. Immune defence against Candida fungal
infections.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2015;15:630–642.
Santamaria R, RizzeĴo L, Bromley M, et al. Systems biology of infectious diseases: a focus
on fungal infections.  Immunobiology . 2011;216:1212–1227.
Zelante T, Pieraccini G, Scaringi L, et al. Learning from other diseases: protection and
pathology in chronic fungal infections.  Semin Immunopathol . 2016;38:239–248.
Immunity to Parasites
de Freitas E.O, LeoraĴi F.M, Freire-de-Lima C.G, et al. The contribution of immune evasive
mechanisms to parasite persistence in visceral leishmaniasis.  Front Immunol . 2016;7:153.
Kurup S.P, Butler N.S, Harty J.T. T cell-mediated immunity to malaria.  Nat Rev Immunol
. 2019;19:457–471.
Maizels R.M, Smits H.H, McSorley H.J. Modulation of host immunity by helminths: the
expanding repertoire of parasite eﬀector molecules.  Immunity . 2018;49:801–818.
White M.P.J, McManus C.M, Maizels R.M. Regulatory T cells in helminth infection:
induction, function and therapeutic potential.  Immunology . 2020;160:248–260.
Vaccines and Adjuvants
Apostolico Jde S, Lunardelli V.A, Coirada F.C, et al. Adjuvants: classiﬁcation, modus
operandi, and licensing.  J Immunol Res . 2016:1459394.
Furman D, Davis M.M. New approaches to understanding the immune response to
vaccination and infection.  Vaccine . 2015;33:5271–5281.
Hobernik D, Bros M. DNA vaccines: how far from clinical use?  Int J Mol Sci . 2018;19:3605.
Kamphorst A.O, Araki K, Ahmed R. Beyond adjuvants: immunomodulation strategies to
enhance T cell immunity.  Vaccine . 2015;33(suppl 2):B21–B28.
Wimmers F, Pulendran B.. Emerging technologies for systems vaccinology: multi-omics
integration and single-cell (epi)genomic proﬁling.  Curr Opin Immunol . 2020;65:57–64.
Chapter 17: Transplantation
Immunology 
General Principles of Transplantation Immunology,
Immune Responses to Allografts,
The Nature of Alloantigens,
Recognition of Alloantigens by T Cells,
Activation and Effector Functions of
Alloreactive T Lymphocytes,
Activation of Alloreactive B Cells and
Production and Functions of Alloantibodies,
Innate Immune Responses to Allografts,
Patterns and Mechanisms of Allograft Rejection,
Hyperacute Rejection,
Acute Rejection,
Chronic Rejection,
Prevention and Treatment of Allograft Rejection,
Methods to Reduce the Immunogenicity of
Allografts,
Immunosuppression to Prevent or to Treat
Allograft Rejection,
Methods to Induce Donor-Specific Tolerance,
Xenogeneic Transplantation,
Blood Transfusion and the Abo and Rh Blood Group
Antigens,
ABO Blood Group Antigens,
Other Blood Group Antigens,
Hematopoietic Stem Cell (HSC) Transplantation,
Indications, Methods, and Immune Barriers in
Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation,
Immunologic Complication of Hematopoietic
Stem Cell Transplantation,
Summary,
Transplantation is widely used for replacing nonfunctioning organs
and tissues with healthy organs or tissues. Transplantation is the
process of taking cells, tissues, or organs, called a graft, from one
individual and placing them into a (usually) diﬀerent individual.
The individual who provides the graft is called the donor, and the
individual who receives the graft is called either the recipient or the
host. If the graft is placed into its normal anatomic location, the
procedure is called orthotopic transplantation; if the graft is placed
in 
a 
diﬀerent 
site, 
the 
procedure 
is 
called 
heterotopic
transplantation. Transfusion refers to the transfer of circulating
blood cells or plasma from one individual to another. Clinical
transplantation to treat human diseases has increased steadily
during the past 60 years. Transplantation of hematopoietic stem
cells (HSCs), kidneys, livers, and hearts is now common practice in
clinical medicine, and transplantation of other organs such as lung
and pancreas is becoming more frequent (Fig. 17.1). Almost 40,000
kidney, heart, lung, liver, pancreas, and intestine transplants are
currently performed in the United States each year. Transplantation
of hands and faces are also now performed in a few medical
centers, and transplantation of many other organs or cells,
including tissue stem cells, is being aĴempted.
After the technical challenge of surgically transplanting organs
was overcome, it soon became clear that the immune response
against grafted tissues is the major barrier to survival of
transplanted tissues or organs. Conversely, controlling this
immune response is key to successful transplantation. These
realizations have led to the development of transplantation
immunology as a discipline within the broader topic of
immunology, and this is the theme of this chapter.
General Principles of Transplantation
Immunology
Based on experimental studies and clinical observations, there are
several principles that uniquely apply to immune responses against
transplants.
Transplantation of cells or tissues from one individual to a
genetically nonidentical individual invariably leads to rejection of
the transplant because of an adaptive immune response. This
problem was ﬁrst appreciated when aĴempts to replace damaged
skin on burn patients with skin from unrelated donors proved to be
uniformly unsuccessful. Within 1 to 2 weeks, the transplanted skin
would undergo necrosis and fall oﬀ. The failure of the grafts led
Peter 
Medawar 
and 
other 
investigators 
to 
study 
skin
transplantation in animal models. These experiments established
that the failure of skin grafting was caused by an inﬂammatory
reaction, which was called rejection. The knowledge that graft
rejection is the result of an adaptive immune response came from
experiments demonstrating that the process had characteristics of
memory and speciﬁcity and was mediated by lymphocytes (Fig.
17.2). For instance, rejection occurs 10 to 14 days after the ﬁrst
transplant from a donor to a nonidentical recipient (called ﬁrst-set
rejection) and more rapidly after the second transplant from the
same donor to this recipient (called second-set rejection), implying
that the recipient developed memory for the grafted tissue.
Individuals who have rejected a graft from one donor show
accelerated rejection of another graft from the same donor but not
from a diﬀerent donor, demonstrating that the rejection process is
immunologically 
speciﬁc. 
These 
experimental 
results 
were
recapitulated in clinical transplantation. Perhaps the most
compelling evidence showing that allograft rejection is an adaptive
immune response was the ﬁnding that the ability to rapidly reject a
transplant with second-set kinetics can be transferred with
lymphocytes from a transplant recipient animal to a naive animal.
FIGURE 17.1  Number of solid organ transplants in
the United States in 2018 by organ type. 
Data from United Network for Organ Sharing. Available at
https://unos.org/data/transplant/.
Transplant immunologists have developed a special vocabulary
to describe the kinds of cells and tissues encountered in the
transplant seĴing. A graft transplanted from one individual to the
same individual is called an autologous graft. A graft transplanted
between two genetically identical individuals is called a syngeneic
graft. A graft transplanted between two genetically diﬀerent
individuals of the same species is called an allogeneic graft (or
allograft). A graft transplanted between individuals of diﬀerent
species is called a xenogeneic graft (or xenograft). The molecules
that are recognized as foreign in allografts are called alloantigens,
and those in xenografts are called xenoantigens. The lymphocytes
and antibodies that react with alloantigens or xenoantigens are
described as being alloreactive or xenoreactive, respectively.
Most of this chapter focuses on allogeneic transplantation
because it is far more commonly practiced than xenogeneic
transplantation, which is discussed brieﬂy at the end of the chapter.
We will consider both the basic immunology and some aspects of
the clinical practice of transplantation. We will conclude the
chapter with a discussion of HSC transplantation, which raises
special issues not usually encountered with solid organ transplants.
Immune Responses to Allografts
Immune 
responses 
that 
mediate 
allograft 
rejection 
are
fundamentally similar to responses that ﬁght microbes. The main
diﬀerence is the nature of what is recognized as foreign. Adaptive
immune responses play the major role in graft rejection, but innate
responses may contribute in some situations. In this section, we
focus on adaptive immune responses to alloantigens and mention
the possible role of innate immunity later.
Alloantigens elicit both cellular and humoral immune responses.
The mechanisms of allorecognition are best understood by
considering the graft antigens that stimulate allogeneic responses
and the properties of the responding lymphocytes.
The Nature of Alloantigens
Most of the antigens that stimulate adaptive immune responses
against allografts are proteins encoded by polymorphic genes that
diﬀer 
among 
individuals. 
These 
proteins 
are 
called
histocompatibility molecules because they determine if the grafted
tissue (histo, tissue) is compatible or incompatible with the host’s
immune system. The most important of these molecules are the
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins (see Chapter 6).
All of the animals of an inbred strain are genetically identical, and
they are homozygous for all genes (except genes on the sex
chromosomes in males). In contrast, inbred animals of diﬀerent
strains, and individuals in an outbred species (except identical
twins), diﬀer in many of the genes they inherit. The basic rules of
transplantation immunology, which were ﬁrst established from
experiments done with genetically deﬁned mice, include the
following (Fig. 17.3):
• Cells or organs transplanted between genetically identical
individuals (identical twins or members of the same inbred
strain of animals) are not rejected.
• Cells or organs transplanted between genetically
nonidentical people or members of two diﬀerent inbred
strains of a species are almost always rejected.
FIGURE 17.2  First-set and second-set allograft
rejection.Results of the experiments shown
indicate that graft rejection displays the
features of adaptive immune responses,
namely memory and mediation by
lymphocytes. An inbred strain B mouse will
reject a graft from an inbred strain A mouse
with first-set kinetics (left panel). An inbred
strain B mouse sensitized by a previous graft
from an inbred strain A mouse will reject a
second graft from an inbred strain A mouse
with second-set kinetics (middle panel),
demonstrating memory. An inbred strain B
mouse injected with lymphocytes from
another strain B mouse that has rejected a
graft from a strain A mouse will reject a graft
from a strain A mouse with second-set
kinetics (right panel), demonstrating the role
of lymphocytes in mediating rejection and
memory. An inbred strain B mouse sensitized
by a previous graft from a strain A mouse will
reject a graft from a third unrelated strain
with first-set kinetics, thus demonstrating
another feature of adaptive immunity,
specificity (not shown). Syngeneic grafts are
never rejected (not shown).
• The oﬀspring of a mating between two diﬀerent inbred
strains of animal will not reject grafts from either parent. In
other words, an (A × B) F1 animal will not reject grafts from
an A or B strain animal. (This rule is violated by HSC
transplantation, when natural killer (NK) cells in an (A × B)
F1 recipient do reject HSCs from either parent, as we will
discuss later in this chapter.)
• A graft derived from the oﬀspring of a mating between two
diﬀerent inbred strains of animal will be rejected by either
parent. In other words, a graft from an (A × B) F1 animal
will be rejected by either an A or a B strain animal.
Such results indicated that the molecules in the grafts that are
responsible for eliciting rejection must be polymorphic and their
expression is codominant. Polymorphic refers to the property that
these graft antigens diﬀer among the individuals of a species (other
than identical twins) or between diﬀerent inbred strains of animals.
Codominant expression means that every individual inherits genes
encoding these molecules from both parents, and both parental
alleles are expressed. Therefore, (A × B) F1 animals express both A
and B alleles, see both A and B tissues as self, and are tolerant to
both A and B proteins. By contrast, inbred A or B animals express
only that allele, are not tolerant to the proteins they do not express,
and see (A × B) F1 tissues as partly foreign. Thus, an (A × B) F1
animal does not reject either A or B strain grafts whereas both A
and B strain recipients reject an (A × B) F1 graft.
FIGURE 17.3  The genetics of graft rejection.In the
illustration, the two different mouse colors
represent inbred strains with different sets of
genes, referred to here as A or B, encoding
molecules important for graft rejection, called
major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
molecules. Inherited MHC alleles from both
parents are codominantly expressed in the skin of
an A × B offspring, and therefore these mice are
represented by both colors. Syngeneic grafts are
not rejected (A). Allografts are always rejected
(B). Grafts from an A or a B parent will not be
rejected by an (A × B) F1 offspring (C), but grafts
from the F1 will be rejected by either parent (D).
These phenomena are due to the fact that MHC
gene products are responsible for graft rejection;
grafts are rejected only if they express an MHC
type (represented by green or orange) that is not
expressed by the recipient mouse.
The genetics of graft rejection provided one of the earliest lines
of evidence that the adaptive immune system distinguishes self
from foreign antigens. All individuals are normally tolerant to self
antigens and usually do not react against these, but they do react
against foreign antigens. This is now known to be a fundamental
property of the normal immune system, where foreign most often
refers 
to 
microbial 
antigens. 
In 
the 
context 
of 
organ
transplantation, foreign usually means products of polymorphic
MHC genes.
The molecules responsible for strong and rapid rejection reactions
are MHC molecules that bind and present peptides to T cells. MHC
molecules, described in Chapter 6, were named before their
physiologic function was understood. George Snell and colleagues
produced pairs of congenic strains of inbred mice that were bred to
be genetically identical to each other except for genes needed for
graft rejection. They used these mice to identify the polymorphic
genes, which were called MHC genes, that encode the molecular
targets of allograft rejection. Transplants of most tissues between
any pair of unrelated individuals will be rejected because the genes
encoding MHC molecules are so polymorphic that two unrelated
individuals are extremely unlikely to inherit the same alleles. The
role of MHC molecules as the antigens that cause graft rejection is a
consequence of the nature of T cell antigen recognition, as we will
discuss later. Recall that human MHC molecules are called human
leukocyte antigens (HLA), and in the context of human
transplantation, 
the 
terms 
MHC 
and 
HLA 
are 
used
interchangeably.
In any transplant between genetically nonidentical donor and
recipient, there will be polymorphic antigens other than MHC
molecules against which the recipient may mount an immune
response. These antigens typically induce weak or slower (more
gradual) rejection reactions than do MHC molecules and are
therefore called minor histocompatibility antigens. The relevance of
minor 
histocompatibility 
antigens 
in 
clinical 
solid 
organ
transplantation is uncertain, mainly because there has been liĴle
success in identifying the relevant antigens. In mice, the male H-Y
y
g
g
antigen appears to be a target of immune recognition by female
recipients of grafts from male donors. Although in humans there is
a slightly higher risk for rejection of heart transplants from male
donor to female recipient, compared with gender-matched
transplants, given the scarcity of donor hearts, gender matching is
not practical. Minor histocompatibility antigens play a more
signiﬁcant role in stimulating graft-versus-host responses after
HSC transplantation, discussed later, but the nature of the relevant
antigens in that seĴing is also not deﬁned.
FIGURE 17.4  Direct and indirect alloantigen
recognition. A, Direct alloantigen recognition
occurs when alloreactive T cells bind directly to an
intact allogeneic major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) molecule with bound peptide on a graft
(donor) dendritic cell (DC) or other antigen-
presenting cell (APC), within lymph nodes.
Recipient CD4+ or CD8+ T cells can directly
recognize donor class II or class I MHC
molecules, respectively, and will differentiate into
helper T cells or cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs).
The CTLs will directly recognize the same donor
MHC-peptide complex displayed on graft tissue
cells and kill these cells. B, Indirect alloantigen
recognition occurs when allogeneic MHC
molecules from graft cells are taken up and
processed by recipient APCs and peptide
fragments of the allogeneic MHC molecules
containing polymorphic amino acid residues are
bound and presented by recipient (self) MHC
molecules. Donor MHC–specific helper T cells
that are generated in this way can help B cells to
produce donor MHC–specific antibodies that can
damage graft cells. The helper T cells also can be
activated in the graft by recipient macrophages
presenting the same donor MHC–derived
peptides, leading to inflammatory damage to the
graft.
Recognition of Alloantigens by T Cells
Allogeneic MHC molecules of a graft can be presented for recognition
by the recipient’s T cells in two diﬀerent ways, called direct and
indirect (Fig. 17.4) . Initial studies showed that the T cells of a graft
recipient recognize intact, unprocessed MHC molecules in the
graft, and this is called direct presentation (or direct recognition) of
alloantigens. Subsequent studies showed that sometimes the
recipient T cells recognize graft (donor) MHC molecules only in the
context of the recipient’s MHC molecules, implying that the
recipient’s MHC molecules must be presenting peptides derived
from allogeneic donor MHC proteins to recipient T cells. This
process is called indirect presentation (or indirect recognition), and
it is essentially the same as the recognition of any foreign (e.g.,
microbial) protein antigen. The initial T cell response to MHC
alloantigens, whether it results from direct or indirect recognition,
most likely occurs in lymph nodes draining the graft, as we will
discuss later.
Direct Recognition of Major Histocompatibility Complex
Alloantigens on Donor Cells
In the case of direct recognition, intact MHC molecules displayed by
cells in the graft are recognized by recipient T cells without a need
for processing by host antigen-presenting cells (APCs) (see Fig.
17.4A) . It may seem puzzling that T cells that are normally selected
during their maturation to be self MHC restricted are capable of
recognizing foreign (allogeneic or xenogeneic) MHC molecules. A
likely explanation is that T cell receptors (TCRs) have some intrinsic
aﬃnity for MHC molecules, regardless of whether they are self or
foreign. Furthermore, during T cell development in the thymus,
positive selection promotes survival of T cells with weak self MHC
reactivity, and among these T cells, there may be many with strong
reactivity to allogeneic MHC molecules. Negative selection in the
thymus eﬃciently eliminates T cells with high aﬃnity for self MHC
(see Chapters 8 and 15), but it will not eliminate T cells that bind
strongly to allogeneic MHC molecules, simply because allogenic
MHC molecules are not present in the thymus. The result is that
the mature repertoire includes many T cells that bind allogeneic
MHC molecules with high aﬃnity. One can think of direct
allorecognition as an example of an immunologic cross-reaction in
which a T cell that was selected to be self MHC restricted is able to
bind 
structurally 
similar 
allogeneic 
MHC 
molecules 
with
suﬃciently high aﬃnity to permit activation of the T cell (Fig. 17.5).
MHC molecules that are expressed on cell surfaces normally
contain bound peptides, and in some cases the peptide contributes
to the structure recognized by the alloreactive T cell, exactly like the
role of peptides in the normal recognition of foreign antigens by
self MHC–restricted T cells (Fig. 17.5B). Even though these peptides
may be derived from proteins that are present in both donor and
recipient, on the graft cells they are displayed by allogeneic MHC
molecules. Therefore, the complexes of peptides (self or foreign)
with allogeneic MHC molecules will appear diﬀerent from self
peptide–self MHC complexes. In other cases, direct recognition and
activation of an alloreactive T cell may occur regardless of which
peptide is carried by the allogeneic MHC molecule, because the
polymorphic amino acid residues of the allogeneic MHC molecule
alone form a structure that resembles self MHC plus peptide (Fig.
17.5C).
T cell responses to directly presented allogeneic MHC molecules
are very strong because there is a high frequency of T cells that can
directly recognize any single allogeneic MHC protein. It is estimated
that as many as 1% to 10% of all T cells in an individual will directly
recognize and react against an allogeneic MHC molecule on a donor
cell. In striking contrast, in an infection, the frequency of naive T
cells that react against any microbial peptide displayed by self
MHC molecules is approximately 1 in 105 or 106 T cells. There are
several explanations for the high frequency of alloreactive T cells.
• Many diﬀerent peptides derived from donor cellular
proteins may combine with a single allogeneic MHC
molecule, and each of these peptide-MHC combinations can
theoretically activate a diﬀerent clone of recipient T cells. In
contrast, most microbes or protein antigens contain
relatively few immunodominant peptides that can be
displayed by the self MHC molecules of an individual at any
time, so few T cell clones are activated. It is estimated that
each APC expresses thousands of MHC molecules. On an
allogenic APC, most of these can be recognized by
alloreactive T cells at one time. However, in the case of an
infection, less than 1% (and perhaps as few as 0.1%) of the
self MHC molecules on an APC normally present peptides
from that microbe at one time, and only these can be
recognized by T cells speciﬁc for the microbial antigen.
FIGURE 17.5  Molecular basis of direct
recognition of allogeneic major
histocompatibility complex molecules.Direct
recognition of allogeneic major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules
may be thought of as a cross-reaction in
which a T cell–specific for a self MHC
molecule–foreign peptide complex (A) also
recognizes an allogeneic MHC molecule (B
and C). Donor or self (recipient) peptides that
bind to MHC molecules in the graft may
contribute to allorecognition (B) or they may
not (C).
• Allogeneic MHC molecules can display not only foreign
peptides from donor cells but also self peptides, and these
self peptide–foreign MHC complexes can activate T cells.
Because these complexes are not normally expressed in the
thymus or peripheral tissues, they have not participated in
negative selection of T cells that could recognize allogeneic
graft cells and potentially cause graft damage. In contrast, T
cells speciﬁc for self peptides displayed by self MHC
molecules are eliminated by negative selection in the
thymus and by peripheral tolerance mechanisms (see
Chapters 8 and 15). Therefore, the range of peptide-MHC
complexes that can activate T cells is much greater if the
MHC is allogeneic.
• Many of the T cells that respond to an allogeneic MHC
molecule, even on ﬁrst exposure, are memory T cells. It is
likely that these memory cells were generated during
previous exposure to other foreign (e.g., microbial) antigens
and cross-react with allogeneic MHC molecules. These
memory cells not only are expanded populations of antigen-
speciﬁc cells but also are more rapid and powerful
responders than are naive lymphocytes. Thus, these
alloreactive memory T cells contribute to the greater
strength of the initial T cell response to a new allograft,
compared to the response to the ﬁrst encounter with a
microbial antigen.
Direct allorecognition can generate both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells
that recognize graft antigens and contribute to rejection. The role of
the alloreactive T cell response in rejection is described later.
Indirect Recognition of Alloantigens
In the indirect pathway, donor (allogeneic) MHC molecules are
captured and processed by recipient APCs, and peptides derived from
the allogeneic MHC molecules are presented in association with self
MHC molecules (see Fig. 17.4B) . Thus, peptides from the allogeneic
MHC molecules are displayed by host APCs and recognized by T
cells like conventional microbial protein antigens. Because
allogeneic MHC molecules have amino acid sequences diﬀerent
from those of the host, they themselves can serve as foreign
antigens and generate foreign peptides associated with self MHC
molecules on the surface of host APCs. Each allogeneic MHC
molecule may give rise to multiple peptides that are foreign for the
host, each recognized by a diﬀerent clone of T cells. Indirect
presentation may result in allorecognition by CD4+ T cells because
alloantigens are acquired by host APCs primarily through the
endosomal 
vesicular 
pathway 
(i.e., 
as 
a 
consequence 
of
phagocytosis) and are therefore presented by class II MHC
molecules. Some antigens of phagocytosed graft cells do enter the
class I MHC pathway of antigen presentation and are indirectly
recognized by CD8+ T cells. This phenomenon is an example of
cross-presentation or cross-priming (see Fig. 6.14), in which
dendritic cells (DCs) ingest proteins of another cell such as from
the graft; the proteins are delivered to the cytosol, where they are
processed into peptides by proteasomes; and the peptides are
presented on class I MHC molecules to activate (prime) CD8+ T
lymphocytes.
Evidence that indirect recognition of allogeneic MHC molecules
plays a signiﬁcant role in graft rejection comes from studies with
knockout mice lacking class II MHC expression. For example, skin
grafts from donor mice lacking class II MHC are able to induce
recipient CD4+ (i.e., class II MHC–restricted) T cell responses to
peptides derived from donor class I MHC molecules. In these
experiments, the donor class I MHC molecules are processed and
presented by self class II molecules on the recipient’s APCs and
stimulate the recipient’s helper T cells. Evidence also has been
obtained that indirect antigen presentation may contribute to
chronic rejection of human allografts (discussed later). CD4+ T cells
from heart and liver allograft recipients recognize and are activated
by peptides derived from donor MHC when presented by the
patient’s own APCs. The indirect pathway may become more
important over time after transplantation, as donor DCs in the graft
are replaced by host DCs.
Activation and Effector Functions of
Alloreactive T Lymphocytes
When lymphocytes recognize alloantigens, they become activated
to proliferate, diﬀerentiate, and perform eﬀector functions that can
damage grafts. The activation steps are similar to those we have
described for lymphocytes reacting to microbial antigens.
Activation of Alloreactive T Lymphocytes
The T cell response to an organ graft may be initiated in the lymph
nodes that drain the graft (Fig. 17.6) . Most organs contain resident
APCs, such as DCs, and therefore transplanted organs carry with
them APCs that express donor MHC molecules. These donor APCs
can migrate to regional lymph nodes and present, on their surface,
unprocessed allogeneic class I or class II MHC molecules to the
recipient’s CD8+ and CD4+ T cells, respectively (direct MHC
allorecognition). Host DCs from the recipient may also migrate into
the graft, pick up graft alloantigens, and transport these back to the
draining lymph nodes, where they are displayed (the indirect
pathway). The connection between lymphatic vessels in allografts
and the recipient’s lymph nodes is surgically disrupted during the
process of transplantation, and it is likely reestablished by growth
of new lymphatic channels in response to inﬂammatory stimuli
produced during grafting. Naive CD4+ and CD8+ lymphocytes that
normally traﬃc through the lymph node encounter these
alloantigens and are induced to proliferate and diﬀerentiate into
eﬀector helper T cells and cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs). This
process is sometimes called sensitization to alloantigens. The
eﬀector cells migrate back into the graft and mediate rejection, by
mechanisms that are discussed later.
As mentioned earlier, many of the T cells that respond to the
allogeneic MHC antigens in a new graft are cross-reactive memory
T cells previously generated against environmental antigens before
transplantation. Unlike naive T cells, memory T cells may not need
to see antigens presented by DCs in lymph nodes to be activated,
and they may migrate directly into grafts, where they can be
activated by APCs or tissue cells displaying alloantigen.
FIGURE 17.6  Activation of alloreactive T cells. A, In
the case of direct allorecognition, donor dendritic
cells in the allograft migrate to secondary
lymphoid tissues, where they directly present
allogeneic major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
molecules to host T cells. Only CD8+ T cells
recognizing donor class I MHC is shown, but CD4+
T cells can also directly recognize donor class II
MHC. In the case of indirect allorecognition,
recipient dendritic cells that have entered the
allograft transport donor MHC proteins to
secondary lymphoid tissues and present peptides
derived from these MHC proteins to alloreactive
host T cells. This is shown for CD4+ T cells, and
indirect recognition of allogeneic MHC by CD8+ T
cells is likely less important. After both indirect
and direct allorecognition, the T cells become
activated and differentiate into effector CD4+
helper T cells and CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes
(CTLs). B, The alloreactive effector T cells
migrate into the allograft, become reactivated by
alloantigen, and mediate damage. In the graft,
direct recognition of allogeneic class I MHC by
CD8+ CTLs is required for killing of graft
parenchymal cells, because these cells express
only allogeneic MHC. In contrast, CD4+ helper T
cells that can directly or indirectly recognize
allogeneic class II MHC can be activated by donor
or host antigen-presenting cells (APCs),
respectively, and both can promote inflammation
that damages the graft.
The response of alloreactive T cells to foreign MHC molecules
can be analyzed in vitro by the mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR),
in which lymphocytes from two genetically distinct individuals are
mixed together in cell culture. The T cells from one individual
become activated by recognition of allogeneic MHC molecules on
the cells of the other. The MLR was used clinically in the past as a
predictive test of T cell–mediated graft rejection and as an in vitro
model to study the mechanisms of alloreactivity, but now it is
mainly of historical signiﬁcance.
Role of Costimulation in T Cell Responses to Alloantigens
In addition to recognition of alloantigen, costimulation of T cells
primarily by B7 molecules on APCs is important for activating
alloreactive T cells. Costimulation is likely most important to
activate naive alloreactive T cells, but even alloreactive memory T
cell responses can be enhanced by costimulation. Rejection of
allografts and stimulation of alloreactive T cells in an MLR can be
inhibited by agents that block B7 molecules. Allografts survive for
longer periods when they are transplanted into knockout mice
lacking B7-1 (CD80) and B7-2 (CD86) compared with transplants
into normal recipients. As we will discuss later, blocking B7
costimulators is a therapeutic strategy to inhibit graft rejection in
humans as well.
The requirement for costimulation leads to the interesting
question of why these costimulators are expressed by graft APCs in
the absence of infection, which we have previously discussed as the
physiologic stimulus for the expression of costimulators (see
Chapter 9). One possibility is that the innate immune response to
ischemic damage of some cells in the graft, discussed later, results
in increased expression of costimulators on APCs.
Effector Functions of Alloreactive T Cells
Alloreactive CD4 +   and CD8 +   T cells that are activated by graft
alloantigens cause rejection by distinct mechanisms (see Fig. 17.6) .
The CD4+ helper T cells diﬀerentiate into cytokine-producing
eﬀector 
cells 
that 
damage 
grafts 
by 
cytokine-mediated
inﬂammation, similar to a delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH)
reaction (see Chapters 10 and 19). CD8+ T cells diﬀerentiate into
CTLs, which kill graft cells.
Only CTLs that are generated by direct allorecognition can kill
graft cells, whereas both CTLs and helper T cells generated by either
direct or indirect alloantigen recognition can cause cytokine-
mediated damage to grafts. CD8+ CTLs that are generated by direct
allorecognition of donor MHC molecules on donor APCs can
recognize the same MHC molecules on parenchymal cells in the
graft and kill those cells. These T cells can also secrete cytokines
that cause damaging inﬂammation. In contrast, any CD8+ CTLs that
are generated in response to indirect recognition of allogeneic MHC
are restricted to recognition of peptides from these allogeneic MHC
molecules bound to recipient (self) MHC molecules, and therefore
the T cells will not be able to kill the foreign graft cells because the
graft cells do not express recipient MHC molecules. When CD4+
eﬀector T cells are generated by direct or indirect recognition of
allogeneic MHC, the principal mechanism of rejection is
inﬂammation caused by the cytokines produced by the eﬀector T
cells. CD8+ T cells that may be activated by the indirect pathway
may also contribute to rejection by producing inﬂammatory
cytokines. Presumably, eﬀector cells activated by the indirect
pathway inﬁltrate the graft and recognize peptides from graft MHC
molecules being displayed by host APCs that have also entered the
graft.
Activation of Alloreactive B Cells and
Production and Functions of Alloantibodies
Antibodies against graft antigens, called donor-speciﬁc antibodies,
also contribute to rejection. High-aﬃnity alloantibodies are mostly
produced by helper T cell–dependent activation of alloreactive B
cells, much like antibodies against other protein antigens (see
Chapter 12). The antigens most frequently recognized by
alloantibodies are donor MHC molecules, including both class I
and class II MHC proteins. The likely sequence of events leading to
the generation of these alloantibody-producing cells is that naive B
lymphocytes recognize the allogenic MHC molecules, internalize
and process these proteins, and present peptides derived from
them to helper T cells that were previously activated by the same
peptides presented by DCs (see Fig. 17.4). Thus, activation of
alloreactive B cells is an example of indirect presentation of
alloantigens. In addition, donor-speciﬁc antibodies against non-
HLA alloantigens also contribute to rejection.
The alloreactive antibodies produced in graft recipients engage
the same eﬀector mechanisms that antibodies use to combat
infections, including complement activation, and Fc receptor–
mediated binding and activation of neutrophils, macrophages, and
NK cells. Because MHC antigens are expressed on endothelial cells,
much of the alloantibody-mediated damage is targeted at the graft
vasculature, as discussed later.
Innate Immune Responses to Allografts
In addition to the adaptive immune responses speciﬁc for
alloantigenic diﬀerences between donor and host, innate immunity
plays a role in the outcome of transplantation. The interruption of
blood supply to tissues and organs during the time between
removal from a donor and placement in a host usually causes some
ischemic damage. This can result in expression of damage-
associated molecular paĴerns (DAMPs) in the graft (see Chapter 4),
which simulate innate responses mediated by both innate cells
within the graft and the recipient’s innate immune system. These
innate responses can directly cause graft injury, but they are also
thought to enhance adaptive responses by increasing migration of
alloreactive circulating memory T cells into the graft and by
activating APCs, as is the case in immune responses to microbes
(see Chapter 6). APC activation increases the expression of
costimulators and production of cytokines and thus the priming of
naive alloreactive T lymphocytes. In addition, host NK cells can
respond to the absence of self MHC molecules on donor graft cells
(see Chapter 4) and therefore contribute to graft rejection.
Patterns and Mechanisms of Allograft
Rejection
Thus far, we have described the molecular basis of alloantigen
recognition and the cells involved in the recognition of and
responses to allografts. We now 
 turn to a consideration of the
eﬀector mechanisms responsible for the immunologic rejection of
allografts. In diﬀerent experimental models and in clinical
transplantation, 
alloreactive CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and
alloantibodies all have been shown to be capable of mediating
allograft rejection. These diﬀerent immune eﬀectors cause graft
rejection by diﬀerent mechanisms, and all three eﬀectors may
contribute to rejection concurrently.
For historical reasons, graft rejection is classiﬁed on the basis of
the 
time 
course 
of 
rejection 
after 
transplantation 
and
histopathologic 
features 
rather 
than 
by 
immune 
eﬀector
mechanisms. Based on the experience of renal transplantation, the
histopathologic paĴerns are called hyperacute, acute, and chronic.
It is helpful to consider rejection in the context of these paĴerns
because the immune mechanism of rejection correlates well with
the paĴern. Our discussion of these types of rejection will
emphasize the underlying mechanisms rather than the pathologic
or clinical features.
Hyperacute Rejection
Hyperacute rejection is characterized by thrombotic occlusion of the
graft vasculature that begins within minutes to hours after host
blood vessels are anastomosed to graft vessels and is mediated by
preexisting antibodies in the host circulation that bind to donor
endothelial antigens (Fig. 17.7A) . Binding of antibody to
endothelium activates complement, and antibody and complement
products together induce a number of changes in the graft
endothelium that promote intravascular thrombosis. Complement
activation leads to endothelial cell injury and exposure of
subendothelial 
basement 
membrane 
proteins 
that 
activate
platelets. The endothelial cells are stimulated to secrete high-
molecular-weight forms of von Willebrand factor, which causes
platelet adhesion and aggregation. Both endothelial cells and
platelets undergo membrane vesiculation, leading to shedding of
lipid particles that promote coagulation. Endothelial cells lose the
cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycans that normally interact
with antithrombin III to inhibit coagulation. These processes
contribute to thrombosis and vascular occlusion (Fig. 17.7B), and
the grafted organ suﬀers irreversible ischemic necrosis.
FIGURE 17.7  Hyperacute rejection. A, In
hyperacute rejection, preformed antibodies
reactive with vascular endothelium activate
complement and trigger rapid intravascular
thrombosis and necrosis of the vessel wall. B,
Hyperacute rejection involving a glomerulus in a
kidney allograft. Typical features include
endothelial damage, thrombi, and leukocytic
infiltration. 
B, Courtesy Dr. Helmut Rennke, Department of Pathology, Brigham
and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
In the early days of transplantation, hyperacute rejection was
often mediated by preexisting IgM alloantibodies speciﬁc for the
carbohydrate ABO blood group antigens that are expressed on red
blood cells and endothelial cells. These natural antibodies are
present in most individuals (discussed later). Hyperacute rejection
by anti-ABO antibodies is extremely rare now because all donor
and recipient pairs are selected so that they have compatible ABO
types. Hyperacute rejection caused by natural antibodies, speciﬁc
for a variety of antigens that diﬀer among species, is a major barrier
to xenotransplantation and limits the use of animal organs for
human transplantation.
Currently, the rare instances of hyperacute rejection of allografts
that do occur are mediated by IgG antibodies directed against
protein alloantigens, such as donor MHC molecules, or against less
deﬁned alloantigens expressed on vascular endothelial cells. Such
antibodies generally arise as a result of previous exposure to
alloantigens through blood transfusion, previous transplantation,
or multiple pregnancies. If the level of these alloreactive antibodies
is low, hyperacute rejection may develop slowly, over several days,
but the onset is still earlier than that typical for acute rejection. As
we will discuss later, patients in need of allografts are routinely
screened before grafting for the presence of antibodies that bind to
blood cells of a potential organ donor to avoid the use of organs
that will likely suﬀer hyperacute rejection.
In unusual cases in which grafts have to be done between ABO-
incompatible donors and recipients, graft survival may be improved
by rigorous depletion of antibodies and B cells. Sometimes, if the
graft is not rapidly rejected, it survives even in the presence of anti-
graft antibody. One possible mechanism of this resistance to
hyperacute rejection is increased expression of complement
regulatory proteins on graft endothelial cells, a beneﬁcial
adaptation of the tissue called accommodation.
Acute Rejection
Acute rejection is a process of injury to the graft parenchyma and
blood vessels mediated by alloreactive T cells and antibodies. Before
modern immunosuppression, acute rejection would often begin
several days to a few weeks after transplantation. The time of onset
of acute rejection reﬂects the time needed to generate alloreactive
eﬀector T cells and antibodies in response to the graft. In current
clinical practice, episodes of acute rejection may occur at much later
times, even years after transplantation, if immunosuppression is
reduced for any number of reasons. Although the paĴerns of acute
rejection are divided into acute T cell–mediated (cellular) rejection
and acute antibody-mediated (humoral) rejection, both often
coexist in an organ undergoing acute rejection.
Acute Cellular Rejection
The principal mechanisms of acute cellular rejection are CTL-
mediated killing of graft parenchymal cells and endothelial cells and
inﬂammation caused by cytokines produced by helper T cells (Fig.
17.8A) . On histologic examination of kidney allografts, where this
type of rejection is best characterized, there are inﬁltrates of
lymphocytes and macrophages. In kidney allografts, the inﬁltrates
may involve the tubules (called tubulitis; Fig. 17.8B), with
associated tubular necrosis, and blood vessels (called endotheliitis;
Fig. 17.8C), with necrosis of the walls of capillaries and small
arteries. The cellular inﬁltrates present in grafts undergoing acute
cellular rejection include both CD4+ helper T cells and CD8+ CTLs
speciﬁc for graft alloantigens, and both types of T cells may cause
parenchymal cell and endothelial injury. The helper T cells are
mainly Th1 cells that produce interferon-γ (IFN-γ) and tumor
necrosis factor (TNF). They cause macrophage and endothelial
activation and inﬂammatory damage to the organ. Experimentally,
adoptive transfer of alloreactive CD4+ helper T cells or CD8+ CTLs
can cause acute cellular graft rejection in recipient mice.
FIGURE 17.8  Acute cellular rejection. A, In acute
cellular rejection, CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes
reactive with alloantigens on endothelial cells in
blood vessels and parenchymal cells mediate
damage to these cell types. B, Acute cellular
rejection of a kidney with inflammatory cells in the
connective tissue around the tubules and between
epithelial cells of the tubules. C, Inflammation of
the endothelial layer of a blood vessel
(endotheliitis) in acute cellular rejection, with
inflammatory cells damaging endothelium. 
B, Courtesy Dr. Helmut Rennke, Department of Pathology, Brigham
and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. C, Courtesy Dr.
Zoltan Laszik, Department of Pathology, University of California, San
Francisco, California.
Acute Antibody-Mediated (Humoral) Rejection
Alloantibodies cause acute rejection by binding to alloantigens,
mainly HLA molecules, on vascular endothelial cells, leading to
endothelial injury and intravascular thrombosis that result in graft
destruction (Fig. 17.9A) . The binding of the alloantibodies to the
endothelial cell surface triggers local complement activation, which
causes lysis of the cells, recruitment and activation of neutrophils,
and thrombus formation. Alloantibodies may also engage Fc
receptors on neutrophils and NK cells, which then kill the
endothelial cells. In addition, alloantibody binding to the
endothelial surface may directly alter endothelial function by
inducing intracellular signals that enhance surface expression of
proinﬂammatory and procoagulant molecules.
The histologic hallmarks of acute antibody-mediated rejection of
renal allografts are acute inﬂammation of glomeruli and
peritubular capillaries with focal capillary thrombosis (Fig. 17.9B).
Immunohistochemical identiﬁcation of the C4d complement
fragment in capillaries of renal allografts is used clinically as an
indicator of activation of the classical complement pathway and
humoral rejection (Fig. 17.9C).
Chronic Rejection
As therapy for acute rejection has improved, the major cause of the
failure of vascularized organ allografts has become chronic rejection.
Since 1990, 1-year survival of kidney allografts has been beĴer than
90%, but the 10-year survival has remained approximately 60%
despite advances in immunosuppressive therapy. Chronic rejection
develops insidiously during months or years and may or may not
be preceded by clinically recognized episodes of acute rejection.
Chronic rejection of diﬀerent transplanted organs is associated
with distinct pathologic changes. In the kidney and heart, chronic
rejection results in vascular occlusion and interstitial ﬁbrosis. Lung
transplants undergoing chronic rejection show thickened small
airways (called bronchiolitis obliterans), and liver transplants show
ﬁbrotic and nonfunctional bile ducts.
FIGURE 17.9  Acute antibody-mediated rejection. A,
Alloreactive antibodies formed after engraftment
may contribute to parenchymal and vascular
injury. B, Acute antibody-mediated rejection of a
kidney allograft with inflammatory cells in
peritubular capillaries. C, Complement C4d
deposition in capillaries in acute antibody-
mediated rejection, revealed by
immunohistochemistry as brown staining. MHC,
Major histocompatibility complex. 
B and C, Courtesy Dr. Zoltan Laszik, Department of Pathology,
University of California, San Francisco, California.
A dominant lesion of chronic rejection in vascularized grafts is
arterial occlusion as a result of the proliferation of intimal smooth
muscle cells, and the grafts eventually fail mainly because of the
resulting ischemic damage (Fig. 17.10) . The arterial changes are
called graft vasculopathy or accelerated graft arteriosclerosis (Fig.
17.10B). Graft vasculopathy is frequently seen in failed cardiac and
renal allografts and can develop in any vascularized organ
transplant within 6 months to a year after transplantation. The
likely mechanisms underlying the occlusive vascular lesions of
chronic rejection are activation of alloreactive T cells and secretion
of IFN-γ and other cytokines that stimulate proliferation of vascular
smooth muscle cells. As the arterial lesions of graft arteriosclerosis
progress, blood ﬂow to the graft parenchyma is compromised, and
the parenchyma is slowly replaced by nonfunctioning ﬁbrous tissue
(Fig. 17.10C). The interstitial ﬁbrosis seen in chronic rejection also
may be a repair response to parenchymal cell damage caused by
repeated bouts of acute antibody-mediated or cellular rejection,
perioperative ischemia, toxic eﬀects of immunosuppressive drugs,
and even chronic viral infections. Chronic rejection leads to
congestive heart failure or arrhythmias in cardiac transplant
patients or loss of glomerular and tubular function and renal
failure in kidney transplant patients.
Prevention and Treatment of Allograft
Rejection
If the recipient of an allograft has a fully functional immune
system, transplantation almost invariably results in some form of
rejection. The strategies used in clinical practice and in
experimental models to avoid or delay rejection are general
immunosuppression and minimizing the strength of the speciﬁc
allogeneic reaction. An important goal of transplantation research
is to ﬁnd ways of inducing donor-speciﬁc tolerance, which would
allow grafts to survive without nonspeciﬁc immunosuppression.
Methods to Reduce the Immunogenicity of
Allografts
Solid organs used in transplantation come from both living and
deceased donors, and graft survival after transplantation varies
depending on the source. The greatest barrier to transplantation as a
therapeutic option for organ failure is availability of organs.
Currently in the United States, there are approximately 110,000
people in need of a life-saving organ transplant, but there have
been only approximately 20,000 donors per year. Living donors can
donate one kidney, a lobe of a lung, and parts of the liver, pancreas,
or intestine, because they can remain healthy after these types of
donations. Living donors may be genetically related to the
recipient, including siblings, parents, children (over 18 years of
age), aunts, uncles, cousins, nieces, and nephews. Other living
donors may be unrelated. As we have discussed, immunologic graft
rejection is targeted at allogeneic proteins encoded by polymorphic
alleles in the recipient not shared by the donor. Related donors will
share more alleles of polymorphic genes, including MHC genes,
than unrelated donors, and this will reduce the incidence and
severity of rejection episodes (as discussed later). For example,
because MHC genes are inherited as linked haplotypes, there is a
25% chance that two siblings will have identical MHC genes,
whereas the chance of an unrelated donor and recipient having
identical MHC genes is extremely low.
FIGURE 17.10  Chronic rejection. A, In chronic
rejection with graft arteriosclerosis, injury to the
vessel wall leads to intimal smooth muscle cell
proliferation and luminal occlusion. This lesion may
be caused by a chronic inflammatory reaction to
alloantigens in the vessel wall. B, Chronic
rejection in a kidney allograft with graft
arteriosclerosis. The vascular lumen is replaced
by an accumulation of smooth muscle cells and
connective tissue in the vessel intima. C, Fibrosis
and loss of tubules in a kidney with chronic
rejection (lower left) adjacent to relatively normal
kidney (upper right). The blue area shows
fibrosis, and an artery with graft arteriosclerosis is
present (bottom right). 
B, Courtesy Dr. Helmut Rennke, Department of Pathology, Brigham
and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. C, Courtesy Dr.
Zoltan Laszik, Department of Pathology, University of California, San
Francisco, California.
Deceased donors, called cadaveric donors, are sources of any
transplantable organ and the only source of organs that could not
be removed from a living donor, such as hearts. Most deceased
donors are brain dead, with complete and irreversible loss of all
higher brain function, but whose other organs can be kept alive in
the body by cardiorespiratory life support, until just before organ
harvest. Less frequently, organs are retrieved from people after very
recent but irreversible cessation of circulation and respiration, such
as after trauma. The survival of grafts from deceased donors is on
average lower than from either related or unrelated living donors
because there is more ischemic damage to organs removed after
death of the donor. Furthermore, most deceased donors are
unrelated to the recipients, and grafts from unrelated donors
usually express more antigens that diﬀer from those of the
recipient and can simulate stronger rejection responses than those
from living donors.
In human transplantation, the major strategy to reduce graft
immunogenicity has been to minimize alloantigenic diﬀerences
between the donor and recipient. Several clinical laboratory tests are
routinely performed to reduce the risk for immunologic rejection of
allografts. These include ABO blood typing; the determination of
HLA alleles expressed on donor and recipient cells, called tissue
typing; the detection of preformed antibodies in the recipient that
recognize HLA and other antigens representative of the donor
population; and the detection of preformed antibodies in the
recipient that bind to antigens of an identiﬁed donor’s cells, called
cross-matching. Not all of these tests are done in all types of
transplantation. We will next summarize each of these tests and
discuss their signiﬁcance.
To avoid hyperacute rejection, the ABO blood group antigens of
the graft donor are selected to be compatible with the recipient. This
test is uniformly used in organ transplantation because grafts will
typically not survive if there are ABO incompatibilities between the
donor and recipient. Natural IgM antibodies speciﬁc for allogeneic
ABO blood group antigens will cause hyperacute rejection. Blood
typing is performed by mixing a patient’s red blood cells with
yp
g
p
y
g
p
standardized sera containing anti-A or anti-B antibodies. If the
patient expresses either blood group antigen, the serum speciﬁc for
that antigen will agglutinate the red blood cells. The biology of the
ABO blood group system is discussed later in this chapter in the
context of blood transfusion.
In kidney transplantation, the more MHC alleles that are matched
between the donor and recipient, the beĴer the graft survival (Fig.
17.11) . HLA matching had a more profound inﬂuence on graft
survival before modern immunosuppressive drugs were routinely
used, but current data still show signiﬁcantly greater survival of
grafts when donor and recipient have fewer HLA allele
mismatches. Past clinical experience with older typing methods
showed that of all class I and class II MHC loci, matching at HLA-
A, HLA-B, and HLA-DR is most important for predicting survival of
kidney allografts. (HLA-C is not as polymorphic as HLA-A or HLA-
B, and HLA-DR and HLA-DQ are in linkage disequilibrium, so
matching at the DR locus often also matches at the DQ locus.)
Although current typing protocols in many centers include HLA-C,
HLA-DQ, and HLA-DP loci, most of the available data in predicting
graft outcome refer only to HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-DR
mismatches. Because two codominantly expressed alleles are
inherited for each of these HLA genes, it is possible to have zero to
six HLA mismatches of these three loci between the donor and
recipient. Zero-antigen mismatches predict the best survival of
living related donor grafts, and grafts with one-antigen mismatches
are similar. The survival of grafts with two to six HLA mismatches
is signiﬁcantly worse than that of grafts with zero- and one-antigen
mismatches. Mismatching of two or more HLA genes has an even
greater impact on nonliving (unrelated) donor renal allografts.
Therefore, aĴempts are made to reduce the number of diﬀerences
in HLA alleles expressed on donor and recipient cells, which will
have a modest eﬀect in reducing the chance of rejection.
FIGURE 17.11  Influence of major histocompatibility
complex matching on graft survival.Matching of
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) alleles
between the donor and recipient significantly
improves renal allograft survival. The data shown
are for deceased donor (cadaver) grafts. Human
leukocyte antigen (HLA) matching has less of an
impact on survival of renal allografts from live
donors, and some MHC alleles are more
important than others in determining outcome. 
Data from Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients. SRTR
annual report, 2012. Available at http://www.srtr.org/. Accessed July
2013.
HLA matching in renal transplantation is possible because donor
kidneys can be stored for some time before being transplanted, and
patients needing a kidney allograft can be maintained on dialysis
until a well-matched organ is available. In the case of heart and
liver transplantation, organ preservation is more diﬃcult, and
potential recipients are often in critical condition. For these
reasons, HLA typing is not considered in pairing of potential
donors and recipients, and the choice of donor and recipient is
based on ABO blood group matching, other measures of
immunologic 
compatibility 
described 
later, 
and 
anatomic
compatibility. The paucity of heart donors, the emergent need for
transplantation, and the success of immunosuppression override
any beneﬁt of reducing HLA mismatches between donor and
recipient. As we will discuss later, in HSC transplantation, HLA
matching is essential to reduce the risk for graft-versus-host disease
(GVHD).
Most HLA haplotype determinations are now performed by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR), replacing older serologic
methods. MHC genes can be ampliﬁed by PCR with use of primers
that bind to nonpolymorphic sequences within the 5′ and 3′ ends of
exons encoding the polymorphic regions of class I and class II MHC
molecules. The ampliﬁed segment of DNA can then be sequenced.
Thus, the actual nucleotide sequence and therefore the predicted
amino acid sequence can be directly determined for the MHC
alleles of any cell, providing precise molecular tissue typing. On the
basis of these DNA sequencing eﬀorts, the nomenclature of HLA
alleles has changed to reﬂect the identiﬁcation of many alleles not
distinguished by previous serologic methods. Each allele deﬁned by
sequence has at least a four-digit number, but some alleles require
six or eight digits for precise deﬁnition. The ﬁrst two digits usually
correspond to the older serologically deﬁned allotype, and the third
and fourth digits indicate the subtypes. Alleles with diﬀerences in
the ﬁrst four digits encode proteins with diﬀerent amino acids. For
example, HLA-DRB1∗1301 is the sequence-deﬁned 01 allele of the
serologically deﬁned HLA-DR13 family of genes encoding the HLA-
DR β1 protein.
Patients in need of allografts are also tested for the presence of
preformed antibodies against donor MHC molecules or other cell
p
f
g
surface antigens. Two types of tests are done to detect these
antibodies. In the panel reactive antibody (PRA) test, patients
waiting for organ transplants are screened for the presence of
preformed antibodies reactive with allogeneic HLA molecules
prevalent in the population. The presence of these antibodies,
which may be produced as a result of previous pregnancies,
transfusions, or transplantation, increases risk for hyperacute or
acute vascular rejection. Small amounts of the patient’s serum are
mixed with multiple ﬂuorescently labeled beads coated with
deﬁned MHC molecules, representative of the MHC alleles that
may be present in an organ donor population. Each MHC molecule
is aĴached to a bead with a diﬀerently colored ﬂuorescent label.
Binding of the patient’s antibodies to beads is determined by ﬂow
cytometry. The results are reported as the percentage of the MHC
allele panel with which the patient’s serum reacts. The PRA is
determined on multiple occasions while a patient waits for an organ
allograft. This is because the PRA can vary, as each panel is chosen
at random and the patient’s serum antibody titers may change over
time.
If a potential donor is identiﬁed, the cross-matching test will
determine if the patient has antibodies that react speciﬁcally with
that donor’s cells. The test is performed by mixing the recipient’s
serum with the donor’s blood lymphocytes (a convenient source of
cells, some of which express both class I and class II MHC
proteins). 
Complement-mediated 
cytotoxicity 
tests 
or 
ﬂow
cytometric assays can then be used to determine if antibodies in the
recipient serum have bound to the donor cells. For example,
complement is added to the mixture of cells and serum, and if
preformed antibodies, usually against donor MHC molecules, are
present in the recipient’s serum, the donor cells are lysed. This
would be a positive cross-match, which indicates that the donor is
not suitable for that recipient.
FIGURE 17.12  Mechanisms of action of
immunosuppressive drugs.Each major category of
drugs used to prevent or to treat allograft
rejection is shown along with the molecular
targets of the drugs. APC, Antigen-presenting
cell; CTL, cytotoxic T lymphocyte; IL, interleukin;
mTOR, mechanistic target of rapamycin; TCR, T
cell receptor.
Immunosuppression to Prevent or to Treat
Allograft Rejection
Immunosuppressive drugs that inhibit or kill T lymphocytes are the
principal agents used to treat or prevent graft rejection. Several
drugs are commonly used (Fig. 17.12).
Inhibitors of T Cell Signaling Pathways
The calcineurin inhibitors cyclosporine and tacrolimus (FK506)
inhibit transcription of certain genes in T cells, most notably genes
encoding cytokines such as IL-2. Cyclosporine is a fungal peptide
that binds with high aﬃnity to a ubiquitous cellular protein called
cyclophilin. The complex of cyclosporine and cyclophilin binds to
and 
inhibits 
the 
enzymatic 
activity 
of 
calcineurin, 
a
calcium/calmodulin-activated serine/threonine phosphatase (see
Chapter 7). Because calcineurin is required to activate the
transcription factor nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT),
cyclosporine inhibits NFAT activation and the transcription of IL-2
and other cytokine genes. The net result is that cyclosporine blocks
the IL-2–dependent proliferation and diﬀerentiation of T cells.
Tacrolimus is a macrolide made by a bacterium that functions like
cyclosporine. Tacrolimus binds to FK506 binding protein (FKBP),
and the complex shares with the cyclosporine-cyclophilin complex
the ability to bind calcineurin and inhibit its activity.
The introduction of cyclosporine into clinical practice ushered in
the modern era of transplantation. Before the use of cyclosporine,
the majority of transplanted hearts and livers were rejected. Now as
a result of the use of cyclosporine, tacrolimus, and other more
recently introduced drugs, the majority of these allografts survive
for more than 5 years (Fig. 17.13). Nevertheless, calcineurin
inhibitors have limitations. For example, at doses needed for
optimal immunosuppression, cyclosporine causes kidney damage,
and some rejection episodes are refractory to cyclosporine
treatment. Tacrolimus was initially used for liver transplant
recipients, but it has now largely replaced cyclosporine for all organ
transplants because of beĴer eﬃcacy and safety.
The immunosuppressive drug rapamycin (sirolimus) inhibits
growth factor–mediated T cell proliferation. Like tacrolimus,
rapamycin binds to FKBP, but the rapamycin-FKBP complex does
not inhibit calcineurin. Instead, this complex binds to and inhibits
a cellular enzyme called mTOR (mechanistic target of rapamycin),
which is a serine/threonine protein kinase required for translation
of proteins that promote cell survival and proliferation. mTOR is
negatively regulated by a protein complex called tuberous sclerosis
complex 1 (TSC1)-TSC2 complex. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K)-AKT signaling results in phosphorylation of TSC2 and
release of mTOR inhibition. Several growth factor receptor
signaling pathways, including the IL-2 receptor pathway in T cells,
as well as TCR and CD28 signals, activate mTOR through PI3K-
AKT, leading to translation of proteins needed for cell cycle
progression. Thus, by inhibiting mTOR function, rapamycin blocks
T cell proliferation. Combinations of calcineurin inhibitors (which
block IL-2 synthesis) and rapamycin (which blocks IL-2–driven
proliferation) potently inhibit T cell responses. Interestingly,
rapamycin inhibits the generation of eﬀector T cells but does not
impair the survival and functions of regulatory T cells (Tregs) as
much, which may promote immune suppression of allograft
rejection. mTOR is involved in DC functions, and therefore,
rapamycin may suppress T cell responses by its eﬀects on DCs as
well. mTOR is also involved in B cell proliferation and antibody
responses, and therefore rapamycin also may be eﬀective in
preventing or treating antibody-mediated rejection.
FIGURE 17.13  Influence of cyclosporine on graft
survival.Five-year survival rates for patients
receiving cardiac allografts increased significantly
beginning when cyclosporine was introduced in
1983. 
Data from Transplant Patient DataSource, United Network for Organ
Sharing, Richmond, Virginia.
Other molecules involved in cytokine and TCR signaling are also
targets of immunosuppressive drugs that are in trials for treatment
or prevention of allograft rejection. These target molecules include
the tyrosine kinase JAK3, which is involved in signaling by various
cytokine receptors, including IL-2, and protein kinase C, an
essential kinase in TCR signaling.
Antimetabolites
Metabolic toxins that kill proliferating T cells are used in
combination with other drugs to treat graft rejection. These agents
inhibit the proliferation of lymphocyte precursors during their
maturation and also kill proliferating mature T cells that have been
stimulated by alloantigens. The ﬁrst such drug to be developed for
the prevention and treatment of rejection was azathioprine. This
drug is still used, but it is toxic to precursors of leukocytes in the
bone marrow and enterocytes in the gut. The most widely used
drug in this class is mycophenolate mofetil (MMF). MMF is
metabolized to mycophenolic acid, which blocks the activity of
inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase, an enzyme required for de
novo synthesis of guanine nucleotides. Because proliferating
lymphocytes are particularly dependent on de novo synthesis of
purines, MMF targets lymphocytes in a relatively speciﬁc manner.
MMF is now routinely used, often in combination with tacrolimus,
to prevent acute allograft rejection.
Function-Blocking or Depleting Anti-Lymphocyte Antibodies
Antibodies that react with T cell surface structures and deplete or
inhibit T cells are used to treat acute rejection episodes. The ﬁrst
anti–T cell antibody used in transplant patients was a mouse
monoclonal antibody called OKT3 that is speciﬁc for human CD3.
(OKT3 was the ﬁrst monoclonal antibody used as a drug in humans,
but it is no longer being produced.) Polyclonal rabbit or horse
antibodies speciﬁc for a mixture of human T cell surface proteins,
so-called anti-thymocyte globulin, also have been in clinical use for
many years to treat acute allograft rejection. These anti–T cell
antibodies deplete circulating T cells either by activating the
complement system to eliminate T cells or by opsonizing them for
phagocytosis.
Monoclonal antibodies speciﬁc for CD25, the α subunit of the IL-
2 receptor are now in clinical use. These reagents prevent T cell
activation by blocking IL-2 binding to activated T cells and IL-2
signaling.
Another monoclonal antibody in use in clinical transplantation is
one speciﬁc for CD52, a cell surface protein expressed widely on
most mature B and T cells whose function is not understood. Anti-
CD52 (called alemtuzumab) was originally developed to treat B cell
tumors, and it was found to profoundly deplete most peripheral B
and T cells for many weeks after injection into patients. In the
initial clinical trials, it was administered just before and early after
transplantation, with the hope that it may induce a prolonged state
of graft tolerance, but it is not widely used now.
The major limitation to the use of monoclonal or polyclonal
antibodies from other species is that humans given these agents
produce anti-Ig antibodies that neutralize the injected foreign Ig.
For this reason, humanized antibodies (e.g., against CD3 and
CD25), which are less immunogenic, have been developed (see
Chapter 5).
Costimulatory Blockade
Drugs that block T cell costimulatory pathways reduce acute
allograft rejection. The rationale for the use of these types of drugs
is to prevent the delivery of costimulatory signals required for
activation of T cells (see Chapter 9). Recall that CTLA4-Ig is a
recombinant protein composed of the extracellular portion of
CTLA4 fused to an IgG Fc domain. A high-aﬃnity form of CTLA4-
Ig, called belatacept, which binds to B7 molecules on APCs and
prevents them from interacting with T cell CD28 (see Fig. 9.7), is
approved for use in allograft recipients. Clinical studies have shown
that belatacept can be as eﬀective as cyclosporine in preventing
acute rejection, but its high cost and other factors have limited
widespread use of this biologic agent. An antibody that binds to T
cell CD40 ligand (CD40L) and prevents its interactions with CD40
on APCs (see Chapter 9) has also proved beneﬁcial for preventing
graft rejection in experimental animals. In some experimental
protocols, simultaneous blockade of both B7 and CD40 appears to
be more eﬀective than either alone in promoting graft survival.
However, in clinical trials of anti-CD40L antibody, patients
developed thrombotic complications, apparently related to the
expression of CD40L on human platelets.
Treatments to Reduce Alloantibodies and Alloreactive B Cells
As we have learned more about the importance of alloantibodies in
mediating acute and perhaps chronic rejection, therapies targeting
antibodies and B cells that were developed for other diseases are
now 
being 
used 
in 
transplant 
patients. 
For 
example,
plasmapheresis is sometimes used to treat acute antibody-
mediated rejection. In this procedure, a patient’s blood is pumped
through a machine that removes the plasma but returns the blood
cells to the circulation. In this way, circulating antibodies, including
pathogenic alloreactive antibodies, can be removed. Intravenous
immunoglobulin (IVIG), which is an accepted therapy for several
antibody-mediated inﬂammatory diseases, is also used to treat
acute antibody-mediated rejection. In IVIG therapy, pooled IgG
from normal donors is injected intravenously into a patient. The
mechanisms of action are not fully understood but likely involve
binding of the injected IgG to the patient’s Fc receptors on various
cell types, thereby reducing alloantibody production and blocking
eﬀector functions of the patient’s own antibodies. IVIG also
enhances degradation of the patient’s antibodies by competitively
inhibiting their binding to the neonatal Fc receptor (see Chapter 5).
B cell depletion by administration of rituximab, an anti-CD20
antibody that is approved for treatment of B cell lymphomas and
for autoimmune diseases, is used in some cases of acute antibody-
mediated rejection. The proteasome inhibitor bortezomib, which
kills plasma cells and is approved to treat multiple myeloma, is also
sometimes used to treat antibody-mediated allograft rejection.
Antiinflammatory Drugs
Antiinﬂammatory agents, speciﬁcally corticosteroids, are frequently
used to reduce the inﬂammatory reaction to organ allografts. The
proposed mechanism of action of these natural hormones and their
synthetic analogs is to block the synthesis and secretion of
cytokines, including TNF and IL-1, and other inﬂammatory
mediators, such as prostaglandins, reactive oxygen species, and
nitric oxide, produced by macrophages and other inﬂammatory
cells. The net result of this therapy is reduced leukocyte
recruitment, inﬂammation, and graft damage.
Current 
immunosuppressive 
protocols 
have 
dramatically
improved graft survival. Before the use of calcineurin inhibitors, the
1-year survival rate of unrelated cadaveric kidney grafts was
between 50% and 60%, with a 90% rate for grafts from living related
donors (which are beĴer matched with the recipients). Since
cyclosporine, tacrolimus, rapamycin, and MMF have been
introduced, the survival rate of unrelated cadaveric kidney grafts
has 
increased 
to 
approximately 
90% 
at 
1 
year. 
Heart
transplantation, for which HLA matching is not practical, has also
signiﬁcantly beneﬁted from the use of the various classes of
immunosuppressive drugs reviewed earlier, and now has a similar
approximately 90% 1-year survival rate and approximately 75% 5-
year survival rate. Experience with other organs is more limited, but
survival rates have also improved with modern immunosuppressive
therapy, with 10-year patient survival rates of approximately 60%
and 75% for pancreas and liver recipients, respectively, and 3-year
patient survival rates of 70% to 80% for lung recipients.
Strong immunosuppression is usually started in allograft
recipients at the time of transplantation with a combination of
drugs called induction therapy. After a few days, the drugs are
changed for long-term maintenance of immunosuppression. For
example, in the case of adult kidney transplantation, a patient may
be initially induced with an anti–IL-2 receptor or anti–T cell
depleting antibody and a high-dose corticosteroid and then
maintained on a calcineurin inhibitor, an antimetabolite, and
maybe low-dose corticosteroids. Acute rejection, when it occurs, is
managed by rapidly intensifying immunosuppressive therapy. In
modern transplantation, chronic rejection has become a more
common 
cause 
of 
allograft 
failure, 
especially 
in 
cardiac
transplantation. Chronic rejection is much less responsive to
immunosuppression than is acute rejection.
pp
j
Immunosuppressive therapy leads to increased susceptibility to
infections and tumors. The major goal of immunosuppression to
treat graft rejection is to reduce the generation and function of
helper T cells and CTLs, which mediate acute cellular rejection. It is
therefore not surprising that defense against viruses and other
intracellular pathogens and tumors, the physiologic function of T
cells, is also compromised in immunosuppressed transplant
recipients. A frequent problem in immunosuppressed patients is
reactivation of latent herpesviruses, including cytomegalovirus,
herpes simplex virus, varicella-zoster virus, and Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV). For this reason, transplant recipients are now given
prophylactic 
antiviral 
therapy 
for 
herpesvirus 
infections.
Immunosuppressed allograft recipients are also at greater risk for a
variety of opportunistic infections, which normally do not occur in
immunocompetent 
people, 
including 
fungal 
infections
(Pneumocystis 
jiroveci 
pneumonia, 
histoplasmosis,
coccidioidomycosis, 
and 
microsporidiosis) 
and 
protozoan
infections 
(toxoplasmosis 
and 
cryptosporidiosis).
Immunosuppressed allograft recipients have a higher risk for
development of cancer compared with the general population,
including various forms of skin cancer. Some of the tumors that are
more frequently found in allograft recipients are known to be
caused by viruses, and therefore they may arise because of
impaired antiviral immunity. These include uterine cervical
carcinoma, which is related to human papillomavirus infection, and
lymphomas caused by EBV infection. The lymphomas found in
allograft 
recipients 
are 
called 
post-transplantation
lymphoproliferative disorders (PTLDs), and most are derived from
EBV-infected B lymphocytes.
Despite the risk for infections and neoplasms associated with the
use of immunosuppressive drugs, the major limitation of most of
these drugs, including calcineurin inhibitors, mTOR inhibitors,
antimetabolites, and corticosteroids, is direct toxicity to cells
unrelated to immunosuppression. In some cases, the toxicities
aﬀect the same cells as rejection does, such as cyclosporine toxicity
to renal tubular epithelial cells, which can complicate the
p
p
interpretation of declining renal function in kidney allograft
recipients.
Methods to Induce Donor-Specific Tolerance
Allograft rejection may be prevented by making the host tolerant to
the alloantigens of the graft. Tolerance in this seĴing means that the
host immune system does not injure the graft despite the
withdrawal of immunosuppressive agents. It is presumed that
tolerance to an allograft will involve the same mechanisms that are
involved in tolerance to self antigens (see Chapter 15), that is,
anergy, deletion, and active suppression of alloreactive T cells by
Tregs. Tolerance is desirable in transplantation because it could be
alloantigen speciﬁc and would therefore avoid the major problems
associated with nonspeciﬁc immunosuppression, namely immune
deﬁciency leading to increased susceptibility to infection and
development of tumors and drug toxicity. In addition, achieving
graft tolerance may reduce chronic rejection, which has to date
been unaﬀected by the commonly used immunosuppressive agents
that prevent and reverse acute rejection episodes.
Various experimental approaches and clinical observations have
shown that it should be possible to achieve tolerance to allografts.
In experiments in mice, Medawar and colleagues found that if
neonatal mice of one strain (the recipient) are given spleen cells of
another strain (the donor), the recipients will subsequently accept
skin grafts from the donor. Such tolerance is alloantigen speciﬁc
because the recipients will reject grafts from mouse strains that
express MHC alleles that diﬀer from those of the spleen cell donor.
Renal transplant patients who have received blood transfusions
containing allogeneic leukocytes have a lower incidence of acute
rejection episodes than do those who have not been transfused. The
postulated explanation for this eﬀect is that the introduction of
allogeneic leukocytes by transfusion produces tolerance to
alloantigens. One underlying mechanism for tolerance induction
may be that the transfused donor cells contain immature DCs,
which induce unresponsiveness to donor alloantigens. Indeed,
pretreatment of potential recipients with blood transfusions is now
used as prophylactic therapy to reduce rejection.
Several strategies are being tested to induce donor-speciﬁc
tolerance in allograft recipients.
• Costimulatory blockade. It was postulated that recognition
of alloantigens in the absence of costimulation would lead
to T cell tolerance, and there is some experimental evidence
in animals to support this. However, the clinical experience
with agents that block costimulation is that they suppress
immune responses to the allograft but do not induce long-
lived tolerance, and patients have to be maintained on the
therapy.
• Hematopoietic chimerism. We mentioned earlier that
transfusion of donor blood cells into the graft recipient
inhibits rejection. If the transfused donor cells or progeny
of the cells survive for extended periods in the recipient, the
recipient becomes a chimera. Long-term allograft tolerance
by hematopoietic chimerism has been achieved in a small
number of renal allograft recipients who received an HSC
transplant from the donor at the same time as the organ
allograft, but the risks of HSC transplantation and the
availability of appropriate donors may limit the
applicability of this approach.
• Transfer or induction of Tregs. AĴempts to generate donor-
speciﬁc Tregs in culture and to transfer these into graft
recipients are ongoing. There has been some success
reported in recipients of HSC transplants, in whom
infusions of Tregs reduce GVHD.
In rare cases, some transplants survive and function even after
immunsuppression is stopped or signiﬁcantly reduced because of
infections or toxicities. This has been most frequently observed in
liver transplant patients. Clinicians use the term operational
tolerance to refer to this phenomenon. It is not clear in most cases
if alloreactive T cell responses are reduced or extinguished. It is
also not known why this occurs most often with liver
transplantation.
Xenogeneic Transplantation
The use of solid organ transplantation as a clinical therapy is
greatly limited by the inadequate numbers of donor organs
available. For this reason, the possibility of transplantation of
organs from other mammals, such as pigs, into human recipients
has kindled great interest.
A major immunologic barrier to xenogeneic transplantation is the
presence of natural antibodies in the human recipients that cause
hyperacute rejection. More than 95% of primates have natural IgM
antibodies that are reactive with carbohydrate determinants
expressed by cells of species that are evolutionarily distant, such as
pigs, which have organs that are anatomically compatible with
humans. The majority of human anti-pig natural antibodies are
directed at a carbohydrate determinant formed by the action of a
pig α-galactosyltransferase enzyme. This enzyme places an α-linked
galactose moiety on the same substrate that in human and other
primate cells is fucosylated to form the blood group H antigen.
Investigators have produced α-galactosyltransferase gene knockout
pigs to try to circumvent this problem, but this strategy alone has
not been successful. Humans rarely produce natural antibodies
against carbohydrate determinants of closely related species, such
as chimpanzees. Thus, organs from chimpanzees or other higher
primates might theoretically be accepted in humans. However,
ethical and logistic concerns have limited such procedures.
Natural antibodies against xenografts induce hyperacute
rejection by the same mechanisms as those seen in hyperacute
allograft rejection. These mechanisms include the generation of
endothelial cell procoagulants and platelet-aggregating substances,
coupled with the loss of endothelial anticoagulant mechanisms.
However, the consequences of activation of human complement on
pig cells are typically more severe than the consequences of
activation of complement by natural antibodies on human
allogeneic cells. This may be because some of the complement
regulatory proteins made by pig cells are not able to interact with
human complement proteins and thus cannot limit the extent of
injury induced by the human complement system (see Chapter 13).
For these reasons, investigators have developed genetically
modiﬁed pigs that are transgenic for human complement
regulatory proteins. The CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing technology is
now being applied to generate pigs with multiple genetic
modiﬁcations chosen to reduce xenograft rejection.
Even when hyperacute rejection is prevented, xenografts are
often damaged by a form of acute vascular rejection that occurs
within 2 to 3 days of transplantation. This form of rejection has
been called delayed xenograft rejection, accelerated acute rejection,
or acute vascular rejection and is characterized by intravascular
thrombosis and necrosis of vessel walls. The mechanisms of
delayed xenograft rejection are incompletely understood; recent
ﬁndings indicate that there may be incompatibilities between
primate platelets and porcine endothelial cells that promote
thrombosis independent of antibody-mediated damage.
Xenografts also can be rejected by T cell–mediated immune
responses to xenoantigens. The mechanisms of cell-mediated
rejection of xenografts are thought to be similar to those that we
have described for allograft rejection.
Blood Transfusion and the Abo and Rh Blood
Group Antigens
Blood transfusion is a form of transplantation in which whole blood
or blood cells from one or more individuals are transferred
intravenously into the circulation of another individual. Blood
transfusions are most often performed to replace blood lost by
hemorrhage or to correct defects caused by inadequate production
of blood cells, which may occur in a variety of diseases. The major
barrier to successful blood transfusions is the immune response to
cell surface molecules that diﬀer among individuals. The most
important alloantigen system in blood transfusion is the ABO
system, which we will discuss in detail later. Individuals who do not
express a particular blood group antigen produce natural IgM
antibodies against that antigen. If such individuals are given blood
cells expressing that antigen, the preexisting antibodies bind to the
transfused cells, activate complement, and cause transfusion
reactions, which can be life-threatening. Transfusion across an ABO
barrier may trigger an immediate hemolytic reaction, resulting in
both intravascular lysis of red blood cells, probably mediated by the
complement system, and extensive phagocytosis of antibody- and
complement-coated erythrocytes by macrophages in the liver and
spleen. Hemoglobin is liberated from the lysed red blood cells in
quantities that may be toxic for kidney cells, causing acute renal
tubular cell necrosis and kidney failure. High fever, shock, and
disseminated 
intravascular 
coagulation 
may 
also 
develop,
suggestive of release of massive amounts of cytokines (e.g., TNF or
IL-1). The disseminated intravascular coagulation consumes
cloĴing factors faster than they can be synthesized, and the patient
may paradoxically die of bleeding in the presence of widespread
cloĴing. More delayed hemolytic reactions may result from
incompatibilities of minor blood group antigens. These result in
progressive loss of the transfused red blood cells, leading to anemia
and jaundice, the laĴer a consequence of overloading the liver with
hemoglobin-derived pigments.
ABO Blood Group Antigens
The ABO antigens are carbohydrates, linked to cell surface proteins
and 
lipids, 
which 
are 
synthesized 
by 
polymorphic
glycosyltransferase enzymes that vary in activity depending on the
inherited allele (Fig. 17.14) . The ABO antigens were the ﬁrst
alloantigen system to be deﬁned in mammals. These speciﬁc
carbohydrate antigens are present on red blood cells, hence their
name, but they are also found on endothelial and some epithelial
cells. All normal individuals produce a common core glycan, which
is aĴached mainly to plasma membrane proteins. Most individuals
possess a fucosyltransferase that adds a fucose moiety to a
nonterminal sugar residue of the core glycan, and the fucosylated
glycan is called the H antigen. A single gene on chromosome 9
encodes a glycosyltransferase enzyme that may further modify the
H antigen. There are three allelic variants of this gene. The O allele
gene product is devoid of enzymatic activity. The A allele–encoded
enzyme transfers a terminal N-acetylgalactosamine moiety onto the
H antigen, and the B allele gene product transfers a terminal
galactose moiety. Individuals who are homozygous for the O allele
cannot aĴach terminal sugars to the H antigen and express only the
H antigen. In contrast, individuals who possess an A allele (AA
homozygotes, AO heterozygotes, or AB heterozygotes) form the A
antigen by adding terminal N-acetylgalactosamine to some of their
H antigens. Similarly, individuals who express a B allele (BB
homozygotes, BO heterozygotes, or AB heterozygotes) form the B
antigen by adding terminal galactose to some of their H antigens.
AB heterozygotes form both A and B antigens from some of their H
antigens. The terminology has been simpliﬁed so that OO
individuals are said to be blood type O; AA and AO individuals are
blood type A; BB and BO individuals are blood type B; and AB
individuals are blood type AB. Mutations in the gene encoding the
fucosyltransferase that produces the H antigen are rare; people who
are homozygous for such a mutation are said to have the Bombay
blood group and cannot produce H, A, or B antigens.
Individuals who express a particular A or B blood group antigen
are tolerant to that antigen, but individuals who do not express that
antigen produce natural antibodies that recognize the antigen.
Almost all individuals express the H antigen and, therefore, are
tolerant to this antigen and do not produce anti-H antibodies.
Individuals who express A or B antigens are tolerant to these
molecules and do not produce anti-A or anti-B antibodies,
respectively. However, blood group O and A individuals produce
anti-B IgM antibodies, and blood group O and B individuals
produce anti-A IgM antibodies. Individuals with the Bombay
phenotype who are unable to produce the core H antigens make
antibodies against H, A, and B antigens. On face value, it seems
g
g
paradoxical that individuals who do not express a blood group
antigen make antibodies against it. The likely explanation is that
the antibodies are produced against glycolipids of intestinal
bacteria that happen to cross-react with the ABO antigens, unless
the individual is tolerant to one or more of these. Predictably, the
presence of any blood group antigen on an individual’s red blood
cells induces tolerance to that antigen.
FIGURE 17.14  ABO blood group antigens. A, Blood
group antigens are carbohydrate structures added
onto proteins or lipids by the action of
glycosyltransferases (see text). B, Different blood
group antigens are produced by the addition of
different sugars by different inherited
glycosyltransferases. Individuals who express a
particular blood group antigen are tolerant to that
antigen but produce natural antibodies that react
with other blood group antigens.
In clinical transfusion, the choice of blood donors for a particular
recipient is based on the expression of blood group antigens and the
antibody responses to them. If a patient receives a transfusion of
red blood cells from a donor who expresses the antigen not
expressed on self red blood cells, a transfusion reaction may result
(described earlier). It follows that AB individuals can tolerate
transfusions from all potential donors and are therefore called
universal 
recipients; 
similarly, 
O 
individuals 
can 
tolerate
transfusions only from O donors but can provide blood to all
recipients and are therefore called universal donors. In general,
diﬀerences in minor blood groups lead to red blood cell lysis only
after repeated transfusions trigger a secondary antibody response.
A and B blood group antigens are expressed on many other cell
types in addition to blood cells, including endothelial cells. For this
reason, ABO typing is critical to avoid hyperacute rejection of
certain solid organ allografts, as discussed earlier in the chapter.
ABO incompatibility between mother and fetus generally does not
cause problems for the fetus because most of the anti-carbohydrate
antibodies are IgM and do not cross the placenta.
Other Blood Group Antigens
Lewis Antigen
The same glycoproteins that carry the A and B blood group
determinants can be modiﬁed by other glycosyltransferases to
generate minor blood group antigens. For example, addition of
fucose moieties at other nonterminal positions can be catalyzed by
diﬀerent fucosyltransferases and create epitopes of the Lewis
antigen system. Lewis antigens have received much aĴention from
immunologists because these carbohydrate groups serve as ligands
for E-selectin and P-selectin and thus play a role in leukocyte
migration (see Chapter 3). They are not, however, involved in
strong transfusion reactions because individuals do not make
natural antibodies against them.
Rhesus Antigen
The Rhesus (Rh) antigens, named after the monkey species in
which they were originally identiﬁed, are another clinically
important set of blood group antigens. Rh antigens are
nonglycosylated, hydrophobic cell surface proteins found in red
blood cell membranes and are structurally related to other red
blood cell membrane proteins with transporter functions. Rh
proteins are encoded by two tightly linked and highly homologous
genes, but only one of them, called RhD, is commonly considered
in clinical blood typing. This is because up to 15% of the population
has a deletion or other alteration of the RhD allele. These people,
called Rh negative, are not tolerant to the RhD antigen and will
make antibodies to the antigen if they are exposed to Rh-positive
blood cells.
The major clinical signiﬁcance of anti-Rh antibodies is related to
hemolytic reactions in developing fetuses that are similar to
transfusion reactions. Rh-negative mothers carrying an Rh-positive
fetus can be sensitized by fetal red blood cells that enter the
maternal circulation, usually during childbirth. Because the Rh
antigen is a protein, as opposed to the carbohydrate ABO antigens,
class-switched high-aﬃnity IgG antibodies speciﬁc for Rh are
produced in Rh-negative mothers. Subsequent pregnancies in
which the fetus is Rh positive are at risk because the maternal anti-
Rh IgG antibodies can cross the placenta and mediate the
destruction of the fetal red blood cells. This causes hemolytic
disease of the fetus and newborn (also called erythroblastosis
fetalis) and can be lethal for the fetus. This disease can be
prevented by administration of anti-RhD antibodies to the mother
within 72 hours of birth of the ﬁrst Rh-positive baby. The treatment
prevents the baby’s Rh-positive red blood cells that entered the
mother’s circulation from inducing the production of anti-Rh
antibodies in the mother. The exact mechanisms of action of the
administered antibodies are not clear but may include phagocytic
clearance or complement-mediated lysis of the baby’s red blood
cells before they can elicit an antibody response in the mother, or
Fc receptor–dependent feedback inhibition of the mother’s RhD-
speciﬁc B cells (see Chapter 12).
Hematopoietic Stem Cell (HSC)
Transplantation
HSC transplantation is a clinical procedure to treat diseases caused
by intrinsic defects in one or more hematopoietic lineages and more
commonly to treat cancers of blood cells. In this procedure, the
patient’s own hematopoietic cells are destroyed and HSCs from a
healthy donor are then given to the patient. We consider HSC
transplantation separately from other forms of transplantation
because this type of grafting has several unique features that are
not encountered with solid organ transplantation.
Indications, Methods, and Immune Barriers
in Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
The transplantation of pluripotent HSCs was done in the past using
an inoculum of bone marrow cells collected by aspiration, and the
procedure is often called bone marrow transplantation. In modern
clinical practice, HSCs are more often obtained from the blood of
donors, after treatment of the donor with colony-stimulating factors
that mobilize stem cells from the bone marrow. The recipient is
treated 
before 
transplantation 
with 
a 
combination 
of
chemotherapy, immunotherapy, or irradiation to free up niches for
the transferred stem cells and, in the case of treating hematopoietic
malignancies, to kill as many of the cancer stem cells as possible.
After transplantation, the injected stem cells repopulate the
recipient’s bone marrow and diﬀerentiate into all of the
hematopoietic lineages.
HSC transplantation is most often used clinically in the
treatment of leukemias and pre-leukemic conditions. The
mechanism by which HSC transplantation cures hematopoietic
neoplasms is in part the graft-versus-tumor eﬀect, in which mature
T cells present in the bone marrow or stem cell inoculum recognize
alloantigens on residual tumor cells and destroy them. NK cells in
the injected HSC inoculum may also recognize and kill leukemic
cells. Autologous HSC transplantation is used to treat the plasma
cell–derived tumor called myeloma. Because many of the neoplastic
cells are in the patient’s bone marrow, these are killed when the
bone marrow is ablated as part of the conditioning regimen. The
HSCs that are transplanted are from the same patient but they do
not contain myeloma cells because these cells do not circulate in
the blood. Thus, the function of the bone marrow is restored and
the tumor cells are eliminated. Since the transplant is autologous,
there is no risk for its rejection or GVHD (described later).
HSC transplantation is also used clinically to treat diseases
caused by inherited mutations in genes aﬀecting only cells derived
from HSCs, such as lymphocytes or red blood cells. Examples of
such diseases that can be treated by HSC transplantation are X-
linked severe combined immunodeﬁciency disease (X-SCID), IPEX
(the disease caused by FOXP3 mutations and a deﬁciency of
regulatory T cells), and hemoglobin mutations, such as beta-
thalassemia major and sickle cell disease. X-SCID has also been
treated by expressing the normal gene in the patient’s own HSCs
and transplanting them to correct the deﬁciency. The same
approach is applicable to other diseases in which the defective gene
is known and is functional in blood cells, which are produced from
HSCs. Because these transplants are autologous, they do not cause
immunologic problems.
Allogeneic 
HSCs 
are 
rejected 
by 
even 
a 
minimally
immunocompetent host, and therefore the donor and recipient must
be carefully matched at all MHC loci. The mechanisms of rejection
of HSCs are not completely known, but in addition to adaptive
immune mechanisms, HSCs may be rejected by NK cells. The role
of NK cells in bone marrow rejection has been studied in
experimental animals. Irradiated F1 hybrid mice reject bone
marrow cells donated by either inbred parent. This phenomenon,
called hybrid resistance, appears to violate the classical laws of
solid-organ transplantation (in which F1 mice do not react against
grafts from either parent, see Fig. 17.3). Hybrid resistance is seen in
T cell–deﬁcient mice, and depletion of recipient NK cells with anti–
NK cell antibodies prevents the rejection of parental bone marrow
cells. Hybrid resistance is probably due to host NK cells reacting
against bone marrow precursors that lack class I MHC molecules
expressed by the host. Recall that, normally, recognition of self
p
y
y
g
class I MHC inhibits the activation of NK cells, and, if these self
MHC molecules are missing, the NK cells are released from
inhibition (see Fig. 4.10).
Even after successful engraftment, two additional problems are
frequently associated with HSC transplantation, that is, GVHD and
immunodeﬁciency, which are discussed next.
Immunologic Complication of Hematopoietic
Stem Cell Transplantation
Graft-Versus-Host Disease
GVHD is caused by the reaction of grafted mature T cells in the HSC
inoculum with alloantigens of the host. It occurs when the host is
immunocompromised and therefore unable to reject the allogeneic
cells in the graft. In most cases, the reaction is directed against
minor histocompatibility antigens of the host because bone marrow
transplantation is not usually performed when the donor and
recipient have diﬀerences in MHC alleles. GVHD may also develop
when solid organs that contain signiﬁcant numbers of T cells are
transplanted, such as the small bowel, lung, or liver.
GVHD is a major limitation to the success of bone marrow
transplantation. 
Immediately 
after 
HSC 
transplantation,
immunosuppressive agents, including the calcineurin inhibitors
cyclosporine and tacrolimus, antimetabolites such as methotrexate,
and the mTOR inhibitor sirolimus, are given for prophylaxis against
the development of GVHD. Despite these aggressive prophylactic
strategies, GVHD is the principal cause of mortality among HSC
transplant recipients. GVHD may be classiﬁed on the basis of
histologic paĴerns into acute and chronic forms.
Acute GVHD is characterized by epithelial cell death in the skin
(Fig. 17.15A-B), liver (mainly the biliary epithelium), and
gastrointestinal tract. It is manifested clinically by rash, jaundice,
diarrhea, and gastrointestinal hemorrhage. When the epithelial cell
death is extensive, the skin or the lining of the gut may slough oﬀ.
In this circumstance, acute GVHD may be fatal.
Chronic GVHD is characterized by ﬁbrosis and atrophy of one or
more of the same organs, without evidence of acute cell death (Fig.
17.15C). Chronic GVHD may also involve the lungs and produce
obliteration of small airways, called bronchiolitis obliterans, similar
to what is seen in chronic rejection of lung allografts. When it is
severe, chronic GVHD leads to complete dysfunction of the aﬀected
organ.
In animal models, acute GVHD is initiated by mature T cells
transferred with HSCs, and elimination of mature donor T cells
from the graft can prevent the development of GVHD. In clinical
HSC transplantation, eﬀorts to eliminate T cells from the inoculum
have reduced the incidence of GVHD but also decreased the graft-
versus-leukemia eﬀect that is often critical in treating leukemias by
this type of transplantation. T cell–depleted HSC preparations also
tend to engraft poorly, perhaps because mature T cells produce
colony-stimulating factors that aid in stem cell repopulation.
Although GVHD is initiated by grafted T cells recognizing host
alloantigens, the eﬀector cells that cause epithelial cell injury are
less well deﬁned. On histologic examination, NK cells are often
aĴached to the dying epithelial cells, suggesting that NK cells are
important eﬀector cells of acute GVHD. CD8+ CTLs and cytokines
also appear to be involved in tissue injury in acute GVHD.
FIGURE 17.15  Histopathology of graft-versus-host
disease in the skin. Acute GVHD. Low-power (A)
and high-power (B) photomicrographs are shown
of a skin biopsy from a patient with acute graft-
versus-host disease (GVHD). A sparse
lymphocytic infiltrate can be seen at the dermal-
epidermal junction, and damage to the epithelial
layer is indicated by spaces at the dermal-
epidermal junction (vacuolization), cells with
abnormal keratin staining (dyskeratosis),
apoptotic keratinocytes (arrows), and
disorganization of maturation of keratinocytes
from the basal layer to the surface. Chronic
GVHD. C, Chronic GVHD showing a sparse
lymphocytic infiltrate at the dermal-epidermal
junction, which has resulted in occasional
damaged keratinocytes. The epidermis is thinned,
signifying atrophy. The underlying dermis shows
thickening of collagen bundles, indicative of
sclerosis. 
A and B, Courtesy Dr. Scott Grantor, Department of Pathology,
Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts. C, Courtesy Dr. Jarish Cohen, Department
of Pathology, University of California San Francisco.
The relationship of chronic GVHD to acute GVHD is not known
and raises issues similar to those of relating chronic allograft
rejection to acute allograft rejection. For example, chronic GVHD
may represent the ﬁbrosis of wound healing secondary to acute loss
of epithelial cells. However, chronic GVHD can arise without
evidence of prior acute GVHD. An alternative explanation is that
chronic GVHD represents a response to ischemia caused by
vascular injury.
Both acute and chronic GVHD are commonly treated with intense
immunosuppression, such as high doses of corticosteroids, but
many patients do not respond well. Therapeutic failures may be
because these treatments target only some of many eﬀector
mechanisms at play in GVHD, and some treatments may deplete
Tregs, which are important for preventing GVHD. The BTK (Bruton
tyrosine kinase) inhibitor ibrutinib, which had been previously
approved for treating B cell malignancies, also has been shown in
clinical trials to be eﬀective in treating chronic GVHD, and has
been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for this
purpose. Therapies in development include Treg cell transfer.
Immunodeficiency After Hematopoietic Stem Cell
Transplantation
HSC transplantation is often accompanied by immunodeﬁciency.
Several factors may contribute to defective immune responses in
recipients. The transplant recipients may be unable to regenerate a
complete new lymphocyte repertoire. Radiation therapy and
chemotherapy used to prepare recipients for transplantation may
deplete the patient’s memory cells and long-lived plasma cells, and
it can take a long time to regenerate these populations.
The consequence of immunodeﬁciency is that HSC transplant
recipients are susceptible to viral infections, especially reactivation
of cytomegalovirus infection, and to many bacterial and fungal
infections. They are also susceptible to EBV-provoked B cell
lymphomas. The immune deﬁciencies of HSC transplant recipients
can 
be 
more 
severe 
than 
those 
of 
conventionally
immunosuppressed patients. Therefore, the recipients commonly
receive prophylactic antibiotics, antiviral prophylaxis to prevent
cytomegalovirus infections, and antifungal prophylaxis to prevent
invasive Aspergillus infection. Recipients are also immunized
against common infections, to restore the protective immunity that
is lost because of ablation of the bone marrow before HSC
transplantation.
There is great interest in the use of pluripotent stem cells to
repair tissues that have liĴle natural regenerative capacity, such as
cardiac muscle, brain, and spinal cord. One approach is to use
embryonic stem cells, which are pluripotent stem cells derived
from the blastocyst stage of human embryos. Although embryonic
stem cells have not yet been widely used clinically, it is likely that a
major 
barrier 
to 
their 
successful 
grafting 
will 
be 
their
alloantigenicity and rejection by the recipient’s immune system. A
possible solution to this may be to use induced pluripotent stem
(iPS) cells, which can be derived from adult somatic tissues by
transduction of certain genes. The immunologic advantage of the
iPS cell approach is that these cells can be derived from somatic
cells harvested from the patient, and therefore they will not be
rejected. However, the current experience is that iPS cells do not
eﬃciently generate mature, stable cell populations in vivo, so their
potential for cell replacement may be limited. Another solution
being investigated is to remove MHC genes from allogeneic
embryonic stem cells by CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing technology.
Summary
• Allografts are tissues or organs transplanted from one
individual to a genetically nonidentical recipient. Allografts
stimulate a speciﬁc immune response called rejection that
can destroy the graft. The major molecular targets in
allograft rejection are allogeneic class I and class II major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules.
• Intact allogeneic MHC molecules may be presented on
donor antigen-presenting cells (APCs) to recipient T cells
(direct recognition), or the allogeneic MHC molecules may
be internalized by host APCs that enter the graft or reside
in draining lymphoid organs and be processed and
presented to T cells as peptides associated with self MHC
molecules (indirect recognition).
• The frequency of T cells capable of recognizing allogeneic
MHC molecules is very high, compared with T cells that
recognize any microbial peptide bound to self MHC,
explaining why the response to alloantigens is much
stronger than the response to conventional foreign
antigens.
• Graft rejection is mediated by T cells, including cytotoxic T
lymphocytes that kill graft cells and helper T cells that
cause cytokine-mediated inﬂammation resembling delayed-
type hypersensitivity reactions, and by antibodies.
• Several eﬀector mechanisms cause rejection of solid organ
grafts. Preexisting antibodies speciﬁc for donor blood
group, MHC, or other antigens cause hyperacute rejection
characterized by thrombosis of graft vessels. Alloreactive T
cells and antibodies produced in response to the graft cause
blood vessel wall damage and parenchymal cell death,
called acute rejection. Chronic rejection is characterized by
ﬁbrosis and arterial stenosis (graft vasculopathy), which
may be due to inﬂammatory reactions mediated by T cell
cytokines.
• Graft rejection may be prevented by minimizing the
immunogenicity of the graft (by limiting MHC allelic
diﬀerences) and treated by immunosuppression. Most
immunosuppression is directed at T cell responses and
entails the use of cytotoxic drugs, speciﬁc
immunosuppressive agents, and anti–T cell antibodies.
Widely used immunosuppressive agents target calcineurin,
mTOR (mechanistic target of rapamycin), and lymphocyte
DNA synthesis. Immunosuppression is often combined
with antiinﬂammatory drugs, such as corticosteroids, that
inhibit cytokine synthesis by macrophages and other cells.
Patients receiving solid organ transplants may become
immunodeﬁcient because of their therapy and are
susceptible to viral infections and malignant tumors.
• Xenogeneic transplantation of solid organs from pigs into
humans is limited by the presence of natural antibodies to
carbohydrate antigens on the cells of discordant species
that cause hyperacute rejection. Other mechanisms of
xenograft failure include antibody-mediated acute vascular
rejection, T cell–mediated immune response to xenogeneic
j
p
g
MHC molecules, and prothrombotic eﬀects of xenogeneic
endothelium on human platelets and coagulation proteins.
• The ABO blood group antigens are polymorphic
carbohydrate structures present on blood cells and
endothelium that limit transfusions and some solid organ
transplantations between individuals. Preexisting natural
anti-A or anti-B IgM antibodies are present in individuals
who do not express A or B antigens on their cells,
respectively, and these antibodies can cause transfusion
reactions and hyperacute allograft rejection.
• Rhesus (Rh) antigens are proteins on red blood cells that
can stimulate IgG antibody responses in Rh-negative
women carrying Rh-positive fetuses, and these anti-Rh
antibodies can cause hemolytic disease in Rh-positive
fetuses during subsequent pregnancies.
• Hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) transplants are performed to
treat leukemias and genetic defects restricted to
hematopoietic cells. HSC transplants are susceptible to
rejection, and recipients require intense preparatory
immunosuppression. In addition, T lymphocytes and NK
cells in the HSC grafts may respond to alloantigens of the
host and cause graft-versus-host disease (GVHD). Acute
GVHD is characterized by epithelial cell death in the skin,
intestinal tract, and liver; it may be fatal. Chronic GVHD is
characterized by ﬁbrosis and atrophy of one or more of
these same target organs and the lungs and also may be
fatal. HSC transplant recipients also often develop severe
immunodeﬁciency, rendering them susceptible to
infections.
Selected Readings
∗Indicates publications of historical interest, generally reporting
the discovery of a phenomenon or process that was later shown to
be of fundamental importance in the immune system. Many (but
not all) of these discoveries led to Nobel Prizes for the
discoverer(s). The nature of the discovery is summarized brieﬂy in
each reference.
Recognition and Rejection of Allogeneic Transplants
Brzostek J, Gascoigne N.R.J. Thymic origins of T cell receptor alloreactivity.  Transplantation
. 2017;101:1535–1541.
Ford M.L. T cell cosignaling molecules in transplantation.  Immunity . 2016;44:1020–1033.
Loupy A, Lefaucheur C. Antibody-mediated rejection of solid-organ allografts.  N Engl J
Med . 2018;379:1150–1160.
Merola J, Jane-Wit D.D, Pober J.S. Recent advances in allograft vasculopathy.  Curr Opin
Organ Transplant . 2017;22:1–7.
Thurman J.M, Panzer S.E, Le Quintrec M. The role of complement in antibody mediated
transplant rejection.  Mol Immunol . 2019;112:240–246.
Todd J.L, Palmer S.M. Danger signals in regulating the immune response to solid organ
transplantation.  J Clin Invest . 2017;127:2464–2472.
Clinical Transplantation
Chabannon C, Kuball J, Bondanza A, et al. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in its
60s: a platform for cellular therapies.  Sci Translational Med . 2018;10:eaap9630.
Dierickx D, Habermann T.M. Post-transplantation lymphoproliferative disorders in adults. 
N Engl J Med . 2018;378:549–562.
McDonald-Hyman C, Turka L.A, Blazar B.R. Advances and challenges in immunotherapy
for solid organ and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.  Sci Translational Med
. 2015;7:280rv2.
∗Merrill J.P, Murray J.E, Harrison J.H, Guild W.R. Successful homotransplantation of the
human kidney between identical twins.  JAMA . 1956;160:277–282 (The report of the ﬁrst
successful solid organ transplant, which involved donor and recipient who were idntical twins.
Murray received the Nobel Prize for this work.
See. hĴps://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/1990/thomas/lecture/.
∗Thomas E.D, Lochte Jr. H.L, Lu W.C, Ferrebee J.W. Intravenous infusion of bone marrow
in patients receiving radiation and chemotherapy.  N Engl J Med . 1957;257:491–496 (The
report of the ﬁrst successful bone marrow transplant to treat leukemeia, which involved a
donor and recipient who were identical twins. Thomas received the Nobel Prize for this work.
See hĴps://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/1990/murray/lecture/.).
Zeiser R, Blazar B.R. Acute graft-versus-host disease: biologic process, prevention, and
therapy.  N Engl J Med . 2017;377:2167–2179.
Zeiser R, Blazar B.R. Pathophysiology of chronic graft-versus-host disease and therapeutic
targets.  N Engl J Med . 2017;377:2565–2579.
Zwang N.A, Turka L.A. Transplantation immunology in 2013: new approaches to diagnosis
of rejection.  Nat Rev Nephrol . 2014;10:72–74.
Immunosuppression and Tolerance Induction to Allografts
Alessandrini A, Turka L.A. Foxp3-positive regulatory T cells and kidney allograft tolerance. 
Am J Kidney Dis . 2017;69:667–674.
Leventhal J.R, Mathew J.M. Outstanding questions in transplantation: tolerance.  Am J
Transplant . 2020;20:348–354.
McDonald-Hyman C, Turka L.A, Blazar B.R. Advances and challenges in immunotherapy
for solid organ and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.  Sci Translational Med
. 2015;7:280rv2.
Schroder P.M, Fitch Z.W, Schmiĵ R, et al. The past, present, and future of costimulation
blockade in organ transplantation.  Curr Opin Organ Transplant . 2019;24:391–401.
Waldner M, Fantus D, Solari M, Thomson A.W. New perspectives on mTOR inhibitors
(rapamycin, rapalogs and torkinibs) in transplantation.  Br J Clin Pharmacol
. 2016;82:1158–1170.
Yeung M.Y, Grimmig T, Sayegh M.H. Costimulation blockade in transplantation.  Adv Exp
Med Biol . 2019;1189:267–312.
Xenotransplantation
Rosales I.A, Colvin R.B. The pathology of solid organ xenotransplantation.  Curr Opin Organ
Transplant . 2019;24:535–542.
Sykes M, Sachs D.H. Transplanting organs from pigs to humans.  Sci Immunol
. 2019;4:eaau6298. .
Blood Group Antigens
1. Carter J.H, Flegel W.A. Red cell transfusions in the genomics era.  Semin Hematol
. 2019;56:236–240.
2. ∗Landsteiner K. Ueber Agglutinationsersche inungen normalen menschlichen blutes.
[Agglutination phenomena of normal human blood.  Wiener Klinische Wochenschrift
. 1901;46:1132–1134 (This paper describes results of serum–red blood cell agglutination
studies that demonstrated for the ﬁrst time the existence of diﬀerent blood groups. Landsteiner
went on to further characterize the ABO and Rh blood groups. These studies led to the ﬁrst
successful blood transfusions, and he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1930 for this
work. See. hĴps://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/1930/landsteiner/lecture/.
3. Lee-Sundlov M.M, Stowell S.R, Hoﬀmeister K.M. Multifaceted role of glycosylation in
transfusion medicine, platelets, and red blood cells.  J Thromb Haemost . 2020;18:1535–
1547.
4. Westhoﬀ C.M. Blood group genotyping.  Blood . 2019;133:1814–1820.
Chapter 18: Tumor Immunology
Overview of Tumor Immunity,
Tumor Antigens,
Neoantigens: Antigens Encoded by Mutated
Genes,
Antigens of Oncogenic Viruses,
Overexpressed Cellular Proteins,
Other Antigens of Tumors,
Immune Responses To Tumors,
T Lymphocytes,
Antibodies,
Natural Killer Cells,
Macrophages,
The Role of Innate and Adaptive Immunity in
Promoting Tumor Growth,
Evasion of Immune Responses by Tumors,
Molecules and Cells That Inhibit Immune
Responses to Tumors,
Loss of Tumor Antigen Expression,
Immunotherapy For Tumors,
Passive Immunotherapy With Monoclonal
Antibodies or Antibody-Like Molecules,
Adoptive Cellular Therapy With Antitumor T
Cells,
Immune Checkpoint Blockade: Targeting T Cell
Inhibitory Pathways,
Vaccination With Tumor Antigens,
Other Approaches for Stimulating Antitumor
Immunity,
Summary,
Cancer is a major health problem worldwide and one of the most
important causes of morbidity and mortality in children and adults.
The lethality of malignant tumors is due to their uncontrolled
growth and spread within normal tissues, causing damage and
functional impairment. The malignant phenotype of cancers results
from defective regulation of cell proliferation, resistance of the
tumor cells to apoptotic death, and the ability of the tumor cells to
invade host tissues and metastasize to distant sites. In addition,
reﬂecting our improved understanding of immune responses
against 
cancers 
and 
the 
therapeutic 
success 
of 
cancer
immunotherapy, we now include the ability of tumor cells to evade
host immune defense mechanisms as one of the hallmark features
of cancer. The concept of immune surveillance of cancer, which was
proposed by Macfarlane Burnet and Lewis Thomas in the 1950s,
states that a physiologic function of the immune system is to
recognize and destroy clones of transformed cells before they grow
into tumors and to kill tumors after they are formed. The existence
of immune surveillance has been demonstrated by the increased
incidence of some types of tumors in immunocompromised
experimental animals and humans. More recently, we have learned
p
y
that immune responses against many human cancers are
ineﬀective, but they can be therapeutically stimulated to destroy
tumors. In this chapter, we will describe the types of antigens that
are expressed by malignant tumors, how the immune system
recognizes and responds to these antigens, how tumors evade the
host immune system, and the application of immunologic
approaches to the treatment of cancer.
Overview of Tumor Immunity
Several characteristics of tumor antigens and immune responses to
tumors are fundamental to an understanding of tumor immunity
and for the development of strategies for cancer immunotherapy.
Tumor antigens stimulate speciﬁc adaptive immune responses that
can prevent or limit the growth and spread of the tumors. Clinical
studies, pathologic analyses of tumors, and animal experiments
have all established that although tumor cells are derived from host
cells, the tumors elicit immune responses in their hosts. Most
evidence indicates that the clinically relevant immune responses
involve T cells, and especially CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs).
Histopathologic studies show that many tumors are surrounded by
mononuclear cell inﬁltrates composed of T lymphocytes and
macrophages and that activated lymphocytes and macrophages are
present in lymph node draining the sites of tumor growth (Fig.
18.1A–C). Quantitative analyses of these inﬁltrates in colon cancers
and some other tumor types have revealed that higher numbers of
T cells, in particular CD8+ CTLs and memory cells and CD4+ Th1
cells, are associated with a beĴer prognosis than tumors with fewer
of these cells (Fig. 18.1D).
FIGURE 18.1  Lymphocytic inflammation associated
with tumors.Certain tumor types more frequently
have associated lymphocytic infiltrates, including
medullary breast carcinoma (A) and malignant
melanoma (B). Red arrows indicate malignant
cells. Yellow arrows indicate lymphocyte-rich
inflammatory infiltrates. Immunohistochemical
staining of resected tumors can be used to
enumerate different types of T cells associated
with the tumor, such as an infiltrate of CD8+ T
cells in a colonic carcinoma (C). The tumor cells
appear blue and the CD8+ T cells appear brown.
Increased density of CD3+ T cells within the
tumor, detected in this way, is associated with
longer disease-free survival (D). 
C, Courtesy Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s
Hospital. D, From Galon J, Costes A, Sanchez-Cabo F. Type,
density, and location of immune cells within human colorectal
tumors predict clinical outcome. Science. 2006;313:1960–1964.
The ﬁrst experimental demonstration that tumors can induce
protective immune responses came from studies of transplanted
tumors performed in the 1950s. A sarcoma may be induced in an
inbred mouse by painting its skin with the chemical carcinogen
methylcholanthrene (MCA). If the MCA-induced tumor is excised
and transplanted into other syngeneic mice, the tumor grows. In
contrast, if cells from the original tumor are transplanted back into
the original host, the mouse rejects this transplant and no tumor
grows. The same mouse that has become immune to its own tumor
does not reject MCA-induced tumors produced in other mice,
which have diﬀerent MCA-induced mutations and express diﬀerent
tumor antigens. Furthermore, transfer of T cells from the tumor-
bearing animal to a tumor-free animal can impart protective
immunity against that tumor. Thus, immune responses to these
tumors exhibit the deﬁning characteristics of adaptive immunity—
that is, speciﬁcity, memory, and a key role of lymphocytes.
Subsequent work showed that the frequency of spontaneous or
MCA-induced tumors in genetically immunodeﬁcient mice is
increased compared with immunologically normal mice, further
establishing a role of the immune system in tumor immune
surveillance. Immunodeﬁcient humans, such as patients with
acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome (AIDS) or transplant
recipients given immunosuppressive drugs, are at increased risk for
developing tumors, some of which are caused by viruses (reﬂecting
defective antiviral immunity), but also some tumors not known to
have a viral etiology.
Immune responses frequently fail to prevent the growth of tumors.
There may be several reasons why antitumor immunity is unable to
eradicate cancers. First, many tumors have developed specialized
mechanisms for subverting host immune responses. We will return
to these inhibitory mechanisms later in the chapter. Second, tumor
cells lose the expression of antigens that may be recognized by the
host immune system. Even tumors that do elicit eﬀective immune
responses may become less immunogenic over time because
subclones that do not express immunogenic antigens have a
selective survival advantage. Third, the rapid growth and spread of
a tumor may overwhelm the capacity of the immune system to
eﬀectively control the tumor, which requires that all the malignant
cells be eliminated.
FIGURE 18.2  Tumor neoantigens. A, Normal cells
display self peptides on MHC molecules, but there
is no T cell response due to mechanisms of self-
tolerance. B, Tumor neoantigens are most often
encoded by somatic mutations, which produce
mutated peptides that have new T cell receptor
(TCR) contact residues and are recognized as
foreign by the patient’s T cells. C, Tumors caused
by oncogenic viruses produce viral proteins that
stimulate CD8+ T cells specific for the infected
cancer cells. MHC, Major histocompatibility
complex.
Ineﬀective adaptive immune responses to cancers can be overcome
by therapeutic strategies that stimulate such responses, such that
antitumor T cells can be activated to eﬀectively kill tumor cells. As
we will discuss later in this chapter, this realization has spurred
new directions in cancer immunotherapy in which augmentation of
the host antitumor response is the goal of treatment.
The existence of speciﬁc antitumor immunity implies that tumors
must express antigens that are recognized as foreign by the host.
The nature and signiﬁcance of these antigens are described next.
Tumor Antigens
Immune responses to malignant tumors are targeted to various types
of molecules that cancer cells express and may be recognized by the
immune system. Protein antigens that stimulate T cell responses are
the most important types of antigens for protective antitumor
immunity. In the past, the term tumor antigen has been used to
encompass many diﬀerent molecules expressed by tumor cells that
are detected by the binding of antitumor antibodies, whether or not
they stimulate protective immune responses. The tumor antigens
that elicit T cell immune responses can be classiﬁed into several
groups.
Neoantigens: Antigens Encoded by Mutated
Genes
Tumor neoantigens are proteins encoded by mutated genes, which
appear foreign to the immune system because they do not exist in
normal cells and newly arise as a cancer develops. Usually, these
neoantigens are encoded by genes carrying passenger mutations,
which are point mutations or deletions that are unrelated to the
development or malignant phenotype of the tumors (Fig. 18.2B).
The occurrence of passenger mutations reﬂects the genomic
instability of cancer cells. Alternatively, a smaller number of
neoantigens may be encoded by driver mutations in tumor-
promoting oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes. Because T cells
recognize only peptides bound to major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) molecules, tumor neoantigens can be recognized only if
peptides carrying the mutated amino acid sequences can bind to
the patient’s MHC alleles. Exome sequencing of many cancers has
revealed large numbers of passenger mutations, and computer
algorithms have been used to predict which of these mutations
occur within peptide sequences that are likely to bind to the cancer
patient’s MHC alleles. Studies of cancer patients’ T cells indicate
that the tumor neoantigen peptides predicted to bind to MHC
molecules in individual patients do, in fact, stimulate T cell
responses in those patients, and that the number of diﬀerent tumor
antigen–speciﬁc T cell clones that are activated correlates with the
number of mutations in the cancer. An example of this is a subset
of cancer patients whose tumors have mutations in genes encoding
DNA mismatch repair proteins, which result in a very high
mutational burden. These patients have strong T cell responses to
their tumors and are most likely to beneﬁt from therapies designed
to activate T cells, discussed later in the chapter.
Antigens of Oncogenic Viruses
The products of oncogenic viruses function as tumor antigens and
elicit speciﬁc T cell responses that may serve to eradicate virus-
induced tumors. Viruses are implicated in the development of a
variety of tumors in humans and experimental animals. Examples
in humans include the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), which is associated
with B cell lymphomas and nasopharyngeal carcinoma, and human
papillomavirus (HPV), which is associated with carcinomas of the
uterine cervix, oropharynx, and other sites. In most of these DNA
virus–induced tumors, viral DNA integrates into host DNA and
virus-encoded protein antigens are found in the nucleus,
cytoplasm, or plasma membrane of the tumor cells (Fig. 18.2C).
These endogenously synthesized viral proteins can be processed
and presented by MHC molecules on the tumor cell surface. Some
viruses, such as hepatitis B and C, are associated with cancer but
are not directly oncogenic. It is thought they promote tumors by
inducing chronic inﬂammatory reactions in which tumor-
promoting growth factors and other signals are generated. The
tumor cells may contain viral antigens, but this is highly variable.
The ability of adaptive immunity to prevent the growth of DNA
virus–induced tumors has been established by many observations.
For instance, EBV-associated lymphomas and HPV-associated
cervical cancers arise more frequently in immunosuppressed
individuals, 
such 
as 
allograft 
recipients 
receiving
immunosuppressive therapy and patients with AIDS. The eﬃcacy
of virus-speciﬁc adaptive immunity to prevent tumors may be due
in large part to preventing infection and eliminating infected cells
before cancers develop. Vaccination to prevent infection by these
viruses also decreases the incidence of virus-associated cancers. A
vaccine against HPV has reduced the incidence of cervical cancer
and other HPV-associated lesions. The vaccine is composed of
recombinant HPV capsid proteins from the most common
oncogenic strains of HPV, which form virus-like particles free of
viral genome. Vaccination against hepatitis B virus has reduced the
incidence of HBV-associated liver cancer.
Overexpressed Cellular Proteins
Some tumor antigens are the products of genes that are silenced in
normal cells and derepressed in tumor cells or are proteins made by
normal cells but produced in excessive amounts by tumors. These
antigens are not inherently foreign for the host, but nevertheless
they stimulate immune responses. There are several possible
explanations for their immunogenicity. Normally, the antigens may
be expressed for a limited time or at a particular location—for
example, only during embryonic development or only in tissues
that are not accessible to the immune system—so there is no long-
lived immunologic tolerance to these proteins. Expression in a
tumor later in life or in locations that are not protected from
immune cells may be enough to stimulate immune responses. The
amount of antigen produced in a patient with cancer may be
abnormally high, because of overexpression in each tumor cell or
an abundance of tumor cells, and this too may be enough to elicit
an active immune response.
Major categories of unmutated tumor antigens that are more
abundant in tumors than in normal tissues include cancer-testis
antigens, proteins encoded by ampliﬁed genes, and tissue
diﬀerentiation antigens (Fig. 18.3). The expression of only some of
these structurally unaltered tumor antigens is suﬃciently diﬀerent
from expression in normal cells to stimulate protective immunity in
patients. However, many of these tumor antigens are targets for
antibody therapy and potential candidates for tumor vaccines.
• Cancer-testis antigens are proteins expressed in gametes and
trophoblasts and in many types of cancers but not in normal
somatic tissues (Fig. 18.3A) . The ﬁrst cancer-testis antigens
identiﬁed were melanoma-associated antigens (MAGEs).
They are expressed in melanomas and many other types of
tumors and in normal testis. Subsequently, several other
unrelated gene families have been identiﬁed that encode
antigens expressed by melanoma cells and are recognized
by CTL clones derived from melanoma patients. The MAGE
proteins and these other melanoma antigens are silent in
most normal tissues, except the testis and placental
trophoblast, but they are expressed in a variety of malignant
tumors. More than 200 cancer-testis genes in over 40
diﬀerent gene families have been identiﬁed. About half are
encoded by genes on the X chromosome, and the rest are
distributed on the other chromosomes. It has been
postulated that in most somatic cells, the genes encoding
these proteins are silenced by epigenetic mechanisms such
as methylation of the promoter regions, but the loci are
demethylated in cancer cells, allowing the genes to be
expressed.
• Some proteins are expressed at abnormally high levels in
tumor cells because the genes encoding these proteins are
ampliﬁed (Fig. 18.3B) . One example of such a protein is the
oncogenic epidermal growth factor variant called
HER2/NEU, which is overexpressed in some breast cancers.
There is no evidence that this protein elicits protective
immune responses in patients, presumably because it is
present in normal cells and induces tolerance. A
monoclonal antibody targeting HER2 is used to treat
patients whose tumors show high HER2 expression.
• Diﬀerentiation antigens are found on tumor cells and on the
cell types of origin of the tumors but not on cells from other
tissues (Fig. 18.3C) . Two examples of such diﬀerentiation
antigens in melanomas are tyrosinase, an enzyme involved
in melanin biosynthesis, and MART-1 (Melan A), a protein
required for melanosome function. Both CD8+ CTLs and
CD4+ helper T cell responses speciﬁc for tyrosinase and
MART-1 peptides are found in patients with melanoma,
perhaps because these antigens are expressed at high levels
due to the large number of tumor cells. However, in many
cases, diﬀerentiation antigens do not induce immune
responses because they are normal self antigens. Even in
these situations, diﬀerentiation antigens are important in
oncology because they aid in accurate diagnosis of tumor
types and serve as targets for passive immunotherapy. For
example, some lymphomas and leukemias arise from B cells
and express surface markers characteristic of this lineage,
such as CD19 and CD20. Antibody and T cell therapies
targeted against these proteins are used to treat the cancers.
FIGURE 18.3  Unmutated tumor
antigens.Proteins that are not mutated but
are expressed more abundantly by tumors
than normal cells may induce T cell response
in their hosts. Many of these tumor antigens
include proteins, such as cancer-testis
antigens, encoded by genes that are normally
not expressed in most cells of adults,
because of epigenetic suppression, but are
depressed in tumor cells (A). Some tumor
antigens may be overexpressed because of
gene amplification, such as the HER2/NEU
protein, which is abundant in many breast
carcinomas (B). Tissue-specific antigens are
proteins expressed by both cancer cells and
the normal cell types from which tumors are
derived, such as tyrosinase made by both
melanocytes and malignant melanoma cells.
Because of either gene deregulation or the
abundance of the tumor cells, the amount of
these proteins is high in the tumors, leading
to T cell responses (C).
Other Antigens of Tumors
Many aĴempts have been made to detect antigens in tumor cells
and in the plasma of patients with cancer by producing antibodies
against tumors and using these as screening reagents. Several
classes of tumor antigens have been identiﬁed by this approach. It
is, however, now clear that most of these antigens are produced
even in normal cells, especially under conditions of tissue injury
and inﬂammation. Therefore, the role of these antigens in tumor
immunity is uncertain.
Oncofetal Antigens
Oncofetal antigens were the name given to proteins thought to be
expressed at high levels in cancer cells and in fetal but not adult
tissues. However, their expression in adults is not limited to
tumors, but is increased in tissues and in the circulation in various
inﬂammatory conditions, and the antigens are found in small
quantities even in normal adult tissues. There is also no evidence
that oncofetal antigens are inducers of antitumor immunity. Thus,
their usefulness as tumor markers, targets of antibodies, or vaccine
candidates is limited. The two most studied oncofetal antigens are
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and α-fetoprotein (AFP).
CEA (CD66) is a highly glycosylated membrane protein that
functions as an intercellular adhesion molecule. High CEA
expression is normally restricted to cells in the gut, pancreas, and
liver during the ﬁrst two trimesters of gestation. Its expression is
increased in many carcinomas of the colon, pancreas, stomach, and
breast, and serum levels are also increased in these patients. Serum
CEA can, however, be elevated in the seĴing of nonneoplastic
diseases, such as chronic inﬂammatory conditions of the intestines
or liver, so it is of limited clinical utility.
AFP is a circulating glycoprotein normally synthesized and
secreted by the yolk sac and liver in fetal life. Fetal serum
concentrations can be as high as 2 to 3 mg/mL, but serum
concentrations in adults are low. Serum levels of AFP can be
elevated in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma, germ cell
tumors, and occasionally gastric and pancreatic cancers. An
elevated serum AFP level is sometimes used as an indicator of
advanced liver or germ cell tumors or of recurrence of these tumors
after treatment.
Altered Glycolipid and Glycoprotein Antigens
Most human and experimental tumors express higher than normal
levels or abnormal forms of surface glycoproteins and glycolipids,
including gangliosides, blood group antigens, and mucins. Tumors
often have dysregulated expression of the enzymes that synthesize
the carbohydrate side chains of mucins, which leads to the
appearance of tumor-speciﬁc epitopes on the carbohydrate side
chains or on the abnormally exposed polypeptide core. Several
mucins have been the focus of diagnostic and therapeutic studies.
One of these, a mucin called MUC1, is an integral membrane
protein that is normally expressed only on the apical surface of
breast ductal epithelium, a site that is relatively sequestered from
the immune system. In some carcinomas, however, MUC1 is
expressed in a nonpolarized fashion and contains new, tumor-
speciﬁc carbohydrate and peptide epitopes detectable by mouse
monoclonal antibodies. Whether eﬀective vaccines can be
developed with these epitopes remains an open question.
Immune Responses To Tumors
Both innate and adaptive immune responses to tumors can be
detected in patients and experimental animals, and various
immune mechanisms can kill tumor cells in vitro. The challenge for
tumor immunologists has been to determine which of these
mechanisms may contribute signiﬁcantly to protection against
tumors and to develop therapies that enhance these eﬀector
mechanisms in ways that are tumor speciﬁc. Recent technical
advances 
in 
characterizing 
tumor 
antigen–speciﬁc 
immune
responses and data from studies of cancer patients treated with
drugs that stimulate T cells have indicated that CTLs are the most
important contributors to host immune defense against tumors. In
this section, we will review the evidence for antitumor immunity
mediated by T cells and other immune eﬀector mechanisms.
T Lymphocytes
The principal mechanism of immune protection against tumors is
killing of tumor cells by CD8 +   CTLs (Fig. 18.4) . The ability of CTLs
to provide eﬀective antitumor immunity in vivo is clearly seen in
animal experiments using carcinogen-induced and DNA virus–
induced tumors. CTLs may perform a surveillance function by
recognizing and killing potentially malignant cells that express
peptides that are derived from tumor antigens and are presented in
association with class I MHC molecules. Tumor-speciﬁc CTLs can
be isolated from animals and humans with established tumors,
and, as discussed earlier, there is evidence that the prognosis of
human tumors, including common types such as colon carcinomas,
is more favorable when more CTLs are present within the tumor
(see Fig. 18.1D). Furthermore, mononuclear cells derived from the
inﬂammatory inﬁltrate in human solid tumors, called tumor-
inﬁltrating lymphocytes (TILs), contain CTLs with the capacity to
kill the tumor from which they were isolated. Importantly, the
inability to detect functional tumor-speciﬁc CTLs in some patients
may be because of regulatory mechanisms exploited by the tumor
to suppress CTL responses, and new therapies that block these
regulatory mechanisms lead to the development of strong CTL
responses against the tumor (discussed later).
CD8 +   T cell responses speciﬁc for tumor antigens may require
cross-presentation of the tumor antigens by dendritic cells (DCs).
Most tumor cells are not derived from antigen-presenting cells
(APCs) and therefore are not present in secondary lymphoid organs
where they can display antigens to naive T cells, nor do the tumor
cells express costimulatory molecules needed for naive T cell
activation. Thus, to initiate antitumor CD8+ T cell responses, tumor
antigens have to be presented by DCs, the best APCs for
transporting tumor antigens to secondary lymphoid organs and for
activating naive T cells. DCs at the site of a tumor can ingest tumor
cells or their protein antigens, carry the tumor antigens to lymph
nodes, and colocalize with naive CD8+ T cells (see Chapter 6).
Furthermore, the DCs can deliver the ingested proteins from
phagosomes into the cytosol so that they are processed by
proteasomes into peptides that are then displayed bound to class I
MHC molecules for recognition by CD8+ T cells (Fig. 18.5). This
process of cross-presentation, or cross-priming, is mainly carried
out by the cDC1 subset of DCs, as described in earlier chapters in
the context of initiating CD8+ responses to viruses. DCs also
express costimulators, and these or helper T cells that are activated
at the same time provide the signals needed for diﬀerentiation of
naive CD8+ T cells into tumor-speciﬁc CTLs. Once eﬀector CTLs are
generated, they are able to recognize and kill the tumor cells
without a requirement for costimulation.
CD4 +   helper T cells contribute to antitumor immune responses by
several mechanisms. CD4+ T cell responses to tumor antigens are
commonly found in animal models and patients with cancer, and
the presence of Th1 cells, like CTLs, in human tumors correlates
with good prognosis. Some studies show a therapeutic beneﬁt of
adoptive transfer of tumor antigen–speciﬁc CD4+ T cells into the
host. The antitumor eﬀects of Th1 cells may reﬂect their known role
in enhancing CD8+ T cell responses (see Chapter 11) and activating
macrophages, through the secretion of interferon-γ (IFN-γ) (see
Chapter 10). IFN-γ can increase tumor cell class I MHC expression
and sensitivity to lysis by CTLs. The importance of IFN-γ in tumor
immunity is demonstrated by the ﬁnding of increased incidence of
tumors in knockout mice lacking this cytokine, its receptor, or IFN-
γ induced signaling molecules.
FIGURE 18.4  Cytotoxic T lymphocyte response
against tumors.Tumor antigens are picked up by
host dendritic cells, and responses are initiated in
secondary lymphoid organs. Tumor-specific
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) migrate back to
the tumor and kill tumor cells. CD4+ T cell
responses against tumors involve similar initiating
steps to generate tumor-specific helper T cells,
but the antitumor effector mechanisms are
different. Other mechanisms of tumor immunity
are not shown.
FIGURE 18.5  Activation of tumor-specific CD8+ T
cells by cross-presentation.Protein tumor
antigens, or the cancer cells that produce the
antigen, are ingested by dendritic cells (DCs) into
endocytic vesicles. The antigens are then
delivered into the cytosol, where they enter the
class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
antigen processing and presentation pathway,
resulting in the display of tumor peptides bound to
class I MHC displayed on the DC surface, along
with costimulatory molecules. Naive CD8+ T cells
specific for these peptide-MHC antigens can then
be activated. APCs, Antigen-presenting cells;
CTL, cytotoxic T lymphocyte.
The demonstration that the numbers of diﬀerent types of T cells
within resected tumors correlates with the likelihood of metastatic
disease has led to the idea that determining an immune score for
cancers may be useful to assess prognosis and direct treatment
options. This has been most thoroughly studied in some medical
centers in cases of colon cancer, in which a score was given to
tumors based on the number of CD45RO+ memory T cells and
CD8+ CTLs in the margins of resected tumors. A low score was
found to predict a higher chance for relapse, metastases, and death
within 5 years compared with tumors with a high score, even when
comparing tumors with no evidence of lymph node or distant
metastases at the time of resection. In some studies, the immune
score was found to have greater prognostic value than the histologic
evaluation of the tumor. Current research is focused on expanding
the use of immune scores for a wider range of tumors and
broadening the analyses of resected tumors to include more
subsets of immune cells by immunohistochemistry and other
methods. 
Additional 
immune/inﬂammatory 
gene 
expression
paĴerns of individual tumors are also being studied and may
supplement immune scores.
Antibodies
Tumor-bearing hosts often produce antibodies against various
tumor antigens, but the signiﬁcance of these antibodies in
protecting against cancers is unknown. Antibodies may kill tumor
cells by activating complement or by antibody-dependent cell-
mediated cytotoxicity, in which Fc receptor–bearing macrophages
or natural killer (NK) cells mediate the killing. However, there is
liĴle evidence that humoral immune responses against tumors
have a signiﬁcant eﬀect in preventing the development or
progression of tumors. There are several approved and eﬀective
antitumor antibodies that are used to provide passive immunity
against tumors, discussed later.
Natural Killer Cells
NK cells are capable of killing many types of tumor cells and may
contribute to immune surveillance against cancers. Some studies
have indicated that people with defects in NK cell function or
numbers caused by genetic mutations or with lower than normal
NK cell activity without known genetic defects are at higher risk
than the general population for developing certain types of virally
caused tumors. Mouse studies also have shown that genetic defects
in NK cell function or depletion of NK cells by antibodies enhances
tumor growth and metastases. Although these ﬁndings support a
contribution of NK cells to immune surveillance, these cells usually
represent only a small fraction of the inﬂammatory inﬁltrates
present in most human and mouse tumors, and their role in
immune eradication of established tumors is not clear.
Tumor cells become susceptible to killing by NK cells when they
downregulate expression of class I MHC or they upregulate
expression of ligands that bind activating NK cell receptors. NK
cells express inhibitory receptors that bind class I MHC molecules
expressed on healthy cells (see Chapter 4). As we will see later,
some tumors lose expression of class I MHC molecules, as a result
of selection against class I MHC–expressing cells that are readily
killed by CTLs. This loss of class I MHC molecules makes the
tumors particularly good targets for NK cells. In addition, many
tumors express ligands for the NKG2D activating receptor on NK
cells, such as MIC-A, MIC-B, and ULB, and NKG2D signaling can
override inhibitory signals from class I MHC binding receptors. NK
cells also may be activated to kill tumor cells coated with antitumor
antibodies by antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity. The
tumoricidal capacity of NK cells is increased by cytokines,
including interleukin-2 (IL-2), IL-15, and IL-12, and the antitumor
eﬀects of these cytokines in vivo are partly aĴributable to
stimulation of NK cell activity.
Macrophages
Macrophages are capable of both inhibiting and promoting the
growth and spread of cancers, depending on their activation state.
Classically activated M1 macrophages, discussed in Chapter 10, can
kill many types of tumor cells. How macrophages are activated by
tumors is not known. A possible mechanism is recognition of
damage-associated molecular paĴerns from dying tumor cells by
macrophage innate immune receptors. Macrophages in tumors also
may be activated to kill tumor cells by IFN-γ produced by tumor-
speciﬁc Th1 cells, CTLs, and NK cells. This may be why a large
number of Th1 cells in some tumors is correlated with a good
prognosis. M1 macrophages can kill tumor cells by mechanisms
that they also use to kill infectious organisms, including the
liberation of lysosomal enzymes, nitric oxide, and reactive oxygen
species. We will discuss how M2 macrophages promote tumor
growth in the next section.
The Role of Innate and Adaptive Immunity in
Promoting Tumor Growth
Although much of the emphasis in tumor immunology has been on
the role of the immune system in eradicating tumors, it is clear that
the immune system may also contribute to the growth of some
solid tumors. In fact, chronic inﬂammation has long been
recognized as a risk factor for development of tumors in many
diﬀerent tissues, especially those aﬀected by chronic inﬂammatory
diseases such as BarreĴ’s esophagus and ulcerative colitis. Some
cancers associated with infections are also considered to be an
indirect result of the tumor-promoting eﬀects of the chronic
inﬂammatory states that are induced by the infectious organisms.
These include gastric carcinoma and lymphoma in the seĴing of
chronic Helicobacter pylori infection and hepatocellular carcinomas
associated with chronic hepatitis B and C virus infections. Although
the mechanisms by which chronic inﬂammation can promote
tumor development are not well understood, there are several
possibilities supported by data in rodent models.
Myeloid cells of the innate immune system are considered the
most direct tumor-promoting culprits among immune cells. They
may contribute to malignant transformation of cells by generating
free radicals that cause DNA damage and lead to mutations in
tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes. Some data suggest that
cells of the innate immune system, including mast cells,
neutrophils, and macrophages, secrete soluble factors that promote
cell cycle progression and survival of tumor cells. The transcription
factor NF-κB (nuclear factor κB), which is a key mediator of innate
immune responses, may play an important role in inﬂammation-
associated cancer progression. Tumor-associated macrophages of
the alternatively activated (M2) phenotype, as well as other cells, are
sources of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), a growth
factor that promotes angiogenesis, and matrix metalloproteinases,
enzymes that modify the extracellular tissue (Fig. 18.6). Therefore,
chronic activation of some innate immune cells is characterized by
angiogenesis and tissue remodeling, which favor tumor growth and
spread.
FIGURE 18.6  Promotion of tumor growth by the
antiinflammatory tumor microenvironment.Although
inflammation can promote malignant
transformation of cells and the development of
cancers, established tumors often create a
microenvironment that suppresses antitumor
immunity and promotes cancer cell growth.
Tumors alter the phenotype of dendritic cells in
ways that promote the differentiation of
antiinflammatory regulatory T cells and Th2 cells,
which in turn promote differentiation and
accumulation of M2 macrophages and myeloid-
derived suppressor cells. These cells block the
action of antitumor cytotoxic T lymphocytes and
Th1 cells and provide growth factors for tumor
cells and tumor blood vessels. (The blue arrows
show changes or movement of cells, the black
arrows show effects of released factors from
tumors on immune cells or vice versa, and the red
arrow refers to inhibition.)
Alternatively activated macrophages and less well-characterized
cell populations, such as myeloid-derived suppressor cells
(MDSCs), may also promote tumor growth indirectly by inhibiting
eﬀective antitumor immunity. The role of these suppressor cells in
immune evasion is discussed later.
The adaptive immune system can enhance tumor development in
several ways. In response to tumors, DCs may be conditioned to
drive CD4+ T diﬀerentiation to Th2 cells or regulatory T cells
(Tregs), both of which suppress Th1 and CTL responses that
destroy tumors and increase the development of M2 macrophages
and other cell types that promote tumor growth (see Fig. 18.6).
Experimental evidence in mice suggests that B lymphocytes may
contribute to tumor progression, but this remains controversial
because B cells also have been linked to tumor regression.
The tumor-promoting eﬀects of the immune system are
paradoxical and a topic of active investigation at present. A major
problem is that the nature of the tumor-promoting immune stimuli
varies among diﬀerent tumors, and a cell type that promotes some
tumors may inhibit others. As a result, it has been diﬃcult to
deﬁnitively establish the most important tumor-promoting
mechanisms. 
These 
eﬀects 
of 
chronic 
inﬂammation 
are
theoretically targets for pharmacologic intervention because there
is a large variety of eﬀective antiinﬂammatory drugs already
available. The challenge for oncologists is to achieve a beneﬁcial
balance in which protective antitumor immune responses are not
compromised 
while 
potentially 
harmful 
tumor-promoting
inﬂammatory reactions are controlled.
Evasion of Immune Responses by Tumors
To grow in immunocompetent hosts, tumors have to evade or resist
host immune responses. Several mechanisms of immune evasion
by tumors have been hypothesized and supported by experimental
evidence or by clinical success of therapeutic approaches that target
evasion mechanisms (Fig. 18.7). A major focus of tumor
immunology is to understand these immune evasion mechanisms,
with the goal that interventions to prevent immune evasion will
increase the immunogenicity of tumors and maximize the
eﬀectiveness of the host response. Most evasion mechanisms can be
categorized as either active inhibition of antitumor immune
responses or loss of antigens that drive these responses.
FIGURE 18.7  Mechanisms by which tumors escape
immune defenses.Antitumor immunity develops
when T cells recognize tumor antigens and are
activated. Tumor cells may evade immune
responses by losing expression of antigens or
major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
molecules, by producing ligands for T cell
inhibitory receptors and immunosuppressive
cytokines. The tumor micromovement, which
includes immunosuppressive myeloid cells and
lymphocytes, inhibits the activation, differentiation,
and infiltration of antitumor effector T cells. CTL,
Cytotoxic T lymphocyte; MDSC, myeloid-derived
supressor cell; PD-1, programmed cell death
protein-1; PD-L1, PD-ligand 1; TGF-1β,
transforming growth factor-1; Treg, regulatory T
cell;
Molecules and Cells That Inhibit Immune
Responses to Tumors
Tumors evade antitumor T cell responses by engaging T cell
inhibitory (immune checkpoint) molecules that normally function to
prevent autoimmunity or regulate immune responses to microbes.
This has been shown most clearly for CTLA-4 (cytotoxic T
lymphocyte–associated protein 4) and PD-1 (programmed cell
death protein-1), two of the best-deﬁned inhibitory pathways in T
cells (see Chapter 15). The importance of these molecules in tumor
immune evasion became clear from experimental work in mice
showing that blockade of these inhibitors enhanced anti-tumor
immunity, followed by successful clinical trials and now widely
adopted use of anti-PD-1 and anti-CTLA-4 antibodies to treat
cancers. Tumors are able to resist T cell immune aĴack by
upregulating the expression of PD-1 and CTLA-4 on tumor-speciﬁc
T cells, probably as a result of chronic T cell stimulation by
persistent tumor antigens. Tumor-inﬁltrating T cells often have a
dysfunctional (exhausted) phenotype that was ﬁrst described in the
context of chronic viral infections (see Chapter 11). Exhausted T
cells are characterized by impaired eﬀector functions and increased
expression of CTLA-4, PD-1, and other inhibitory molecules. In
addition to upregulating CTLA-4 on tumor-speciﬁc eﬀector T cells,
the tumor microenvironment may also promote diﬀerentiation of
regulatory T cells, which express CTLA-4.
For PD-1 and CTLA-4 to function as T cell inhibitors, they must
bind their ligands. The ligands for PD-1 are the B7 family proteins
PD-L1 (PD-ligand 1) and PD-L2 (see Chapter 15). Many tumors
express PD-L1 sometimes because of PDL1 gene ampliﬁcation, and
some tumors express PD-L2. IFN-γ produced by tumor-inﬁltrating
T cells also induces PD-L1 expression on tumor cells and on
myeloid cells in the tumor microenvironment. Thus, many tumors
or cells surrounding tumors can engage PD-1 on inﬁltrating T cells
and stop the T cells from performing their tumor-killing functions.
The ligands for CTLA-4 are B7-1 and B7-2, which are costimulatory
molecules mainly expressed on antigen-presenting cells in
secondary lymphoid organs that work by engaging CD28. CTLA-4
binds B7 more strongly than CD28 does and thus acts as a
competitive inhibitor of T cell costimulation (see Chapter 15). A
possible reason why tumors can exploit CTLA-4 to regulate
antitumor responses is that tumor antigens are often presented by
APCs in the absence of strong innate immunity and thus with low
levels of B7 costimulators on the APCs. These low levels may all be
preferentially bound up by the high-aﬃnity receptor CTLA-4 on
eﬀector T cells and Treg and therefore not accessible to CD28. In
addition to PD-1 and CTLA-4, other inhibitory receptors expressed
by tumor-speciﬁc T cells, including LAG3, TIM3, and TIGIT, also
may contribute to inhibition of antitumor immune responses.
Secreted products of tumor cells may suppress antitumor immune
responses. An example of an immunosuppressive tumor product is
TGF-β, which is secreted by many tumors and inhibits the
proliferation 
and 
eﬀector 
functions 
of 
lymphocytes 
and
macrophages (see Chapter 15).
Tregs may suppress T cell responses to tumors. Evidence from
mouse tumor studies and patients with cancer indicates that Tregs
can be found in the cellular inﬁltrates in certain tumors. Depletion
of Tregs in tumor-bearing mice enhances antitumor immunity and
reduces tumor growth. However, the role and prognostic value of
Tregs present within human tumors remain uncertain and may vary
among tumor types.
FIGURE 18.8  History of cancer
immunotherapy.Some of the important discoveries
in the field of cancer immunotherapy are
summarized. BCG, Bacillus Calmette-Guérin;
CAR, chimeric antigen receptor; CTLA-4,
cytotoxic T lymphocyte–associated protein 4; DC,
dendritic cell; FDA, U.S. Federal Drug
Administration; HPV, human papillomavirus; IL-2,
interleukin-2; PD-1, programmed cell death
protein-1; PD-L1, PD-ligand 1. 
Modified from Lesterhuis WJ, Haanen JB, Punt CJ. Cancer
immunotherapy—revisited. Nat Rev Drug Disc. 2011;10:591.
Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) are immature myeloid
precursors that accumulate in bone marrow, lymphoid tissues,
blood, and tumors of tumor-bearing animals and cancer patients and
suppress innate and T cell–mediated antitumor immune responses.
MDSCs are a heterogeneous collection of diﬀerent myeloid cell
types, including cells that are most similar to monocytes,
neutrophils, or DCs. In addition to patients with tumors, MDSCs
also accumulate in tissues of patients with chronic inﬂammatory
diseases. MDSCs are reported to suppress innate and adaptive
immune responses by many diﬀerent mechanisms, including
secretion of immunosuppressive cytokines, such as IL-10 and TGF-
β; promotion of Treg diﬀerentiation; and inhibition of CTL and Th1
diﬀerentiation. 
Cyclooxygenase-2–dependent 
production 
of
prostaglandin E2 may enhance the diﬀerentiation of MDSCs with
these immunosuppressive functions. Although the presence of
MDSCs in tumors correlates with impaired antitumor immune
responses, there are many gaps in our knowledge about the nature
of these cells, how they develop and function, and how they can be
targeted for therapeutic purposes. As mentioned earlier, M2
macrophages activated by tumors may also inhibit antitumor
immunity and promote tumor growth.
Loss of Tumor Antigen Expression
Immune responses to tumor cells impart selective pressures that
result in the survival and outgrowth of variant tumor cells with
reduced immunogenicity. Experiments comparing tumors that
develop in normal mice versus Rag-deﬁcient mice that lack adaptive
immunity show that only in the seĴing of a normal immune system
do tumors become less immunogenic over time, which is consistent
with selective survival of less immunogenic clones. This
phenomenon has been called immune editing, implying that the
immune response selects for changes in tumors that help them
evade the response. Given the high mitotic rate of tumor cells and
their genetic instability, mutations or deletions in genes encoding
tumor antigens are common. If these antigens are not required for
growth of the tumors or maintenance of the transformed
phenotype, the antigen-negative tumor cells will have a growth
advantage in the face of the host immune response. Recent studies
have conﬁrmed this occurs in cancer patients. Tumor-speciﬁc
antigens that drive T cell responses in the patients were identiﬁed
by full exome sequencing and identiﬁcation of mutant peptides that
bound to the patients’ MHC alleles. In those patients, tumor
subclones could be detected that no longer carried the mutations
that encode immunogenic neoantigens.
Class I MHC expression is often downregulated on tumor cells so
they cannot present any tumor antigens to CD8+ T cells. This is
likely a more eﬀective form of immune evasion than mutational
loss of individual antigens. Various tumors show decreased
synthesis of class I MHC molecules, or proteins required for class I
MHC expression on the cell surface such as β2-microglobulin, or
components of the antigen-processing machinery such as
transporter associated with antigen processing-1 (TAP1) and TAP2
and subunits of the proteasome. Loss of expression of class I MHC
molecules or of proteins involved in MHC assembly and antigen
presentation are due to mutations in the genes encoding these
molecules. Tumor cells with such mutations presumably have a
selective survival advantage because they can evade CTL-mediated
immune responses. As we discussed earlier, tumors that lose class I
MHC are more likely to be recognized by NK cells. However,
additional mutations that impair tumor cell expression of ligands
for NK cell–activating receptors may emerge, promoting the
outgrowth of subclones that also evade NK cell aĴack.
Immunotherapy For Tumors
Oncologists and immunologists have worked for many years on
immunologic approaches to treat patients with cancer, but only
recently have there been exciting and broadly applicable
breakthroughs that have been successfully used to treat patients
(Fig. 18.8). A major reason for interest in immunologic treatments
is that most established therapies for cancer rely on drugs
(chemotherapy) or radiation that kill dividing cells or block cell
division, and these treatments have harmful eﬀects on normal
proliferating cells. As a result, the treatment of cancers causes
signiﬁcant morbidity and mortality. Immune responses to tumors
can theoretically be highly speciﬁc for tumor cells and will not
injure most normal cells. Therefore, immunotherapy has the
potential for being the most tumor-speciﬁc treatment that can be
devised. Recent advances in identifying tumor antigens and
methods for genetically modifying T cells so they are speciﬁc for
those 
antigens 
have 
brought 
us 
closer 
to 
tumor-speciﬁc
immunotherapy. The breakthrough approaches now in practice that
stimulate the immune response to control tumors are not entirely
tumor antigen speciﬁc and do have side eﬀects of damaging normal
tissues. Nonetheless, these approaches provide great beneﬁt to
many patients.
Table 18.1
Most of the antibodies listed bind to tumor antigens and destroy or inhibit the growth of the
tumor cells. Antibodies that have antitumor effects by other mechanisms are indicated.
BiTE, Bispecific T cell engager; CLL, chronic lymphocytic leukemia; CTCL, cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; VEGEFA, vascular endothelial growth
factor A.
A second major reason to explore immunologic approaches for
treating tumors is that cytotoxic drugs have been unsuccessful in
achieving durable beneﬁts in most cancers that have spread in the
body beyond their site of origin. Because long-lasting memory is a
cardinal feature of adaptive immune responses and immunity is
systemic, it is possible that once an eﬀective adaptive immune
response to a tumor is initiated, it will be sustained for a long time
and will be eﬀective throughout the body. Because of this feature of
the immune response, there is hope that some immunotherapeutic
approaches will achieve long-term cures.
In this section, we describe the diﬀerent modes of tumor
immunotherapy 
that 
are 
currently 
used 
clinically 
or 
in
development.
Passive Immunotherapy With Monoclonal
Antibodies or Antibody-Like Molecules
Passive antibody therapy involves the transfer of tumor-speciﬁc
antibodies into patients, which is a rapid and theoretically very
speciﬁc approach but does not lead to long-lived immunity. Some
monoclonal antibodies have been in use to treat cancers for over 20
years, and many more are now approved or in advanced
development (Table 18.1). Furthermore, recombinant single
polypeptide proteins with antibody-like antigen-binding sites,
called single chain variable fragments, speciﬁc for tumor antigens
have been developed for cancer treatment.
• Some antitumor antibodies bind to cell surface molecules
on tumor cells and engage host eﬀector mechanisms that
kill the tumor cells (Fig. 18.9A). These mechanisms include
NK cell–mediated cytotoxicity, complement-mediated lysis,
and complement- or Fc receptor–mediated phagocytosis by
macrophages (see Chapter 13). Several antitumor
antibodies that are now approved for the treatment of
certain cancers work in this way. For example, as mentioned
earlier, anti-CD20 is used for treating B cell lymphomas,
and it works by depleting all CD20-expressing cells,
including B cells and B cell–derived lymphoma cells, mainly
by antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity and perhaps
also by complement activation.
FIGURE 18.9  Mechanisms of action of
antitumor antibodies.Many different
monoclonal antibodies that bind directly to
molecules on the surface of cancer cells are
used as drugs to treat cancers. Some of the
main mechanisms by which these antibodies
work to kill cancer cells are shown. Other
monoclonal antibodies used for cancer
immunotherapy that target soluble growth
factors or cell surface molecules on immune
cells are not shown. ADCC, Antibody-
dependent cellular cytotoxocity; CTL,
cytotoxic T lymphocyte; FcR, Fc receptor;
NK, natural killer cell; TCR, T cell receptor.
• Immunotoxins, or conjugated monoclonal antibodies, are
antibodies speciﬁc for tumor antigens that are linked to a
chemotherapy drug or a radioisotope (Fig. 18.9B). The
rationale for these agents is they will allow high local
concentrations of the cytotoxic drug or isotope to be
delivered to the tumor cells, because of the antibody
speciﬁcity. Several drug-conjugated antibodies are
approved for clinical use, including those speciﬁc for
HER2/NEU to treat breast cancers, CD30 to treat Hodgkin’s
lymphoma, CD33 to treat acute myeloid leukemia, CD22 to
treat some acute lymphoblastic leukemias, and CD79b to
treat some B cell lymphomas. Many more antibody-drug
conjugates have been developed, but some have failed in
clinical trials because of signiﬁcant systemic toxicity due to
the nonspeciﬁc accumulation of the toxic component in
various tissues.
• Other monoclonal antibodies used in cancer therapy bind to
growth factor receptors on cancer cells and interfere with
the signaling required for tumor growth and survival (Fig.
18.9C). Anti-HER2/NEU is an approved monoclonal
antibody used to treat breast cancers that overexpress the
cell surface growth factor signaling molecule HER2/NEU.
An antibody that binds and blocks the function of the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is approved for
the treatment of metastatic colorectal cancers and head and
neck cancers. Another antibody in clinical use for several
cancers blocks an endothelial growth factor, VEGF, that
stimulates the angiogenesis that is required to maintain
tumor growth. In this case the antibody does not bind to
the tumor cell.
• Bispeciﬁc T cell engagers (BiTEs) facilitate the targeting of
host T cells of any speciﬁcity to aĴack tumor cells (Fig.
18.9D). These reagents are recombinant proteins
engineered to express two diﬀerent antigen binding sites,
one speciﬁc for a tumor antigen and the second speciﬁc for
a T cell surface molecule, usually CD3. In BiTEs, each
antigen binding site is composed of a single chain variable
fragment, which is a singe polypeptide containing tandem
g
g p
yp p
g
immunoglobulin (Ig) heavy and light chain variable
domains. The presumed mechanism of action of BiTEs,
based on in vitro studies, is the formation of immune
synapses between the tumor cells and the T cells and the
activation of the T cells by CD3 ligation. A CD19-speciﬁc
BiTE is approved for treatment of acute lymphocytic
leukemia. BiTEs speciﬁc for many other tumor antigens
have been developed, including CD20, BCMA, EpCAM,
HER2/NEU, EGFR, CEA, folate receptor, and CD33, and are
at various stages of preclinical development and clinical
trials.
Adoptive Cellular Therapy With Antitumor T
Cells
Adoptive cellular immunotherapy is the transfer of immune cells
that have antitumor reactivity into a tumor-bearing host. The
immune cells are derived from a cancer patient’s blood or solid
tumor and then are treated in various ways in vitro to expand their
numbers and enhance their antitumor activity, before reinfusion
back into the patient.
Adoptive Cellular Therapy With Autologous Tumor-Specific T
Cells
T cells speciﬁc for tumor antigens can be harvested from a patient’s
tumor tissue or blood, expanded and activated in vitro, and infused
back into the cancer patients (Fig. 18.10A) . This general approach
has been used in various trials for many years, but has had limited
success, probably because the cells that are isolated from patients
contain a low frequency of potent tumor-speciﬁc T cells. With the
advent of the technologies discussed earlier to identify the
neoantigens that drive tumor-speciﬁc T cell responses in individual
patients, there is renewed hope for adoptive therapy with T cells
speciﬁc for these antigens. The approach will involve harvesting T
cells from the blood or tumors of patients, stimulating the cells
with tumor neoantigens in vitro to increase the numbers and
functional activity of cells speciﬁc for the tumor, and then
transferring the activated T cells back into the patient. There have
already been some successes with small trials using this approach
in patients with melanoma. Another T cell adoptive therapy
approach currently in development is to transduce a patient’s T
cells to express T cell receptors (TCRs) speciﬁc for a tumor antigen
commonly expressed by a particular tumor type and displayed by a
known HLA (human leukocyte antigen) molecule. The genes
encoding the TCR polypeptide chains are derived from cloned T
cells taken from a patient with that tumor and are incorporated into
a lentiviral expression vector that can be used to infect T cells taken
from any patient with that tumor type and with the same HLA. This
approach will require identifying antigens that are targets for T
cells and expressed in the same type of tumor in diﬀerent patients.
The TCR genes may be optimized by introducing mutations that
enhance the aﬃnity of the TCRs for the antigen.
Chimeric Antigen Receptor T Cell Therapy
Adoptive therapy using T cells expressing chimeric antigen receptors
(CARs) has proved successful in some hematologic malignancies, and
this approach is being developed for other tumors (Fig 18.10B) .
CARs are genetically engineered membrane-bound receptors with
tumor antigen–speciﬁc binding sites encoded by recombinant Ig
variable genes (i.e., single chain variable fragments) and
cytoplasmic tails containing signaling domains of both the TCR
complex and T cell costimulatory receptors (Fig. 18.11). The reason
for using an antibody-like binding site as the tumor antigen
recognition receptor is that this approach avoids the problem of the
MHC restriction of TCRs, so the same CAR construct can be used
for a particular tumor type in any patient. In addition, the CARs
will be able to recognize tumor antigens even if the tumors stop
expressing MHC molecules, which is a frequent mechanism of
immune evasion. The genetically engineered cytoplasmic tails of
CARs contain signaling domains that normally serve critical roles
in T cell activation. Several variations of signaling constructs have
been used so far in CARs developed at diﬀerent centers, but all
contain the TCR ζ chain immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation
motif (ITAM) motifs and the cytoplasmic signaling motifs of
costimulatory receptors such as CD28 or CD137 (4-1BB). These
signaling motifs confer on the tumor-speciﬁc Ig-like receptor the
ability to potently activate T cells.
In current protocols, a cancer patient’s peripheral blood T cells
are isolated, infected with CAR-encoding retroviral or lentiviral
vectors, and then stimulated with anti-CD3 and/or anti-CD28
antibodies to expand their numbers. The expanded CAR-expressing
T cells are then injected back into the patient (see Fig. 18.10B). Prior
to transfer, the patients are usually treated with drugs that deplete
their own lymphocytes, which maximizes the proliferation of the
transferred CAR-T cells. The transferred T cells undergo robust
expansion in the patient, in response to tumor antigen recognition
by the Ig domain of the CAR and costimulatory signals provided by
the signaling domains. The speciﬁcities of the endogenous TCRs on
these T cells (which are still present) become irrelevant to the goal
of killing tumor cells, because all the CAR-expressing T cells can be
activated by the tumor antigen that binds to the receptor encoded
by the CAR gene. Tumor killing is achieved by both direct cytotoxic
and cytokine-mediated mechanisms. CAR-T cells speciﬁc for CD19,
a pan–B cell marker expressed on B cell–derived tumor cells, is
approved for treatment of various B cell malignancies that are
refractory to other treatments, including chronic lymphocytic
leukemia, acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and B cell lymphomas,
and CD20-speciﬁc CAR-T cells are approved for B cell lymphomas.
Memory CAR-T cells may persist in the treated patients, so that
surveillance 
against 
tumor 
recurrence 
is 
maintained. 
The
technologies to produce large numbers of CAR-T cells for each
patient in a short time have advanced greatly, and CAR-T cells are
now used in many medical centers.
FIGURE 18.10  Adoptive T cell therapy. (A) T cells
isolated from the blood of a cancer patient are
activated in vitro to expand their numbers and
induce effector phenotypes and are then infused
back into circulation of the same patient. Some of
these T cells that are specific for tumor antigens
and will be activated by and kill the tumor cells
expressing those antigens. (B) Chimeric antigen
receptors (CARs) are genetically engineered
membrane-bound receptors that recognize tumor
antigen by antibody-like binding sites and
generate intracellular signals that activate T cells.
CAR-T cells are generated by transducing a
cancer patient’s blood T cells in vitro with viruses
engineered to express the CARs and are
expanded in vitro before infusion back into the
patient. CAR-T cell therapy has been successful
for treatment of certain leukemias and
lymphomas. IL-2, interleukin-2.
There remain some signiﬁcant roadblocks that will need to be
overcome for successful expansion of the use of CAR-T cell therapy.
• The tumor antigens targeted by CAR-T cells may be
expressed by some normal cells, which also will be killed. In
the case of the ﬁrst CARs in clinical use speciﬁc for CD19,
normal B cells are killed, but, if necessary, patients can be
supplemented with pooled Ig to make up for the lack of B
cells. Because long-lived antibody-producing plasma cells
found in adult bone marrow and mucosal tissues do not
express CD19 and are not killed, they continue to provide
antibody-mediated immunity in adult patients treated with
CD19-speciﬁc CAR-T cells.
• Another problem commonly encountered in CAR-T cell
therapy is cytokine release syndrome, a dangerous adverse
reaction that frequently occurs soon after adoptive transfer
of the T cells into patients with a high tumor burden. In
these patients, so many of the T cells become activated at
the same time that an intense systemic inﬂammatory
response occurs due to the cytokines secreted by the T cells,
which in turn stimulate cytokine release from macrophages
and other cell types. Some patients who develop this
reaction have been successfully treated with anti–IL-6
receptor antibody. The severity of this complication can be
decreased by treating patients with cytotoxic chemotherapy
to reduce tumor burden before CAR-T cell transfer. This
limits the magnitude of the CAR-T cell activation that
occurs after transfer. Other patients have developed serious
neurotoxicity after CAR-T cell infusion, which may be
related to microvascular injury or the eﬀects of secreted
cytokines that get into the brain, and the risk for long-term
damage to the central nervous system remains a concern,
especially in children whose brains are incompletely
developed.
FIGURE 18.11  Chimeric antigen
receptor.Chimeric antigen receptors (CARs)
are composed of an extracellular
immunoglobulin single chain variable fragment
specific for a tumor antigen, and cytoplasmic
signaling domains that activate T cells, such
as the ζ chain immunoreceptor tyrosine-
based activation motif (ITAMs) and motifs in
the cytoplasmic tails of the costimulatory
receptors CD28 and 4-1BB, which promote
robust T cell activation. V H , V region of one
heavy chain; V L , V region of one light chain.
• Tumors may lose expression of the antigen being targeted
by the CAR and recur. The selection pressure imposed by
the CAR-T cells likely promotes the emergence of antigen-
loss tumor variants. This problem may be reduced by
simultaneously expressing CARs speciﬁc for two (or,
theoretically, more) tumor antigens; the chance of a tumor
clone losing multiple antigens is less.
• In some patients, transferred CAR-T cells appear to become
unresponsive over time, and initially controlled tumors
have recurred. The CAR-T cells in these patients express
markers of exhaustion (see Chapter 11), including high
levels of PD-1, and resemble the exhausted T cells
mentioned earlier. This problem can be addressed by
treating the CAR-T cell recipients with blocking antibodies
specﬁc for PD-1 or by using genome editing methods to
eliminate the PD-1 gene in the CAR-T cells. To avoid the
risk for autoimmunity induced by the PD-1–negative T cells,
endogenous TCRs are also eliminated from the T cells
before transfer. This creates T cells that have only the
introduced tumor-speciﬁc antigen receptor and do not
become exhausted because they lack immune checkpoint
molecules.
• AĴempts to treat solid nonhematologic tumors with CAR-T
cells have been hampered by diﬃculties in identifying
optimal antigen targets for CAR-T cells on solid tumors that
are not also expressed on normal cells whose destruction
would cause serious toxicity. The reason for this may be
that cell surface antigens, which have to be the targets of
the CARs, are usually not tumor-speciﬁc and are often
diﬀerentiation antigens or signaling receptors that are
expressed at some level on normal cells of particular
lineages. One approach to overcome this problem is to
identify pairs of antigens that are commonly expressed
together only on tumor cells and to transduce T cells with
two diﬀerent CARs, each speciﬁc for one of the antigens
and each with diﬀerent signaling domains, both of which
have to be engaged to activate the T cells. It is hoped that
antigens can be identiﬁed such that the likelihood of tumor
cells expressing both antigens is greater than that of any
normal cells expressing both. GeĴing the injected CAR-T
cells to migrate into the sites of solid tumors is also a
challenge. Strategies to genetically engineer the CAR-T cells
with enhanced migratory functions are in development.
Studies are also ongoing to express CARs in cells other than
CD8+ T cells, such as NK cells, with the hope that these will be
eﬀective in killing tumors but will cause less toxicity than do CAR-T
cells.
Immune Checkpoint Blockade: Targeting T
Cell Inhibitory Pathways
Blockade of T cell inhibitory molecules has emerged as one of the
most promising methods for eﬀectively enhancing patients’ immune
responses to their tumors. This approach is based on the idea that
tumor cells exploit various normal pathways of immune regulation
or tolerance to evade the host immune response, as discussed
earlier. Because these inhibitory mechanisms establish checkpoints
in immune responses, the approach of stimulating immune
responses by a drug that inhibits the inhibitors is called immune
checkpoint blockade (Fig. 18.12). The ﬁrst drug developed in this
class is a monoclonal antibody speciﬁc for CTLA-4, the receptor on
T cells that binds B7-1 and B7-2 and blocks T cell costimulation,
especially during T cell priming in secondary lymphoid organs (see
Chapter 15). Anti–CTLA-4 was ﬁrst approved as a therapy for
advanced melanoma, and it is eﬀective in stopping or slowing
tumor progression in many, but not a majority, of treated patients.
This antibody may work by blocking the action of CTLA-4
expressed on activated T cells and on Tregs. As discussed earlier, T
cell responses against tumors also may be inhibited by the PD-
L1/PD-1 pathway, which works by activating a phosphatase that
blocks the activation of eﬀector T cells. Antibody blockade of PD-1
or its ligand PD-L1 appears to be even more eﬀective than anti–
CTLA-4 in enhancing T cell killing of tumors and halting the
progression of otherwise lethal advanced cancers. Anti–PD-1 and
anti–PD-L1 antibodies also cause less severe adverse eﬀects
(described later) than does anti–CTLA-4, and these antibodies are
now approved for the treatment of many types of cancers, including
melanoma, lung carcinomas, renal carcinomas, bladder carcinomas,
colon carcinomas, Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and others. In fact, anti–
PD-1 is approved for all recurrent or metastatic tumors with
mismatch repair defects, which result in high levels of mutations
and thus production of abundant neoantigens in every histologic
type of tumor. This is the ﬁrst cancer therapy that has been
approved based on a genetic signature of the tumor regardless of
the tissue or cell of origin of the tumor. It is likely that the
antitumor T cells that respond to this type of therapy in each
patient are CD8+ T cells that recognize neoantigen-derived peptides
presented by class I MHC. Combined blockade of both PD-1 and
CTLA-4 appears to be more eﬀective against certain cancers than
either alone and is approved for several cancers.
FIGURE 18.12  Checkpoint blockade.Tumor patients
often mount ineffective T cell responses to their
tumors because of the upregulation of inhibitory
receptors such as CTLA-4 and PD-1 on the
tumor-specific T cells and expression of the ligand
PD-L1 on the tumor cells. Blocking anti–CTLA-4
antibodies (A) or anti–PD-1 or anti–PD-L1
antibodies (B) are highly effective in treating
several types of advanced tumors by releasing
the inhibition of tumor-specific T cells by these
molecules. Anti–CTLA-4 may work by blocking
CTLA-4 on responding T cells (shown) or on
regulatory T (Treg) cells. CTLA-4, Cytotoxic T
lymphocyte antigen 4; MHC, major
histocompatibility complex; PD-1, programmed
cell death protein-1; PD-L1, PD ligand-1; TCR, T
cell receptor.
Common adverse eﬀects of checkpoint blockade treatment of
cancers are autoimmune and inﬂammatory reactions, collectively
called immune-related adverse events, which is predictable in light
of the known roles of CTLA-4 and PD-1 in maintaining self-
tolerance and regulating T cell responses. The most frequent
adverse events involve inﬂammation of the colon, lung, liver, and
various endocrine organs, although many other organs and tissues,
including muscles, the heart, and central nervous system, can be
aﬀected. Some of these inﬂammatory disorders are unusual in the
absence of checkpoint blockade, such as autoimmune destruction
of the anterior pituitary gland, or acute-onset and rapid destruction
of pancreatic islets, leading to insulin-dependent diabetes. Most of
these 
adverse 
events 
can 
be 
successfully 
treated 
with
antiinﬂammatory medications such as corticosteroids or corrected
with hormone replacement therapy, but many require cessation of
the checkpoint blockade therapy and some, such as myocarditis,
have a high mortality rate.
Overall, only about 15% to 20% of patients with cancer treated
with anti–CTLA-4 and/or anti–PD-1 have objective improvement in
their disease, and, among these, some tumors recur after an initial
response. There are several possible reasons for these therapeutic
failures.
• Checkpoint blockade therapy is unlikely to work in patients
with tumors that have relatively few somatic mutations
encoding neoantigens because there will be few clones of
tumor-speciﬁc T cells that will respond.
• Many tumors do not take advantage of the CTLA-4 or PD-1–
PD-L1 pathway as a strategy to evade antitumor immunity,
but rather employ other immune evasion mechanisms.
Consistent with this concept, low levels of expression of PD-
L1 on some tumor types, detected by
immunohistochemistry, predict a poor response to anti–PD-
1 therapy.
• PD-L1–expressing tumors that initially respond to anti–PD-1
therapy may become resistant in the presence of the strong
immune response. The acquired resistance could occur by
selective growth of clones of tumor cells that express
molecules other than PD-L1 that inhibit T cell responses.
Alternatively, clones of tumor cells may be selected that
induce the T cells to express other checkpoint receptors
besides PD-1.
An important goal of cancer immunologists and oncologists is to
identify histologic or genetic features of tumors or circulating
biomarkers that may predict which patients will respond best to
which checkpoint blockade therapy. The nature of the cellular
inﬁltrate around the tumor has some predictive value of the
response to checkpoint blockade. In general, abundant eﬀector T
cells, even if they have the phenotype of dysfunctional (or
exhausted) cells, predict a good response, whereas sparse cellular
inﬁltrates or an abundance of Tregs predict poor responses. In the
future, assays for T cells expressing antigen receptors (TCRs)
speciﬁc for neoantigens may be combined with analysis of
neoantigen abundance to provide greater predictive value. The
presence of B cells in the tumor inﬁltrate also correlates with good
responses to checkpoint blockade. It is not known if this is because
B cells and antibodies contribute to antitumor immunity or if the
presence of B cells implies a robust immune response against the
tumor.
To increase the percentage of patients who respond to checkpoint
blockade, oncologists are testing the eﬃcacy of blocking other T cell
inhibitory molecules, including LAG3, TIGIT, and TIM3, alone or in
combination with anti–PD-1 or anti–CTLA-4. Other approaches
include combining checkpoint blockade with more conventional
radiation or chemotherapy protocols or combining checkpoint
blockade with tumor vaccines (discussed later), kinase inhibitors
that block oncogenic pathways in the tumors, or stimulating
(agonistic) antibodies speciﬁc for activating receptors on T cells.
Vaccination With Tumor Antigens
Vaccination of tumor-bearing individuals with tumor antigens may
result in enhanced immune responses against the tumor. The earliest
aĴempts to boost antitumor immunity relied on nonspeciﬁc
immune stimulation. More recently, vaccines composed of killed
tumor cells, recombinant tumor antigens, or DCs incubated with
tumor antigens have been tested in animal models and in clinical
trials with patients with cancer.
The identiﬁcation of peptides recognized by tumor-speciﬁc CTLs
and the identiﬁcation of mutant genes that encode tumor-speciﬁc
antigens recognized by CTLs have provided many candidate
antigens to include in tumor vaccines. New DNA sequencing
technologies are now widely used to rapidly determine all the
mutations in the protein-coding DNA sequences (exomes) of cancer
cell genomes. Prediction algorithms are applied to these data to
identify mutant peptides that are most likely to bind to the MHC
alleles of each patient. These technical advances now allow for the
precise identiﬁcation of tumor-speciﬁc neoantigens in individual
tumors, and this has stimulated eﬀorts for the development of
personalized tumor vaccines (Fig. 18.13).
Tumor vaccination strategies employ a variety of adjuvants and
delivery methods.
• Proinﬂammatory molecules are used to enhance the
numbers of activated DCs at the vaccination site. These
adjuvants include Toll-like receptor (TLR) ligands, such as
CpG DNA and mimics of double-stranded RNA (dsRNA),
and cytokines such as granulocyte-macrophage colony-
stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and IL-12.
• Tumor antigens are delivered in the form of DC vaccines
(Fig. 18.14). In this approach, DCs are puriﬁed from
patients, incubated with tumor antigens, and then injected
back into the patients. A DC-based vaccine is now approved
to treat advanced prostate cancer, but it has not proved to
be eﬀective in most patients. Technical challenges with DC
vaccines are that the cells have to be harvested from each
patient and they require expansion in cell culture, which is
diﬃcult to standardize.
• DNA vaccines and viral vectors encoding tumor antigens
are being tested in clinical trials. These may be the best
ways to induce CTL responses because the encoded
antigens are synthesized in the cytosol of cells, such as DCs,
and eﬃciently enter the class I MHC pathway of antigen
presentation.
Overall, the results of trials with many diﬀerent types of tumor
vaccines have been inconsistent and generally not very successful.
Unlike 
many 
standard 
vaccines 
against 
microbes, 
which
prophylactically prevent infections, tumor vaccines are used as
therapies that need to be eﬀective in stopping progression of
tumors that have already developed. Most tumor vaccines tried to
date have targeted antigens that are commonly shared by the same
tumor type in diﬀerent patients, and these antigens are usually
diﬀerentiation antigens also expressed on cells of the normal tissue
from which the cancer arose. Vaccines using such antigens have
generally not been successful, likely because the antigens in normal
cells induce tolerance that has to be overcome for induction of
eﬀective antitumor immunity.
The development of virus-induced tumors can be reduced by
preventive vaccination with viral antigens or aĴenuated live viruses.
As mentioned earlier, HPV vaccines have been eﬀective in
decreasing the incidence of HPV-induced premalignant lesions and
cancers in the cervix. This approach has also been extremely
successful in reducing the incidence of feline leukemia virus–
induced hematologic cancers in cats and in preventing Marek’s
disease, a herpes virus–induced lymphoma, in chickens.
FIGURE 18.13  Detecting tumor neoantigens that
elicit T cell responses.Tumor DNA can be purified
(1), and exome sequencing can detect random
mutations in the genome of cancer cells (2). A
computer algorithm then can be used to determine
which mutations occur in amino acid sequences
that encode peptides that would bind to the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) alleles in that
patient (3). The validity of the putative
neoantigenic peptides can be tested by assays of
patient T cell response to these peptides in vitro
or by testing if MHC-peptide multimeric complexes
can bind to the T cells (4). This approach is being
used to create personalized tumor vaccines. gen,
Generation; HLA, human leukocyte antigen.
FIGURE 18.14  Dendritic cell vaccines.Dendritic cells
(DCs), generated in vitro from blood monocytes
taken from a patient with a tumor can be pulsed
with defined tumor antigens and infused back into
the patient, where they will present the antigen to
T cells specific for that antigen and boost a tumor-
specific immune response. In other approaches,
the DCs are transfected with a gene encoding the
tumor antigen and sometimes also a cytokine that
promotes immune responses, and these cells are
used as vaccines.
Other Approaches for Stimulating Antitumor
Immunity
Several additional approaches have been used to enhance host
immunity against tumors, with variable success.
Cytokine Therapy
Cancer patients can be treated with cytokines that stimulate the
proliferation and diﬀerentiation of T lymphocytes and NK cells.
These cytokines can enhance the activation of DCs and tumor-
speciﬁc T cells, particularly CD8+ CTLs. Many cytokines also have
the potential to induce nonspeciﬁc inﬂammatory responses, which
by themselves may have antitumor activity. The largest clinical
experience is with high-dose IL-2 given intravenously, which has
been eﬀective in inducing measurable tumor regression in about
10% of patients with advanced melanoma and renal cell carcinoma
and is currently an approved therapy for these cancers. The use of
high-dose IL-2 is, however, limited because it stimulates the
production of toxic amounts of proinﬂammatory cytokines such as
TNF and IFN-γ, which act on vascular endothelial and other cells
and lead to a serious vascular leak syndrome.
IFN-α is approved for treatment of several cancers, including
malignant melanoma, certain lymphomas and leukemias, and
AIDS-related 
Kaposi 
sarcoma. 
The 
mechanisms 
of 
the
antineoplastic eﬀects of IFN-α probably include inhibition of tumor
cell proliferation, increased cytotoxic activity of NK cells, and
increased class I MHC expression on tumor cells, which makes
them more susceptible to killing by CTLs.
Other cytokines, such as TNF and IFN-γ, are eﬀective antitumor
agents in animal models, but their use in patients is limited by
their toxic side eﬀects. Hematopoietic growth factors, including
GM-CSF and G-CSF, are used in cancer treatment protocols to
shorten periods of neutropenia and thrombocytopenia after
chemotherapy or autologous bone marrow transplantation.
Oncolytic Viruses
Oncolytic viruses are genetically modiﬁed viruses that selectively
replicate in and cause lytic death of cancer cells, and, in doing so,
promote CTL responses speciﬁc for tumor antigens that are
released. The ﬁrst oncolytic virus approved for clinical use is
talimogene laherparepvec (TVEC) to treat metastatic melanoma.
TVEC is a herpes simplex virus in which genes have been deleted to
enhance viral-induced cell lysis and reduce chronic infection of
nerves. Furthermore, a gene that encodes a TAP inhibitor has been
deleted, thus enhancing the class I MHC antigen presentation
pathway in infected cells, and a gene encoding GM-CSF has been
added, 
which 
increases 
DC 
accumulation 
in 
the 
tumor
microenvironment. TVEC is injected directly into solid tumor sites
but enhances antitumor CTL responses even at distant locations
from the injection site, which is evidence that the oncolytic virus
promotes systemic antitumor immunity. Clinical trials are being
conducted to test the eﬃcacy of TVEC on other tumor types, and
other oncolytic viruses are in development.
Nonspecific Inflammatory Stimuli
Immune responses to tumors may be stimulated by the local
administration of inﬂammatory substances or by systemic treatment
with agents that function as polyclonal activators of lymphocytes.
One of the oldest examples of tumor immunotherapy was practiced
by the 19th-century physician William Coley, who treated his cancer
patients with extracts of dead bacteria, so called Coley’s toxin. This
approach may have been intermiĴently successful due to the
induction of strong innate responses leading to production of TNF
and other cytokines that caused acute inﬂammation that killed
tumor cells. Nonspeciﬁc immune stimulation of patients with
tumors by injection of inﬂammatory substances such as killed
bacillus CalmeĴe-Guérin (BCG) at the sites of tumor growth has
been used for many years. The BCG mycobacteria activate
macrophages and thereby promote macrophage-mediated killing of
the tumor cells. In addition, the bacteria function as adjuvants and
may stimulate T cell responses to tumor antigens. Intravesicular
BCG is currently used to treat bladder cancer. Cytokine therapies,
discussed earlier, represent another method of enhancing immune
responses in a nonspeciﬁc manner.
Graft-Versus-Leukemia Effect
In leukemia patients treated by allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell
(HSC) transplant, the presence of T cells and NK cells in the HSC
inoculum can contribute to eradication of the tumor. The T cell–
mediated graft-versus-leukemia eﬀect is directed at molecules
present on the recipient’s hematopoietic cells, including the
leukemia cells, that are recognized as foreign by the administered T
cells. Donor NK cells respond to the tumor cells because tumors
may express low levels of class I MHC molecules or they express
class I MHC alleles not recognized by the donor NK cells. Recall
that recognition of self class I MHC normally inhibits the activation
of NK cells (see Chapter 4). The challenge in use of this treatment
to improve clinical outcome is to minimize the dangerous graft-
versus-host disease that may be mediated by the same donor T cells
(see Chapter 17).
The remarkable recent advances in cancer immunotherapy
promise to dramatically change the care of patients with these
dreaded diseases. The success of checkpoint blockade for many
solid tumors and of CAR-T cell infusion for hematologic
malignancies has revitalized the ﬁeld of tumor immunology.
Although limitations and problems remain, the enormous eﬀort
being invested in this ﬁeld makes it likely that further advances will
happen rapidly.
Summary
• Tumors express antigens that are recognized by the immune
system, but most tumors suppress immune responses or
are weakly immunogenic, and immune responses often fail
to prevent the growth of tumors. Nonetheless, the immune
system can be therapeutically stimulated to eﬀectively kill
tumors.
• Tumor antigens recognized by cytotoxic T lymphocytes
(CTLs) are the principal inducers of and targets for
antitumor immunity. Tumor-speciﬁc neoantigens generated
by random mutations of cellular proteins, which can be
processed into major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
binding mutant peptides, are the most important, but other
tumor antigens known to stimulate host T cells include
products of mutated oncogenes, normal proteins whose
expression is dysregulated or increased in tumors, and
antigens of oncogenic viruses.
• Antibodies speciﬁc for tumor cell antigens are used for
diagnosis, and the antigens are potential targets for
antibody therapy. These antigens include oncofetal
antigens, which are expressed normally during fetal life and
whose expression is dysregulated in some tumors, altered
surface glycoproteins and glycolipids, and molecules that
are normally expressed on the cells from which the tumors
arise and are thus diﬀerentiation antigens for particular cell
types.
• Immune responses that are capable of killing tumor cells
are mediated by CTLs, natural killer (NK) cells, and
macrophages, possibly activated by tumor antigen–speciﬁc
helper T cells. Among these immune eﬀector mechanisms,
the role of CTLs in protecting individuals from tumors is
best deﬁned.
• Tumors evade immune responses by several mechanisms,
including downregulated expression of MHC molecules,
selective outgrowth of cells that do not express tumor
antigens, production of soluble immunosuppressive
substances, the engagement of inhibitory receptors on
lymphocytes by their ligands expressed on the tumor cells,
and the induction of regulatory T cells. Tumor-associated
macrophages and myeloid-derived suppressor cells, found
in most solid tumors, can suppress antitumor immunity.
• Immunotherapy for tumors includes approaches that
augment active immune responses against these tumors or
provision of tumor-speciﬁc immune eﬀectors to provide
passive immunity to the patients. Antitumor immunity may
be enhanced by blocking mechanisms of immune
regulation. Immune responses also may be actively
stimulated by vaccination with tumor cells or antigens, and
by systemic administration of cytokines that stimulate
immune responses.
p
• Antitumor antibodies are used widely in tumor
immunotherapy. The antibodies bind to molecules on the
surface of tumor cells and engage eﬀector mechanisms to
kill the tumors, including complement, NK cells, and
phagocytes, or the antibodies bind to growth factor
receptors, which blocks the signaling needed to sustain
tumor cell growth. Tumor antigen–speciﬁc antibodies also
have been conjugated with chemotherapeutic toxins or
radioisotopes, to target these agents specially to tumors.
Some genetically engineered bispeciﬁc antibodies
simultaneously bind tumor antigens and activation
receptors on T cells.
• CAR-T cell therapy is a form of cancer therapy in which a
patient’s T cells are engineered ex vivo to express a hybrid
antigen receptor (chimeric antigen receptor [CAR]) that
recognizes a tumor antigen by antibody V domains and
signals via cytoplasmic T cell receptor and costimulatory
receptor motifs. The CAR-T cells are then transferred back
to the tumor patient, where they become activated by tumor
antigens and kill the tumor cells. CAR-T cell therapy has
been eﬀective in treating some hemopoietic tumors.
• Immune checkpoint blockade is a mode of tumor
immunotherapy in which function-blocking antibodies
against inhibitory receptors on T cells or their ligands,
including PD-1 (programmed cell death protein-1), PD-L1
(PD-ligand 1), and CTLA-4 (cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen
4), are administered to remove the brakes on lymphocyte
activation and thus promote antitumor immunity by
previously inhibited host T cells speciﬁc for tumor antigens.
Checkpoint blockade has been widely adopted to treat
many types of cancers.
Selected Readings
∗Indicates publications of historical interest, generally reporting
the discovery of a phenomenon or process that was later shown to
be of fundamental importance in the immune system. Many (but
not all) of these discoveries led to Nobel Prizes for the
discoverer(s). The nature of the discovery is summarized brieﬂy in
each reference.
Immune Responses to Tumors
General
Burnet F.M. The concept of immunological surveillance.  Progr Exp Tumor Res . 1970;13:1–
27.
Egen J.G, Ouyang W, Wu L.C. Human anti-tumor immunity: insights from
immunotherapy clinical trials.  Immunity . 2020;l52:36–54.
Tumor Antigens
Schumacher T.L, Hacohen N. Neoantigens encoded in the cancer genome.  Curr Opin
Immunol . 2016;41:98–103.
Ward J.P, Gubin M.M, Schreiber R.D. The role of neoantigens in naturally occurring and
therapeutically induced immune responses to cancer.  Adv Immunol . 2016;130:25–74.
Eﬀector Mechanisms
Ahrends T, Borst J. The opposing roles of CD4(+) T cells in anti-tumour immunity. 
Immunology . 2018;154:582–592.
Borst J, Ahrends T, Babala N, et al. CD4(+) T cell help in cancer immunology and
immunotherapy.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2018;18:635–647. .
Chiossone L, Dumas P.Y, Vienne M, Vivier E. Natural killer cells and other innate lymphoid
cells in cancer.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2018;18:671–688.
DeNardo D.G, Ruﬀell B. Macrophages as regulators of tumour immunity and
immunotherapy.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2019;19:369–382.
Noy R, Pollard J.W. Tumor-associated macrophages: from mechanisms to therapy. 
Immunity . 2014;41:49–61.
Sharonov G.V, Serebrovskaya E.O, Yuzhakova D.V, et al. B cells, plasma cells and antibody
repertoires in the tumour microenvironment.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2020;20:294–307.
Tumor Evasion of Immune Responses
Chen D.S, Mellman I. Elements of cancer immunity and the cancer-immune set point. 
Nature . 2017;541:321–330.
Dysthe M, Parihar R. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells in the tumor microenvironment. 
Adv Exp Med Biol . 2020;1224:117–140.
Jayakumar A, Bothwell A.L.M. Functional diversity of myeloid-derived suppressor cells: the
multitasking hydra of cancer.  J Immunol . 2019;203:1095–1103.
O’Donnell J.S, Teng M.W.L, Smyth M.J. Cancer immunoediting and resistance to T cell-
based immunotherapy.  Nat Rev Clin Oncol . 2019;16:151–167.
Ruﬀell B, Coussens L.M. Macrophages and therapeutic resistance in cancer.  Cancer Cell
. 2015;27:462–472.
Tumor Immunotherapy
General
Demaria O, Cornen S, Daeron M, et al. Harnessing innate immunity in cancer therapy. 
Nature . 2019;574:45–56.
Hegde P.S, Chen D.S. Top 10 challenges in cancer immunotherapy.  Immunity
. 2020;52:17–35.
Waldmann AD, Friĵ JM, Lenardo MJ. A guide to cancer immunotherapy: from T cell basic
science to clinical practice. Nat Rev Immunol. 2020;May 20:1–18
Immune Checkpoint Blockade
Friĵ J.M, Lenardo M.J. Development of immune checkpoint therapy for cancer.  J Exp Med
. 2019;216:1244–1254.
Kalbasi A, Ribas .A. Tumor-intrinsic resistance to immune checkpoint blockade.  Nat Rev
Immunol . 2020;20:25–39.
Keenan T.E, Burke K.P, Van Allen E.M. Genomic correlates of response to immune
checkpoint blockade.  Nat Med . 2019;25:389–402.
*Leach DR, Krummel MF, Allison JP. Enhancement of antitumor immunity by CTLA-4
blockade. Science. 1996;271:1734–1736. (The ﬁrst demostration in mice that immune
checkpoint blockade can enhance antitumor T cell responses, which led to clinical trials and
approval of anti-CTLA-4 treatment for cancer patients. James Allison was awarded the 2018
Nobel Prize [see  hĴps://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/2018/allison/lecture ) and
Freeman GJ, Long AJ, Iwai Y, et al. Engagement of the PD-1 immunoinhibitory receptor
by a novel B7 family member leads to negative regulation of lymphocyte activation. J
Exp Med. 2000;192:1027–1034. (Honjo received the Nobel Prize for the discovery of PD-1 as
an inhibitory receptor of T cells and the use of PD-1 blockade in cancer immunotherapy. See 
hĴps://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/2018/honjo/lecture)
Patel S.A, Minn A.J. Combination cancer therapy with immune checkpoint blockade:
mechanisms and strategies.  Immunity . 2018;48:417–433.
Postow M.A, Sidlow R, Hellmann M.D. Immune-related adverse events associated with
immune checkpoint blockade.  N Engl J Med . 2018;378:158–168.
Ribas A. Releasing the brakes on cancer immunotherapy.  N Engl J Med . 2015;373:1490–
1492.
Wolchok J. PuĴing the immunologic brakes on cancer.  Cell . 2018;175:1452–1454.
Adoptive T Cell Therapy
Brightman S.E, Naradikian M.S, Miller A.M, Schoenberger S.P. Harnessing neoantigen
speciﬁc CD4 T cells for cancer immunotherapy.  J Leukocyte Biol . 2020;107:625–633.
Brown C.E, Mackall C.L. CAR T cell therapy: inroads to response and resistance.  Nat Rev
Immunol . 2019;19:73–74.
June C.H, O’Connor R.S, Kawalekar O.U, et al. CAR-T cell immunotherapy for human
cancer.  Science . 2018;359:1361–1365.
June C.H, Sadelain M. Chimeric antigen receptor therapy.  N Engl J Med . 2018;379:64–73.
Majzner R.G, Mackall C.L. Clinical lessons learned from the ﬁrst leg of the CAR T cell
journey.  Nat Med . 2019;25:1341–1355.
Singh A.K, McGuirk J.P. CAR T cells: continuation in a revolution of immunotherapy. 
Lancet Oncol . 2020;21:e168–e178.
Stroncek D.F, Reddy O, Highﬁll S, Panch S.R. Advances in T-cell immunotherapies. 
Hematol Oncol Clin North Am . 2019;33:825–837.
Yamamoto T.N, Kishton R.J, Restifo N.P. Developing neoantigen-targeted T cell-based
treatments for solid tumors.  Nat Med . 2019;25:1488–1499.
Vaccines and Oncolytic Viruses
Bommareddy P.K, SheĴigar M, Kaufman H.L. Integrating oncolytic viruses in combination
cancer immunotherapy.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2018;18:498–513.
Finn O.J. The dawn of vaccines for cancer prevention.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2018;18:183–194.
Sahin U, Tureci O. Personalized vaccines for cancer immunotherapy.  Science
. 2018;359:1355–1360.
Vormehr M, Tureci O, Sahin U. Harnessing tumor mutations for truly individualized cancer
vaccines.  Annu Rev Med . 2019;70:395–407.
Wculek S.K, Cueto F.J, Mujal A.M, et al. Dendritic cells in cancer immunology and
immunotherapy.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2020;20:7–24.
Antibodies
Thomas A, Teicher B.A, Hassan R. Antibody-drug conjugates for cancer therapy.  Lancet
Oncol . 2016;17:e254–e262.
Trabolsi A, Arumov A, Schaĵ J.H. T cell-activating bispeciﬁc antibodies in cancer therapy.  J
Immunol . 2019;203:585–592.
Chapter 19: Hypersensitivity
Disorders 
Causes of Hypersensitivity Diseases,
Mechanisms and Classification of Hypersensitivity
Reactions,
Diseases Caused by Antibodies and Antigen-Antibody
Complexes,
Diseases Caused by Antibodies Against Fixed
Cell and Tissue Antigens,
Immune Complex–Mediated Diseases,
Diseases Caused by T Lymphocytes,
Diseases Caused by Cytokine-Mediated
Inflammation,
Diseases Caused by Cytotoxic T Lymphocytes,
Therapeutic Approaches for Immunologic Diseases,
Selected Immunologic Diseases: Pathogenesis and
Therapeutic Strategies,
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE): The
Prototypic Immune Complex–Mediated
Disease,
Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA),
Multiple Sclerosis (MS),
Type 1 Diabetes,
Inflammatory Bowel Disease,
Celiac Disease,
Psoriasis,
Summary,
The immune system serves the important function of host defense
against microbial infections, but immune responses are also
capable of causing tissue injury and disease. Disorders caused by
immune responses are called hypersensitivity diseases. This term
arose from the clinical deﬁnition of immunity as sensitivity, which
is based on the observation that an individual who has been
exposed to an antigen exhibits a detectable reaction, or is sensitive,
to subsequent encounters with that antigen. Pathologic, or
injurious and excessive, reactions were then called hypersensitivity.
Normally, immune responses eradicate infectious pathogens
without serious injury to host tissues. However, these responses are
sometimes inadequately controlled, inappropriately targeted to
host tissues, or triggered by commensal microorganisms or
environmental antigens that are usually harmless. In these
situations, the normally beneﬁcial immune response is the cause of
disease.
In this chapter, we will describe the pathogenesis of diﬀerent
types of hypersensitivity reactions, with an emphasis on the eﬀector
mechanisms that cause tissue injury. We will conclude with a brief
consideration of the treatment of immunologic diseases and
examples of diseases that illustrate important principles.
Causes of Hypersensitivity Diseases
Hypersensitivity reactions may be speciﬁc for diﬀerent types of
antigens.
• Reactions against self antigens: autoimmunity. Failure of the
normal mechanisms of self-tolerance results in T cell and B
cell reactions against one’s own cells and tissues that are
called autoimmunity (see Chapter 15), and the diseases
caused by these reactions are referred to as autoimmune
diseases. Autoimmune diseases are estimated to aﬀect at
least 5% of the population in higher-income countries, and
the incidence of these disorders is rising. Many of these
diseases are more common in women than in men; the
mechanisms underlying this gender bias remain obscure.
Autoimmune diseases are usually chronic and often
debilitating and are an enormous medical and economic
burden. Although these disorders have been diﬃcult to
treat in the past, many new eﬀective therapies have been
developed since the 1990s based on scientiﬁc advances in
immunology. The mechanisms of autoimmunity were
described in Chapter 15. In this chapter, we will refer to
various autoimmune disorders to illustrate how immune
reactions against self cause disease.
• Reactions against microbes. Immune responses against
microbial antigens may cause disease if the reactions are
excessive or the microbes are unusually resistant to
eradication and thus the infections are persistent. Ongoing
T cell responses against persistent microbes may give rise
to severe inﬂammation, sometimes with the formation of
granulomas; this is the cause of tissue injury in tuberculosis
and some other chronic infections. If antibodies are
produced against microbial antigens, the antibodies may
bind to the antigens to produce immune complexes, which
deposit in tissues and trigger inﬂammation. Rarely,
antibodies or T cells against a microbe will cross-react with
self antigens and cause damage to host tissues. In some
cases involving the intestinal tract (i.e., inﬂammatory bowel
disease [IBD]), the immune response may be directed
against commensal bacteria that normally reside in the gut
and cause no harm. Sometimes the mechanisms that an
immune response uses to eradicate a pathogenic microbe
require killing infected cells, and therefore such responses
inevitably injure host tissues. For example, in hepatitis B
virus infection, the virus that infects liver cells is not
cytopathic, but it is recognized as foreign by the immune
system. Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) eliminate infected
cells, and this normal immune response damages the liver.
This type of normal reaction is not considered
hypersensitivity.
• Reactions against nonmicrobial environmental antigens.
Most healthy individuals do not react against common,
generally harmless environmental substances, but 20% or
more of the population is abnormally responsive to one or
more of these substances. These individuals produce IgE
(immunoglobulin E) antibodies that cause allergic diseases
(see Chapter 20). Some individuals become sensitized to
environmental antigens and chemicals that contact the skin
and develop T cell reactions that lead to cytokine-mediated
inﬂammation, resulting in contact sensitivity. Idiosyncratic
immunologic reactions against therapeutic drugs are also a
frequent clinical problem.
In all of these conditions, the mechanisms of tissue injury are the
same as those that normally function to eliminate infectious
pathogens. These mechanisms include innate and adaptive
immune 
responses 
involving 
phagocytes, 
antibodies, 
T
lymphocytes, mast cells, and other leukocytes and mediators of
inﬂammation. The problem in hypersensitivity diseases is that the
immune response is not controlled appropriately or is targeted to
normal tissues. Because the stimuli for these abnormal immune
responses are often impossible to eliminate (e.g., self antigens,
commensal microbes, and environmental antigens) and the
immune system has many built-in positive feedback loops
(ampliﬁcation mechanisms), once a pathologic immune response
starts, it is diﬃcult to control or to terminate it. Therefore, these
hypersensitivity diseases tend to be chronic and progressive and
pose major therapeutic challenges in clinical medicine.
In clinical situations, the term hypersensitivity is generally used
to describe to harmful immune responses against foreign antigens
(e.g., environmental antigens, drugs, microbes). However, in our
discussion, we will consider all causes of harmful immune
reactions, 
mainly 
to 
emphasize 
the 
common 
pathogenic
mechanisms.
Mechanisms and Classification of
Hypersensitivity Reactions
Hypersensitivity diseases are commonly classiﬁed according to the
type of immune response and the eﬀector mechanism responsible for
cell and tissue injury (Table 19.1). These mechanisms include some
that are predominantly dependent on antibodies and others
predominantly dependent on T cells, although humoral and cell-
mediated immunities often coexist and both contribute to tissue
injury in many hypersensitivity diseases.
• Immediate (type I) hypersensitivity is caused by IgE
antibodies speciﬁc for nonmicobial environmental antigens
and is the most prevalent type of hypersensitivity disease; it
will be discussed in detail separately in Chapter 20.
Immediate hypersensitivity diseases, commonly grouped
under allergy or atopy, are often caused by activation of
interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-5, and IL-13 producing Th2 cells and
the production of IgE antibodies, which activate mast cells
and eosinophils and induce inﬂammation.
• Antibody-mediated (type II) hypersensitivity. IgG and IgM
antibodies speciﬁc for cell surface or extracellular matrix
antigens can cause tissue injury by activating the
complement system, targeting cells for phagocytosis by
leukocytes, recruiting inﬂammatory cells, and interfering
with normal cellular functions.
• Immune complex–mediated (type III) hypersensitivity. IgM
and IgG antibodies speciﬁc for soluble antigens in the
blood form complexes with the antigens, and the immune
complexes may deposit in blood vessel walls in various
tissues, causing inﬂammation, thrombosis, and tissue
injury.
• T cell–mediated (type IV) hypersensitivity. In these
disorders, tissue injury may be due to CD4+ T lymphocytes,
which secrete cytokines that induce inﬂammation, or CD8+
CTLs, which kill target cells.
This classiﬁcation is useful because distinct types of pathologic
immune responses show diﬀerent paĴerns of tissue injury and may
vary in their tissue speciﬁcity. As a result, the diﬀerent
immunologic mechanisms cause disorders with distinct clinical and
pathologic features. However, immunologic diseases in humans are
often complex and caused by combinations of humoral and cell-
mediated immune responses and multiple eﬀector mechanisms.
This complexity is not surprising, given that a single antigen may
stimulate both humoral and cell-mediated immune responses in
which several types of antibodies and eﬀector T cells are produced.
In the discussion that follows, we will use descriptions that identify
the pathogenic mechanisms rather than the less informative
numerical designations for types of hypersensitivity.
Diseases Caused by Antibodies and Antigen-
Antibody Complexes
Antibody-mediated diseases are caused either by antibodies that
bind to antigens on particular cells or in extracellular tissues or by
antigen-antibody complexes that form in the circulation and are
deposited in vessel walls. Antibodies against cellular or tissue
antigens result in diseases in which the immunologic injury aﬀects
the cells or tissues where these antigens are present, so these
diseases are often organ-speciﬁc and not systemic. By contrast, the
manifestations of diseases caused by immune complexes reﬂect the
site of immune complex deposition and are not determined by the
cellular source of the antigen. Therefore, immune complex–
mediated diseases tend to be systemic and aﬀect multiple tissues
and organs.
TABLE 19.1
CTLs, Cytotoxic T lymphocytes; Ig, immunoglobulin.
To prove that a disease is caused by antibodies, one would need
to demonstrate that the lesions can be induced in a normal animal
by the adoptive transfer of Ig puriﬁed from the blood or aﬀected
tissues of individuals with the disease. An experiment of nature is
occasionally seen in children of mothers with antibody-mediated
diseases. These infants may be born with transient manifestations
of such diseases because of transplacental passage of antibodies.
However, in clinical situations, the diagnosis of diseases caused by
antibodies or immune complexes is usually based on the
demonstration of antibodies or immune complexes in the
circulation or deposited in tissues, as well as clinicopathologic
similarities with experimental diseases that are proved to be
antibody mediated by adoptive transfer.
Diseases Caused by Antibodies Against
Fixed Cell and Tissue Antigens
Antibody-mediated diseases are produced by antibodies that bind to
antigens on particular cells or in extracellular tissues. Antibodies
against cell and tissue antigens cause disease by three main
mechanisms:
• Opsonization and phagocytosis (Fig. 19.1A) . Antibodies
that bind to surface antigens on circulating cells may
opsonize these cells, or they may activate the complement
system, resulting in the production of complement proteins
that opsonize the cells. These opsonized cells are
phagocytosed and destroyed by phagocytes that express
receptors for the Fc portions of IgG antibodies and
receptors for complement proteins. This is the principal
mechanism of cell destruction in autoimmune hemolytic
anemia and autoimmune thrombocytopenia, in which
antibodies speciﬁc for red blood cells or platelets,
respectively, lead to the opsonization and removal of these
cells from the circulation. Splenectomy is beneﬁcial in these
diseases because the spleen is a major organ where
opsonized cells are cleared by phagocytosis and where
antibodies are produced. Antibody-coated red cells and
platelets may also be lysed by the membrane aĴack
complex of complement. The same mechanisms are
responsible for hemolysis in transfusion reactions (see
Chapter 17).
• Inﬂammation. Antibodies deposited in tissues activate
complement, leading to the liberation of breakdown
products such as C5a and C3a, which recruit neutrophils
and macrophages (Fig. 19.1B). These leukocytes express IgG
Fc receptors and complement receptors, which bind the
antibodies or aĴached complement proteins. The
leukocytes are activated by signaling from the receptors
(particularly Fc receptors), and leukocyte products
p
y
p
y
p
(including lysosomal enzymes and reactive oxygen species)
are released and cause tissue injury. Free antibodies most
often deposit in basement membranes and extracellular
matrix. An example of antibody-mediated inﬂammation
and leukocyte activation causing tissue injury is
glomerulonephritis caused by antibodies against the
glomerular basement membrane (called Goodpasture
syndrome if the antibodies also bind to basement
membranes in the lungs).
• Abnormal cellular functions. Antibodies that bind to normal
cellular receptors or other proteins may interfere with the
functions of these receptors or proteins and cause disease
without inﬂammation or tissue damage (Fig. 19.1C). For
instance, antibodies speciﬁc for the thyroid-stimulating
hormone receptor or the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
cause functional abnormalities that lead to Graves’ disease
and myasthenia gravis, respectively. Antibodies speciﬁc for
intrinsic factor, required for vitamin B12 absorption, cause
pernicious anemia. Antibodies speciﬁc for cytokines are
rare but known causes of immunodeﬁciencies.
FIGURE 19.1  Effector mechanisms of antibody-
mediated disease. A, Opsonization and
phagocytosis. Antibodies opsonize cells and
may activate complement, generating
complement products that also opsonize
cells, leading to phagocytosis of the cells
through phagocyte Fc receptors or C3b
receptors. B, Inflammation. Antibodies recruit
leukocytes by binding to Fc receptors or by
activating complement and thereby releasing
by-products that are chemotactic for
leukocytes. C, Functional abnormalities.
Antibodies specific for cell surface hormone
receptors, neurotransmitter receptors, or
secreted proteins interfere with normal
physiology. For example, in Graves ‘disease
(left panel) autoantibodies specific for thyroid
stimulating hormone (TSH) receptors in the
thyroid gland stimulate the activity of the
receptors even in the absence of TSH,
causing excess thyroid hormone release
(hyperthyroidism). In myasthenia gravis
(middle panel), autoantibodies specific for
the acetylcholine receptor on muscle cells
block the action of acetylcholine, leading to
paralysis. In autoimmune pernicious anemia
(right panel), antibodies against intrinsic
factor interfere with the absorption of vitamin
B12, resulting in a deficiency that impairs
hematopoiesis and causes anemia.
Antibodies that cause cell- or tissue-speciﬁc diseases are usually
autoantibodies produced as part of an autoimmune reaction, but
sometimes the antibodies are speciﬁc for microbes. Examples of
autoantibodies against tissue antigens are listed in Table 19.2. Less
commonly, the antibodies may be produced against a foreign (e.g.,
microbial) antigen that is immunologically cross-reactive with a
component of self tissues. In a rare sequel to streptococcal infection
called rheumatic fever, antibodies produced against the bacteria
cross-react with antigens in the heart, deposit in this organ, and
cause inﬂammation and tissue damage. Tissue deposits of
antibodies may be detected by pathologic examination in some of
these diseases, and the deposition of antibody is often associated
with local complement activation, inﬂammation, and tissue injury
(Fig. 19.2A).
TABLE 19.2
ANCA, Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.
Immune Complex–Mediated Diseases
Immune complex-mediated diseases are usually caused by antigen-
antibody complexes that form in the circulation and are deposited in
multiple tissues, producing systemic disorders (Fig. 19.3). The
immune complexes that cause disease may be composed of
antibodies bound to either self antigens or foreign antigens.
Almost all of these diseases are systemic, but a few are restricted to
kidneys, perhaps because, in those cases, complexes are formed
only in the glomerular basement membrane.
The occurrence of diseases caused by immune complexes was
suspected in the early 1900s by an astute physician named Clemens
von Pirquet. At the time, diphtheria infections were treated with
serum from horses that had been immunized with the diphtheria
toxin, which is an example of passive immunization against the
toxin by the transfer of serum containing antitoxin antibodies. Von
Pirquet noted that joint inﬂammation (arthritis), rash, and fever
developed in patients who were repeatedly injected with the
antitoxin-containing horse serum. Clinical features of this reaction
suggested that it was not due to the infection or a toxic component
of the serum itself. The symptoms appeared at least 1 week after
the ﬁrst injection of horse serum and more rapidly with each
repeated injection. Von Pirquet concluded that this disease was
caused by a host response to some component of the serum. He
suggested that the host made antibodies to horse serum proteins;
these antibodies formed complexes with the injected proteins, and
the disease was due to the antibodies or immune complexes. We
now know that his conclusions were entirely accurate. He called
this disorder serum disease; it is now known as serum sickness. It
remains a clinical issue today in individuals who receive
therapeutic antibodies produced in animals that contain nonhuman
sequences, such as antisera used to treat snakebites or rabies or
anti-thymocyte globulin used to suppress graft rejection.
Experimental Models of Immune Complex–Mediated Diseases
Serum Sickness
Much of our current knowledge of immune complex diseases is
based on analyses of experimental models of serum sickness.
Immunization of an animal such as a rabbit with a large dose of a
foreign protein antigen leads to the formation of antibodies against
the antigen (Fig. 19.4). These antibodies bind to the circulating
antigen and form immune complexes, which are initially cleared by
macrophages in the liver and spleen. As more complexes are
formed, some of them are deposited in the walls of blood vessels,
where they induce neutrophil-rich inﬂammation by activating the
classical pathway of complement and engaging leukocyte Fc
receptors (see Fig. 19.3). The consequence of this inﬂammatory
process depends on the location of the blood vessels. In skin and
most organs, the vascular wall inﬂammation damages endothelial
cells lining the vessels, which promotes thrombus formation and
thus impairs blood ﬂow to the tissues. The result is ischemic
damage and necrosis of those tissues. Capillaries in the renal
glomeruli and synovia are sites where plasma is ultraﬁltered (to
form urine and synovial ﬂuid, respectively) by passing at high
pressure through specialized basement membranes, and these
locations are among the most common sites of immune complex
deposition. Thus, some of the most common clinical and pathologic
manifestations are arthritis and nephritis; skin rash is also
frequent. The clinical symptoms are usually short-lived, and the
lesions heal unless the antigen is injected again. This type of
disease is an example of acute serum sickness. A more indolent and
prolonged disease, called chronic serum sickness, is produced by
multiple injections of small amounts of antigen, which lead to the
formation of smaller complexes that are deposited most often in
the kidneys, arteries, and lungs.
FIGURE 19.2  Pathologic features of antibody-
mediated glomerulonephritis. A,
Glomerulonephritis induced by an antibody against
the glomerular basement membrane
(Goodpasture’s syndrome). The light micrograph
shows glomerular inflammation and severe
damage, and immunofluorescence shows smooth
(linear) deposits of antibody along the basement
membrane. B, Glomerulonephritis induced by the
deposition of immune complexes (systemic lupus
erythematosus). The light micrograph shows
neutrophilic inflammation, and the
immunofluorescence and electron micrograph
show coarse (granular) deposits of antigen-
antibody complexes along the basement
membrane. 
Immunofluorescence micrographs are courtesy of Dr. Jean Olson,
Department of Pathology, University of California, San Francisco,
and the electron micrograph is courtesy of Dr. Helmut Rennke,
Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts.
FIGURE 19.3  Immune complex–mediated
injury.Circulating immune complexes deposit in
vessel walls and induce inflammation (vasculitis)
and thrombosis.
FIGURE 19.4  Sequence of immunologic responses
in experimental acute serum sickness.Injection of
bovine serum albumin into a rabbit leads to the
production of specific antibody and the formation
of immune complexes. These complexes are
deposited in multiple tissues, activate complement
(leading to a decrease in serum complement
levels), and cause inflammatory lesions, which
resolve as the complexes and the remaining
antigen are removed and free antibody (not bound
to antigen) appears in the circulation. 
Modified from Cochrane CG. Immune complex–mediated tissue
injury. In: Cohen S, Ward PA, McCluskey RT, eds. Mechanisms of
immunopathology. New York, NY: Werbel & Peck; 1979:29–48.
Copyright © 1979, Wiley-Liss, Inc.
Arthus Reaction
A localized form of experimental immune complex–mediated
vasculitis is called the Arthus reaction. It is induced by
subcutaneous injection of an antigen into a previously immunized
animal or an animal that has been given an intravenous injection of
antibody speciﬁc for the antigen. Circulating antibodies rapidly
bind to the injected antigen and form immune complexes that are
deposited in the walls of small blood vessels at the injection site.
This deposition gives rise to a local cutaneous vasculitis, with
thrombosis of the aﬀected vessels, leading to tissue necrosis. The
clinical relevance of the Arthus reaction is limited; rarely, a subject
receiving a booster dose of a vaccine may develop inﬂammation at
the site of injection because of local accumulation of immune
complexes, as in an Arthus reaction.
Pathogenesis of Immune Complex–Mediated Diseases
The amount of immune complex deposition in tissues is determined
by the nature of the complexes and the characteristics of the blood
vessels. Antigen-antibody complexes are produced during most
normal immune responses, but they cause disease only when they
are produced in excessive amounts, are not eﬃciently cleared, and
deposit in tissues. Small complexes are often not phagocytosed and
tend to be deposited in vessels more than large complexes, which
are usually cleared by phagocytes. Complexes containing cationic
antigens bind avidly to negatively charged components of the
basement membranes of blood vessels and kidney glomeruli. Such
complexes typically produce severe and long-lasting tissue injury.
Although immune complexes are often seen in joints and kidneys,
they may be deposited in small vessels in virtually any tissue.
Deposits of antibody and complement may be detected in the
vessels, and if the antigen is known, it is possible to identify
antigen molecules in the deposits as well (Fig. 19.2B). Immune
complexes deposited in vessel walls and tissues activate leukocytes
and mast cells to secrete cytokines and vasoactive mediators. These
mediators may cause more immune complex deposition in vessel
walls by increasing vascular permeability and blood ﬂow.
The major mechanism of tissue injury in immune complex diseases
is inﬂammation within the walls of blood vessels that occurs when
the antibodies of deposited complexes activate complement and bind
to leukocyte Fc receptors. These are the same mechanisms that
cause tissue injury in serum sickness, described earlier.
TABLE 19.3
Examples of Human Immune Complex–Mediated Diseases
Disease
Antigen Involved
Clinicopathologic
Manifestations
Systemic lupus
erythematosus
DNA, nucleoproteins,
others
Nephritis,
arthritis,
vasculitis
Polyarteritis nodosa
Hepatitis B virus
surface antigen (in
minority of cases)
Vasculitis
Poststreptococcal
glomerulonephritis
Streptococcal cell wall
antigens
Nephritis
Serum sickness
Various proteins
Arthritis,
vasculitis,
nephritis
Many systemic immunologic diseases in humans are caused by the
deposition of immune complexes in blood vessels (Table 19.3) .
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease in
which complexes consisting of nuclear antigens and antinuclear
antibodies deposit in blood vessels in kidney glomeruli, skin, and
many other tissues. In a disorder called polyarteritis nodosa,
immune 
complex–mediated 
vasculitis 
involves 
medium-size
muscular arteries. In a small fraction of these patients, the disease
is a late complication of viral infection and the complexes are made
up of viral antigen (e.g., hepatitis virus antigens) and antibodies.
Immune complex deposition is also the mechanism of a disease
called poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis, which develops in rare
cases after streptococcal infection and is caused by complexes of
streptococcal antigen and antibodies depositing in the glomeruli of
the kidney (see Fig. 19.2B). In some forms of glomerulonephritis,
immune complexes are not detected in the circulation, raising the
possibility that the antigens are ﬁrst planted in the kidney and the
complexes form locally.
Diseases Caused by T Lymphocytes
T lymphocytes injure tissues by either producing cytokines that
induce inﬂammation or directly killing target cells (Fig. 19.5) .
Inﬂammatory reactions are elicited mainly by CD4+ T cells of the
Th1 and Th17 subsets. In some T cell–mediated disorders, the
principal mechanism of tissue injury is killing of cells by CD8+
CTLs. The T cells that cause tissue injury may be autoreactive, or
they may be speciﬁc for foreign protein antigens that are present in
or bound to cells or tissues. T lymphocyte–mediated tissue injury
may also accompany strong protective immune responses against
persistent microbes, especially intracellular microbes that resist
eradication by phagocytes and antibodies.
A role for T cells in causing a particular immunologic disease is
suspected largely on the basis of the demonstration of T cells in
lesions and the detection of increased levels of cytokines in the
blood or tissues that may be derived from T cells. Animal models
have been useful for elucidating the pathogenesis of these
disorders.
Diseases Caused by Cytokine-Mediated
Inflammation
In immune-mediated inﬂammation, Th1 and Th17 cells secrete
cytokines that recruit and activate leukocytes. Recall that
inﬂammation is a major defense reaction of innate immunity (see
Chapter 4). When T cells are involved, the inﬂammation becomes
more severe and chronic because T cells induce the production of
potent inﬂammatory mediators for prolonged periods. IL-17,
produced by Th17 cells, promotes neutrophil recruitment;
interferon-γ (IFN-γ), produced by Th1 cells, activates macrophages;
and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and chemokines, produced by T
lymphocytes and cells of innate immunity (such as dendritic cells
[DCs] and macrophages), are involved in the recruitment and
activation of many types of leukocytes. (Th2 cytokines induce
eosinophil-rich allergic inﬂammation [type I hypersensitivity] and
are discussed in Chapter 20.) Although we emphasize CD4+ Th1
and Th17 cells as the sources of cytokines, in lesions many other
cells may produce the same cytokines. For instance, in psoriasis,
CD8+ T cells also produce IL-17. In some animal models of chronic
skin inﬂammation, a source of IL-17 early in the course of the
disease appears to be γδ T cells, and innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) in
tissues produce many of the same cytokines as do T cells (see
Chapter 4).
Tissue injury results from the products of the recruited and
activated neutrophils and macrophages, such as lysosomal enzymes
and reactive oxygen species. Cytokines produced by activated
lymphocytes 
and 
macrophages 
stimulate 
more 
leukocyte
recruitment and inﬂammation, thus propagating the damage (see
Chapter 10). Vascular endothelial cells in the lesions may express
increased levels of cytokine-regulated surface proteins such as
adhesion molecules and class II major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) molecules. The inﬂammation associated with T cell–
mediated diseases is typically chronic, but bouts of acute
inﬂammation may be superimposed on a background of chronic
inﬂammation. Delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) is an example
of such inﬂammatory reactions and is described later. Chronic
inﬂammatory reactions often produce ﬁbrosis as a result of the
secretion of cytokines and growth factors by the macrophages and
T cells that activate ﬁbroblasts and stimulate collagen production.
Many organ-speciﬁc autoimmune diseases are caused by
activation of autoreactive T cells by self antigens, leading to
cytokine release and inﬂammation. This is thought to be the major
mechanism underlying rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis
(MS), type 1 diabetes, psoriasis, and other autoimmune diseases
(Table 19.4). Some of these diseases are described in more detail at
the end of this chapter.
FIGURE 19.5  Mechanisms of T cell–mediated
diseases. A, In cytokine-mediated inflammatory
reactions, CD4+ T cells (and sometimes CD8+
cells, not shown) respond to tissue antigens by
secreting cytokines that stimulate inflammation
and activate leukocytes, leading to tissue injury.
B, In some diseases, CD8+ cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTLs) directly kill tissue cells. APC,
Antigen-presenting cell.
T cell responses speciﬁc for microbes and other foreign antigens
may also lead to inﬂammation and tissue injury. Intracellular
bacteria such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis induce strong T cell and
macrophage responses that result in granulomatous inﬂammation
and ﬁbrosis (described later); the inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis may
cause extensive tissue destruction and functional impairment,
typically in the lungs. Tuberculosis is a good example of an
infectious disease in which tissue injury is mainly due to the host
immune response (see Chapter 16). T cell responses against
intestinal bacteria are thought to underlie some forms of IBD.
A variety of skin diseases, called contact sensitivity, result from
topical exposure to chemicals and environmental antigens. These
disorders are caused by inﬂammatory reactions that are likely
triggered by neoantigens formed by the binding of the chemicals to
self proteins, including MHC molecules. Both CD4+ and CD8+ T
cells may be the source of cytokines in contact sensitivity reactions.
Examples of contact sensitivity include rashes induced by poison
ivy and poison oak (in which T cells react against self proteins that
are modiﬁed by plant chemicals called urushiols); by contact with
metals (nickel and beryllium) and a variety of chemicals, such as
thiuram, which is used in the manufacture of latex gloves; and by
therapeutic drugs. Some of these reactions become chronic and
clinically are called eczema (a clinical term also used to describe a
diﬀerent condition called atopic dermatitis, discussed in Chapter
20).
Delayed-Type Hypersensitivity (DTH)
DTH is an injurious cytokine-mediated inﬂammatory reaction
resulting from the activation of T cells, particularly CD4 +   T cells.
The reaction is called delayed because it typically develops 24 to 48
hours after antigen challenge in a previously immunized
(sensitized) individual, in contrast to immediate hypersensitivity
(allergic) reactions, which develop within minutes (described in
Chapter 20).
In the classic animal model of DTH, a guinea pig was ﬁrst
immunized by the administration of a protein antigen in adjuvant;
this step is called sensitization. About 2 weeks later, the animal was
challenged subcutaneously with the same antigen, and the
subsequent reaction was analyzed; this step is called the elicitation
phase. Humans may be sensitized for DTH reactions by microbial
infection, 
by 
contact 
sensitization 
with 
chemicals 
and
environmental antigens, or by intradermal or subcutaneous
injection of protein antigens (Fig. 19.6). Subsequent exposure to the
same antigen (called challenge) elicits the reaction. For example,
puriﬁed 
protein 
derivative 
(PPD), 
a 
protein 
antigen 
of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, elicits a DTH reaction, called the
tuberculin reaction, when it is injected into individuals who have
been exposed to M. tuberculosis. A positive tuberculin skin test
response is a widely used clinical indicator of previous or active
tuberculosis infection.
The characteristic response of DTH evolves over 24 to 48 hours.
About 4 hours after the injection of an antigen in a sensitized
individual, neutrophils accumulate around the postcapillary
venules at the injection site. By about 12 hours, the injection site
becomes inﬁltrated by T cells and blood monocytes, also organized
in a perivenular distribution (Fig. 19.7). The endothelial cells lining
these venules become enlarged and show increased organelles, and
the vessels leak plasma macromolecules. Fibrinogen escapes from
the blood vessels into the surrounding tissues, where it is
converted into ﬁbrin. The deposition of ﬁbrin, edema, and the
accumulation of T cells and monocytes within the extravascular
tissue space around the injection site cause the tissue to swell and
become ﬁrm (indurated). Induration, a diagnostic feature of DTH,
is detectable by about 18 hours after the injection of antigen and is
maximal by 24 to 48 hours. In clinical practice, loss of DTH
responses to universally encountered antigens (e.g., Candida
antigens) is an indication of deﬁcient T cell function, a condition
known as anergy. (This general loss of immune responsiveness is
diﬀerent from lymphocyte anergy, a mechanism for maintaining
tolerance to speciﬁc antigens, discussed in Chapter 15.)
TABLE 19.4
T Cell–Mediated Diseases
Disease
Speciﬁcity of
Pathogenic T Cells
Principal Mechanisms of
Tissue Injury
Rheumatoid
arthritis
Collagen?
Citrullinated
self proteins?
Inﬂammation mediated
by Th1 and Th17
cytokines. Role of
antibodies and
immune complexes?
Multiple
sclerosis
Protein antigens in
myelin (e.g.,
myelin basic
protein)
Inﬂammation mediated
by Th1 and Th17
cytokines; myelin
destruction by
activated
macrophages
Type 1 diabetes
mellitus
Antigens of
pancreatic islet
β cells (insulin,
glutamic acid
decarboxylase,
others)
T cell–mediated
inﬂammation;
destruction of islet
cells by CTLs
Inﬂammatory
bowel
disease
Enteric bacteria.
Self antigens?
Inﬂammation mediated
by Th1 and Th17
cytokines
Psoriasis
Unknown skin
antigens
Inﬂammation mediated
by T cell–derived
cytokines
Examples of human T cell–mediated diseases are listed. In many cases, the specificity of the
T cells and the mechanisms of tissue injury are inferred on the basis of the similarity with
experimental animal models of the diseases. The roles of Th1 and Th17 cells have been
inferred from experimental models and the presence of subset-specific cytokines in human
lesions. The cytokines may be produced by cells other than CD4+ T lymphocytes. Ongoing
clinical trials targeting these cytokines may provide new information about the contributions of
the cytokines in different diseases.
CTLs, Cytotoxic T lymphocytes.
Although DTH has traditionally been considered a Th1-mediated
injurious 
reaction, 
other 
T 
cells 
may 
contribute 
to 
the
inﬂammation. In some DTH lesions, neutrophils are prominent,
suggesting the involvement of Th17 cells. In infections by some
helminthic parasites, reactions against the parasite eggs elicit DTH
with a strong component of eosinophils. In these cases, a role for
Th2 cytokines has been demonstrated. CD8+ T cells also produce
IFN-γ and contribute to DTH reactions, especially in the skin.
Chronic DTH reactions and ﬁbrosis can develop if a Th1 response
to an infection activates macrophages but fails to eliminate
phagocytosed microbes. With some infections, the reaction
produces nodules of inﬂammatory tissue called granulomas
(Fig. 19.8A). Chronic DTH, as exempliﬁed by granulomatous
inﬂammation, is caused by prolonged cytokine signals (Fig. 19.8B).
In such reactions, the activated T cells and macrophages continue
to produce cytokines and growth factors, which amplify the
reactions of both cell types and progressively modify the local
tissue environment by activating ﬁbroblasts that lay down collagen.
The result is a cycle of tissue injury and chronic inﬂammation
followed by replacement with connective tissue (ﬁbrosis). In
chronic DTH reactions, activated macrophages also respond to
persistent 
cytokine 
signals 
by 
increasing 
cytoplasm 
and
cytoplasmic organelles. Histologically, these macrophages may
resemble skin epithelial cells, because of which they are sometimes
called epithelioid cells. Activated macrophages may fuse to form
multinucleate giant cells. Granulomatous inﬂammation is an
aĴempt to contain the infection but is also the cause of signiﬁcant
tissue injury and functional impairment. This type of inﬂammation
is a characteristic response to some persistent microbes, such as M.
tuberculosis, and some fungi. Much of the respiratory diﬃculty
associated with tuberculosis or chronic fungal infection of the lungs
is caused by replacement of normal lung tissue with ﬁbrotic tissue
and is not directly aĴributable to the microbes.
Diseases Caused by Cytotoxic T
Lymphocytes
CTL responses to viral infection can lead to tissue injury by killing
infected cells, even if the virus itself has liĴle cytopathic eﬀect. The
principal physiologic function of CTLs is to eliminate intracellular
microbes, primarily viruses, by killing infected cells. Some viruses
directly injure infected cells and are said to be cytopathic, whereas
others are not. Because CTLs cannot distinguish between
cytopathic and noncytopathic viruses, they kill virus-infected cells
regardless of whether the infection itself is harmful to the host.
Examples of viral infections in which the lesions are mainly due to
the host CTL response and not the virus itself include lymphocytic
choriomeningitis in mice and certain forms of viral hepatitis in
humans (see Chapter 16).
FIGURE 19.6  Delayed-type hypersensitivity
reaction.Infection or immunization (vaccination)
sensitizes an individual, and subsequent challenge
with an antigen from the infectious agent elicits a
delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) reaction. The
reaction is manifested by induration with redness
and swelling at the site of the challenge, which
peaks at approximately 48 hours. 
Courtesy Dr. J. Faix, Department of Pathology, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Palo Alto, California.
CTLs may contribute to tissue injury in autoimmune disorders in
which destruction of particular host cells is a prominent
component, such as type 1 diabetes, in which insulin-producing β
cells in pancreatic islets are destroyed. CTLs also cause injury to
organ allografts during rejection responses (see Chapter 17).
FIGURE 19.7  Morphology of a delayed-type
hypersensitivity reaction. A, Histopathologic
examination of the reaction in skin illustrated in
Fig. 19.6 shows perivascular mononuclear cell
infiltrates in the dermis. At higher magnification
(not shown), the infiltrate is seen to consist of
activated lymphocytes and macrophages
surrounding small blood vessels in which the
endothelial cells are also activated. B,
Immunohistochemical staining demonstrates the
presence of many CD4+ T lymphocytes. 
Courtesy Dr. J. Faix, Department of Pathology, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Palo Alto, California.
Therapeutic Approaches for Immunologic
Diseases
One of the most impressive accomplishments of immunology has
been the development of novel therapies for immunologic diseases
based on the understanding of fundamental mechanisms of these
disorders (Fig. 19.9). The therapies can be divided into several
broad groups.
Broadly Acting Antiinflammatory Agents
The mainstay of therapy for hypersensitivity diseases for many
years has been antiinﬂammatory drugs, particularly corticosteroids.
Such drugs inhibit the secretion of cytokines and other mediators
of inﬂammation and thus reduce the inﬂammation associated with
pathologic immune responses. Nonsteroidal antiinﬂammatory
drugs are commonly used to reduce milder inﬂammatory reactions.
Cytokine Antagonists
A large number of cytokines and their receptors involved in
inﬂammation are being targeted by speciﬁc antagonists for the
treatment of chronic T cell–mediated inﬂammatory diseases (Table
19.5). The ﬁrst clinically succcessful cytokine antagonists targeted
TNF and included a soluble form of the TNF receptor and anti-TNF
antibodies, which bind to and neutralize TNF. These agents are of
great beneﬁt in many patients with rheumatoid (RA), Crohn’s
disease, and psoriasis. Antibodies to the IL-6 receptor also have
been successfully used in some forms of arthritis. Antagonists of
other proinﬂammatory cytokines and their receptors, including IL-
1, IL-12, IL-17, and the receptors for IL-12, IL-17, and IL-23, are now
approved for various inﬂammatory diseases, and many others are in
clinical trials. Antibodies against Th2 cytokines or their receptors
are approved for treating allergic diseases (see Chapter 20). In
addition to these biologic agents, small molecule inhibitors of
Janus kinases (JAKs) (important intracellular signaling mediators
of a variety of cytokine receptors; see Chapter 7) are also approved
to inhibit cytokine actions in RA, and inhibitors of other kinases
(such as the B cell signaling molecule BTK) are approved for
antibody-mediated diseases (e.g., RA and SLE).
FIGURE 19.8  Granulomatous inflammation. A,
Lymph node from a patient with tuberculosis
containing granulomas with activated
macrophages, multinucleate giant cells, and
lymphocytes. In some granulomas, there may be
a central area of necrosis (not shown).
Immunohistochemical studies would identify the
lymphocytes as T cells. B, Mechanisms of
granuloma formation. Cytokines are involved in the
generation of Th1 cells, activation of
macrophages, and recruitment of leukocytes.
Prolonged reactions of this type lead to the
formation of granulomas. APC, Antigen-presenting
cell; IFN-γ, interferon-γ; TNF, tumor necrosis
factor.
FIGURE 19.9  Biologic therapies for inflammatory
diseases targeting T cell responses and
inflammation.Illustrated are the sites of action of
some therapeutic agents that block different
components of immune and inflammatory
responses. Many of these agents target cytokines
and their receptors. B cell depletion by anti-CD20
may also reduce pathologic T cell responses (not
shown). APC, Antigen-presenting cell; CTLA-4,
cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen 4; IL, interleukin;
JAKs, Janus kinases; TCR, T cell receptor; TNF,
tumor necrosis factor; TNFR-Ig, TNF receptor-
immunoglobulin.
TABLE 19.5
Examples of Cytokine Antagonists in Clinical Use or Trials
Cytokine or
Receptor
Targeted
Predicted Biologic
Eﬀects of Antagonist
Clinical Indications
TNF
Inhibits leukocyte
migration into
sites of
inﬂammation
Rheumatoid arthritis,
psoriasis, inﬂammatory
bowel disease
IL-1
Inhibits leukocyte
migration into
sites of
inﬂammation
Rare autoinﬂammatory
syndromes, severe gout,
rheumatoid arthritis
IL-6
receptor
Inhibits inﬂammation,
antibody
responses?
Juvenile idiopathic
arthritis, rheumatoid
arthritis
IL-17
Inhibits leukocyte
recruitment into
sites of
inﬂammation
Psoriasis
IL-17
receptor
Inhibits leukocyte
recruitment into
sites of
inﬂammation
Psoriasis
p40 chain
of IL-12
and IL-
23
Inhibits Th1 and Th17
development
Inﬂammatory bowel
disease, psoriasis
Cytokine or
Receptor
Targeted
Predicted Biologic
Eﬀects of Antagonist
Clinical Indications
IL-2
receptor
(CD25)
Inhibits IL-2–
mediated T cell
proliferation
Acute graft rejection
BAFF
Reduces survival of B
lymphocytes
Systemic lupus
erythematosus
The table lists examples of antagonists against cytokines (antibodies or soluble receptors) that
are approved for clinical use or in trials. Monoclonal antibodies specific for each of the listed
targets are in clinical use; soluble TNF receptor and IL-1 receptor antagonists are used as
well.
BAFF, B cell activating factor; IL, interleukin; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
Depletion of Cells and Antibodies
Monoclonal antibodies that deplete all lymphoid cells, only B cells,
or only T cells are used to treat inﬂammatory diseases. In Chapter
5, we listed some of the depleting antibodies in clinical practice (see
Table 5.3). A recent development is the successful use of anti-CD20
antibody (rituximab), which depletes only B cells, to treat diseases
that were thought to be caused primarily by T cell–mediated
inﬂammation. This treatment has shown eﬃcacy in patients with
RA and MS. The eﬀectiveness of anti-CD20 may be related to a role
of B cells as antigen-presenting cells (APCs) for T cell responses,
especially for the generation and maintenance of memory T cells.
Plasmapheresis 
has 
been 
used 
to 
eliminate 
circulating
autoantibodies and immune complexes.
Other Biologic Agents
CTLA-4-Ig, a fusion protein of the extracellular domain of CTLA-4
and an IgG Fc region, blocks B7 costimulators (see Chapter 9) and
is approved for treatment of RA and graft rejection. Antibodies
against integrins have been used to inhibit leukocyte migration into
tissues, particularly the central nervous system (CNS) in MS
patients (anti-VLA-4) and the intestines in IBD patients (anti-α4β7).
Intravenous IgG
Intravenous Ig (IVIG) is pooled IgG from healthy donors
administered intravenously. It has beneﬁcial eﬀects in some
autoimmune diseases, such as autoimmune thrombocytopenia and
hemolytic anemia. It is not clear how this agent, which contains IgG
of many unknown speciﬁcities, inhibits hypersensitivity reactions.
One possibility is that the IgG binds to the inhibitory Fc receptor
(FcγRIIB) on B lymphocytes (see Chapter 12) and DCs and thus
aĴenuates autoantibody production and inﬂammatory responses.
IVIG may also compete with pathogenic antibodies for binding to
the neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn), which functions in adults to
protect antibodies from catabolism (see Chapter 5), resulting in
reduced half-lives of the pathogenic antibodies.
Tolerance-Inducing Therapies
There are ongoing aĴempts at more speciﬁc treatments for adaptive
immune mediated inﬂammatory diseases, such as inducing
tolerance in disease-producing T cells. MS and type 1 diabetes are
two diseases in which the target antigens have been deﬁned; in
both disorders, clinical trials are underway in which the antigens
(peptides of myelin basic protein [MBP] and insulin, respectively)
are administered to patients in ways that inhibit lymphocytes
speciﬁc for the antigens. A risk with many treatments that block
various components of the immune system is that these will
interfere with the normal function of the immune system in
combating microbes and thus make individuals susceptible to
infections. Antigen-speciﬁc tolerance avoids this problem by
selectively targeting the disease-causing lymphocytes.
There is also interest in exploiting our knowledge of regulatory T
cells (Tregs) to treat inﬂammatory diseases. Numerous clinical
trials are ongoing to purify patients’ Tregs, expand and activate
them in culture, and transfer them back to the patients. Another
approach is to treat patients with low doses of IL-2, which is
expected to activate and maintain Tregs more than eﬀector cells, or
IL-2 that is mutated to bind preferentially to CD25, the IL-2
receptor chain that is expressed at constant and high levels in
Tregs.
Selected Immunologic Diseases:
Pathogenesis and Therapeutic Strategies
In the following section, we will describe the pathogenesis of
selected diseases that are caused by antibodies and T cells and
novel therapies for these diseases. The goal of this discussion is not
to present clinical details but to focus on how diseases illustrate the
principles underlying abnormal immune reactions.
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE): The
Prototypic Immune Complex–Mediated
Disease
 SLE is a chronic, remiĴing and relapsing, multisystem
autoimmune disease that aﬀects predominantly women, with an
incidence in the United States of 1 in 700 among women 20 to 60
years of age (about 1 in 250 among black women) and a female-to-
male ratio of 10:1. SLE is considered the classic human immune
complex disease. The principal clinical manifestations are rashes,
arthritis, 
and 
glomerulonephritis, 
but 
hemolytic 
anemia,
thrombocytopenia, and neuropsychiatric disorders are also
common. Many diﬀerent autoantibodies are found in patients with
SLE. The most frequent are antinuclear, particularly anti-DNA,
antibodies; others include antibodies against ribonucleoproteins,
histones, and nucleolar antigens. Immune complexes formed from
these autoantibodies and their speciﬁc antigens deposit in small
arteries and capillaries throughout the body and are responsible for
glomerulonephritis, arthritis, and vasculitis. Hemolytic anemia and
thrombocytopenia 
are 
caused 
by 
autoantibodies 
against
erythrocytes and platelets, respectively. The principal diagnostic
test for the disease is the presence of antinuclear antibodies;
antibodies against double-stranded native DNA are speciﬁc for
SLE.
Pathogenesis of Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
In SLE, genetic and environmental factors contribute to a
breakdown of tolerance in self-reactive B and T lymphocytes.
Among the genetic factors is the inheritance of particular HLA
(human leukocyte antigen) alleles. The odds ratio (relative risk) for
individuals with HLA-DR2 or HLA-DR3 is 2 to 3, and if both
haplotypes are present, the odds ratio is about 5. Genetic
deﬁciencies of classical pathway complement proteins, especially
C1q, C2, or C4, are seen in about 5% of patients with SLE. The
complement deﬁciencies may result in defective clearance of
immune complexes and apoptotic cells and failure of B cell
tolerance. A polymorphism in the inhibitory Fc receptor FcγRIIB
has been described in some patients; this may contribute to
inadequate control of B cell activation or a failure to aĴenuate
inﬂammatory responses in innate immune cells. Many other genes
have been detected by genome-wide association studies, and the
roles of some of these, such as the phosphatase PTPN22, have been
discused in Chapter 15. Environmental factors include exposure to
ultraviolet (UV) light, which is postulated to lead to the apoptotic
death of skin cells and release of nuclear antigens.
Two observations have led to new hypotheses of the pathogenesis
of SLE. First, studies in patients have revealed that blood cells show
a striking molecular signature (paĴern of gene expression) that
indicates exposure to IFN-α, a type I interferon that is produced
mainly by plasmacytoid DCs. Some studies have shown that
plasmacytoid DCs from SLE patients produce abnormally large
amounts of IFN-α. Second, studies in animal models have shown
that Toll-like receptors (TLRs) that recognize DNA and RNA,
notably the DNA-recognizing TLR9 and the RNA-recognizing
TLR7, play a role in the activation of B cells speciﬁc for self nuclear
antigens. On the basis of these studies, a model for the
pathogenesis of SLE has been proposed (Fig. 19.10). According to
this model, UV irradiation and other environmental insults lead to
the apoptosis of cells. Inadequate clearance of the nuclei of these
cells, in part because of defects in clearance mechanisms such as
complement proteins and nucleases such as TREX1, results in a
large burden of nuclear antigens. Polymorphisms in various
susceptibility genes for lupus lead to a defective ability to maintain
self-tolerance in B and T lymphocytes, because of which self-
reactive lymphocytes remain functional. Failure of B cell tolerance
may be due to defects in receptor editing or in deletion of
immature B cells in the bone marrow or in peripheral tolerance.
Self-reactive B cells that are not rendered tolerant are stimulated by
the self nuclear antigens, and antibodies are produced against the
antigens. Complexes of the antigens and antibodies bind to Fc
receptors on DCs and to the antigen receptor on B cells and may be
internalized into endosomes. The nucleic acid components engage
endosomal TLRs and stimulate B cells to produce more
autoantibodies and activate DCs, particularly plasmacytoid DCs, to
produce IFN-α, which further enhances the immune response and
may cause more apoptosis. The net result is a cycle of antigen
release and immune activation that leads to the production of high-
aﬃnity autoantibodies.
New Therapies for Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
The recent advances in our understanding of SLE are leading to
novel therapeutic aĴempts, but success has proven elusive. There
has been great interest in depleting B cells by use of an antibody
against the B cell surface protein CD20, but clinical trials using anti-
CD20 have had liĴle success. An antibody that blocks the B cell
growth factor, B cell–activating factor (BAFF), is now approved for
the treatment of SLE but seems to have only modest eﬃcacy.
Additional approaches that are being tried are to combine B cell
depletion with depletion of long-lived plasma cells using
proteasome inhibitors (which lead to the accumulation of
misfolded proteins and ultimately cell death) and to activate Tregs
by treating patients with low-dose IL-2 (see Chapter 15). Despite
the involvement of IFN-α in the disease, clinical trials to test the
eﬃcacy of antibodies against IFN-α or its receptor have not been
successful.
FIGURE 19.10  A model for the pathogenesis of
systemic lupus erythematosus.In this hypothetical
model, various susceptibility genes interfere with
the maintenance of self-tolerance and external
triggers lead to persistence of nuclear antigens.
The result is an antibody response against self
nuclear antigens, which is amplified by the Toll-like
receptor (TLR)-dependent activation of dendritic
cells (DCs) and B cells by nucleic acids, and the
production of type 1 interferons. IgG,
Immunoglobulin G; UV, ultraviolet.
Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA)
RA is an inﬂammatory disease involving small and large joints of
the extremities, including ﬁngers and toes, wrists, shoulders, knees,
and ankles. The disease is characterized by inﬂammation of the
synovium associated with destruction of the joint cartilage and
bone, with a morphologic picture indicative of a local immune
response. Both cell-mediated and humoral immune responses may
contribute to development of synovitis. CD4+ Th1 and Th17 cells,
activated B lymphocytes, plasma cells, and macrophages as well as
other inﬂammatory cells, are found in the inﬂamed synovium, and
in severe cases, well-formed lymphoid follicles with germinal
centers (so-called tertiary lymphoid organs) may be present.
Numerous cytokines, including IL-1, IL-8, TNF, IL-6, IL-17, and
IFN-γ, have been detected in the synovial (joint) ﬂuid. Cytokines
are thought to recruit leukocytes whose products cause tissue
injury and also to activate resident synovial cells to produce
proteolytic enzymes, such as collagenase, that mediate destruction
of the cartilage, ligaments, and tendons of the joints. Increased
osteoclast activity in the joints contributes to the bone destruction
in RA, and this may be caused by the production of the TNF family
cytokine RANK (receptor activator of nuclear factor κB) ligand by
activated T cells. RANK ligand binds to RANK, a member of the
TNF receptor family that is expressed on osteoclast precursors and
induces their diﬀerentiation and activation. Systemic complications
of RA include vasculitis, presumably caused by immune complexes,
and lung injury with ﬁbrosis.
Although much of the emphasis in studies of RA has been on the
role of T cells, antibodies may also contribute to the joint
destruction. Activated B cells and plasma cells are often present in
the synovia of aﬀected joints. Patients frequently have circulating
IgM or IgG antibodies that react with the Fc (and rarely Fab)
portions of their own IgG molecules. These autoantibodies are
called rheumatoid factors, and their presence is used as a
diagnostic test for RA. Another type of antibody that has been
detected in over half of patients is speciﬁc for citrullinated proteins.
(The antibodies are called anti-citrullinated protein antibodies, or
ACPAs, because they are assayed by binding to citrullinated
peptides.) These chemically altered antigens are derived from
proteins such as vimentin and ﬁbrinogen, among others, that are
modiﬁed in an inﬂammatory environment by the enzymatic
conversion of arginine residues to citrulline. About 60% to 80% of
RA patients have rheumatoid factor and/or ACPAs and are said to
have seropositive RA, which tends to be more severe than non-
seropositive RA. Many asymptomatic seropositive individuals have
been studied and observed to gradually develop seropositive RA.
Both types of antibodies are diagnostic markers and may be
involved in the formation of pathogenic immune complexes.
Pathogenesis of Rheumatoid Arthritis
Like other autoimmune diseases, RA is a complex disorder in which
genetic and environmental factors contribute to the breakdown of
tolerance to self antigens. The speciﬁcity of the pathogenic T and B
cells remains unclear, although both B and T cells that recognize
citrullinated proteins have been identiﬁed. Susceptibility to RA is
linked to the HLA-DR4 haplotype and to a few other HLA-DR
alleles, all of which share a ﬁve-residue segment (called the shared
epitope) in the peptide-binding groove. Recent genome-wide
association studies have revealed a large number of genetic
polymorphisms associated with RA, including the gene encoding a
tyrosine phosphatase, PTPN22, discussed in Chapter 15.
The identiﬁcation of ACPAs has led to new ideas about the
pathogenesis of RA (Fig. 19.11). Some of the earliest ACPAs tend to
be of the IgA isotype, so it is postulated that this disease in
initiated at mucosal sites, including the respiratory tract. According
to one model, environmental insults, such as smoking and some
infections, induce the citrullination of self proteins, leading to the
creation of new antigenic epitopes. Because these chemically
modiﬁed epitopes are neoantigens that are not present normally,
there may not be tolerance to these antigens. Individuals who have
the HLA alleles that are capable of presenting these epitopes may
mount T cell and antibody responses against the proteins. If these
modiﬁed self proteins are also present in joints, the T cells and
antibodies aĴack the joints. Th17 and perhaps Th1 cells secrete
cytokines that recruit leukocytes into the joint and activate synovial
cells to produce collagenases and other enzymes. The net result is
the progressive destruction of cartilage and bone. The chronic
immune responses in the joints may lead to formation of tertiary
lymphoid organs in the synovium, and these may maintain and
propagate the local immune reaction.
FIGURE 19.11  A model for the pathogenesis of
rheumatoid arthritis.According to this model,
citrullinated proteins induced by environmental
stimuli elicit T cell and antibody responses in
genetically susceptible individuals. The T cells and
antibodies enter joints, respond to the self
proteins, and cause tissue injury mainly by
cytokine secretion and perhaps also by antibody-
dependent effector mechanisms. Protein
modifications other than citrullination may lead to
the same result. HLA, Human leukocyte antigen.
New Therapies for Rheumatoid Arthritis
The realization of the central role of T cells and cytokines in the
disease has led to remarkable advances in treatment, in which
speciﬁc molecules have been targeted on the basis of scientiﬁc
understanding. Chief among these new therapies are antagonists of
TNF, which have transformed the course of the disease in many
patients from one of progressive and inexorable joint destruction to
one of smoldering but manageable chronic inﬂammation. Various
other targeted therapies have been developed in the past 5 to 10
years. Blockade of cytokines other than TNF has been eﬀective,
including an antibody that blocks the IL-6 receptor, an IL-1
antagonist, and a small molecule that inhibits JAK signaling.
Inhibition of T cell activation has been accomplished by blockade of
B7:CD28 costimulation with CTLA-4-Ig (see Chapter 9). B cell
depletion with anti-CD20 antibody has also proven to be
eﬃcacious, although the mechanisms underlying this eﬀect are not
well understood.
Multiple Sclerosis (MS)
MS is an autoimmune disease of the CNS in which CD4+ T cells of
the Th1 and Th17 subsets react against self myelin antigens,
resulting in inﬂammation with activation of macrophages around
nerves in the brain and spinal cord, destruction of the myelin,
abnormalities in nerve conduction, and neurologic deﬁcits. It is the
most common neurologic disease of young adults. Pathologic
examination reveals inﬂammation in the CNS white maĴer and
demyelination. MS is characterized clinically by weakness,
paralysis, and ocular symptoms with exacerbations and remissions;
CNS imaging suggests that in patients with active disease, there is
frequent new lesion formation.
MS is modeled by experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis
(EAE) in mice, rats, guinea pigs, and nonhuman primates, and this
is one of the best characterized experimental models of an organ-
speciﬁc autoimmune disease mediated mainly by T lymphocytes.
EAE is induced by immunizing animals with antigens normally
present in CNS myelin, such as MBP, proteolipid protein, and
myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein, together with an adjuvant
containing heat-killed mycobacteria, which is necessary to elicit a
strong T cell response. About 1 to 2 weeks after immunization,
animals develop encephalomyelitis, characterized by perivascular
inﬁltrates of lymphocytes and macrophages in the CNS white
maĴer, followed by demyelination. The neurologic lesions can be
mild and self-limited or chronic and relapsing. These lesions result
in progressive or remiĴing and relapsing paralysis. The disease also
can be transferred to naive animals with T cells from diseased
animals. Although antibodies against myelin antigens have been
detected in patients as well as in the animal models, the pathogenic
signiﬁcance of these antibodies is not established.
Pathogenesis of MS
There is abundant evidence that EAE is caused by activated CD4+
Th1 and Th17 cells speciﬁc for protein antigens in myelin. By
analogy with the experimental disease, MS is also thought to be
caused by myelin-speciﬁc Th1 and Th17 cells, and these cells have
been detected in patients and isolated from the blood and CNS.
How these cells are activated in patients remains an enigma. One
theory is that an infection, most likely a viral infection, activates self
myelin–reactive T cells by the phenomenon of molecular mimicry
(see Chapter 15). Self-tolerance may fail because of the inheritance
of susceptibility genes. Identical twins have a 25% to 30%
concordance rate for development of MS, whereas nonidentical
twins have a 6% concordance rate. These observations implicate
genetic factors in the development of the disease but also indicate
that genetics contributes only part of the risk. Genetic
polymorphisms associated with MS include the HLA locus, with
HLA-DRB1∗1501 showing the strongest linkage. Genome-wide
association studies and other genomic analyses have revealed over
100 genetic variants that contribute to disease risk; most of these
map to genes involved in immune function. One interesting
association is with a polymorphism in the noncoding region of the
gene for the IL-2 receptor α chain, CD25. This polymorphism may
alter the generation and maintenance of eﬀector T cells and/or
Tregs. Other studies have suggested that the peripheral
maintenance of Tregs is defective in patients with MS, but how
much this contributes to a failure of self-tolerance is not known.
Once myelin-speciﬁc T cells are activated, they migrate into the
CNS, where they encounter myelin proteins and release cytokines
that recruit and activate macrophages and more T cells, leading to
myelin destruction. Studies of EAE suggest that the disease is
propagated by a process known as epitope spreading (see Chapter
15). The tissue breakdown results in the release of new protein
antigens and the expression of new, previously sequestered
epitopes that activate more autoreactive T cells.
New Therapies for MS
Immunotherapy for MS has, in the past, relied on approaches
whose scientiﬁc bases are not well understood. These include
administration of β-interferon, which may alter cytokine responses,
and treatment with a random polymer of four amino acids, which is
postulated to bind to HLA molecules and block antigen
presentation. Recently, however, several new immune-modifying
therapies based on rational principles have been developed. One is
an antibody against the the α4 subunit of the α4β1 integrin, also
known as VLA-4 (very late antigen 4) (see Chapter 3). The antibody
blocks leukocyte migration into the CNS and has been shown to be
beneﬁcial for patients. However, in a small number of patients, this
treatment resulted in the reactivation of a latent JC virus infection,
causing a severe and sometimes fatal CNS disease. Another
recently approved drug to treat MS also interferes with leukocyte
migration. The drug, called ﬁngolimod (FTY720), blocks the
sphingosine 1-phosphate–mediated pathway of T cell egress from
lymphoid tissues (see Chapter 3). In a subset of patients, B cell
depletion with anti-CD20 antibody is beneﬁcial. These results
suggest an important role of B cells, presumably as APCs, in the
activation of pathogenic T cells. Because MBP is known to be an
important self antigen that is the target of the immune response in
MS, it is hoped that the administration of MBP peptides will induce
antigen-speciﬁc tolerance or generate Tregs speciﬁc for the relevant
antigen. It is also striking that most of the therapies are more
eﬀective in early MS, which is characterized by inﬂammation, than
in progressive MS, which is characterized by neurodegeneration
and is the major cause of permanent disability. This realization is
leading to new aĴempts to restore myelination and repair damaged
axons and neurons.
Type 1 Diabetes
Type 1 diabetes, previously called insulin-dependent diabetes, is a
multisystem metabolic disease resulting from impaired insulin
production that aﬀects about 0.2% of the U.S. population, with a
peak onset at 11 to 12 years of age. The incidence of the disease
appears to be increasing in North America and Europe. The disease
is characterized by hyperglycemia and ketoacidosis. Chronic
complications of diabetes include progressive atherosclerosis of
arteries, which can lead to ischemic necrosis of limbs and internal
organs, and microvascular obstruction causing damage to the
retina, renal glomeruli, and peripheral nerves. Type 1 diabetes is
caused by a deﬁciency of insulin resulting from immune-mediated
destruction of the insulin-producing β cells of the islets of
Langerhans in the pancreas, and continuous hormone replacement
therapy is needed. There is usually a long lag of many years
between the initiation of autoimmunity and overt clinical disease
because 90% or more of the islets have to be destroyed before
clinical manifestations are seen.
Pathogenesis of Type 1 Diabetes
Several mechanisms may contribute to β cell destruction, including
inﬂammation mediated by CD4+ Th1 cells reactive with islet
antigens (including insulin), CTL-mediated lysis of islet cells, local
production of cytokines (TNF and IL-1) that damage islet cells, and
autoantibodies against islet cells. In the few cases in which the
pancreatic lesions have been examined at the early active stages of
the disease, the islets show cellular necrosis and lymphocytic
inﬁltration consisting of both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. This lesion is
called insulitis. Autoantibodies against islet cells and insulin are
also detected in the blood of these patients. In susceptible children
who have not developed diabetes (such as relatives of patients), the
presence of antibodies against islet cells is predictive of the
development of type 1 diabetes. An informative animal model of
the disease is the nonobese diabetic (NOD) mouse, which develops
spontaneous diabetes. In this model, there is evidence for defective
survival and function of Tregs and resistance of eﬀector T cells to
suppression by Tregs. Another interesting idea that has emerged
mostly 
from 
the 
mouse 
model 
is 
that 
post-translational
modiﬁcation of islet antigens may lead to the creation of new
epitopes that elicit immune responses, similar to the neoantigens
in RA, discussed previously.
Multiple genes are associated with type 1 diabetes. Most
aĴention has been focused on the role of HLA genes. Between 90%
and 95% of Caucasians with type 1 diabetes have HLA-DR3 or DR4,
or both, in contrast to about 40% of healthy subjects, and 40% to
50% of patients are DR3/DR4 heterozygotes, in contrast to 5% of
healthy subjects. The actual HLA genes that may play a role in the
pathogenesis may be HLA-DQ alleles that are in linkage
disequilibrium with the DR alleles. Several non-HLA genes also
contribute to the disease. The ﬁrst of these to be identiﬁed is
insulin, with tandem repeats in the promoter region being
associated with disease susceptibility. The mechanism of this
association is unknown; it may be related to the level of expression
of insulin in the thymus, which determines whether insulin-speciﬁc
T cells will be deleted (negatively selected) during their maturation.
Several other polymorphisms have been identiﬁed in patients and
in NOD mice, including in the IL2 and CD25 genes. Diﬀerent
polymorphisms in these genes may increase or decrease the risk for
developing the disease, but how these polymorphisms aﬀect T cell
responses is not fully established. Some studies have suggested
that viral infections (e.g., with coxsackievirus B4) may precede the
onset of type 1 diabetes, perhaps by initiating cell injury, inducing
inﬂammation and the expression of costimulators, and triggering
an autoimmune response. However, epidemiologic data suggest
that repeated infections protect against type 1 diabetes, and this is
similar in the NOD model. In fact, it has been postulated that one
reason for the increasing incidence of type 1 diabetes in higher-
income countries is the control of infectious diseases.
New Therapies for Type 1 Diabetes
The most interesting new therapeutic strategies for type 1 diabetes
are focused on inducing tolerance with diabetogenic peptides from
islet antigens (such as insulin) and inducing or giving Tregs to
patients. These clinical trials are in their early stages.
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
IBD is a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by chronic
remiĴing inﬂammation in the small or large bowel that is likely a
result of inadequately regulated responses to commensal bacteria.
The two main types of IBD are Crohn’s disease, which can aﬀect the
entire thickness of the wall in any part of the gastrointestinal tract
but most frequently involves the terminal ileum, and ulcerative
colitis, which is restricted to the colonic mucosa.
Pathogenesis of IBD
Although the causes of Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis are
poorly understood, several types of evidence suggest that these
disorders are a result of defects in the regulation of immune
responses to commensal organisms in the gut in genetically
susceptible individuals. A number of immunologic abnormalities
may contribute to the development of IBD (Fig. 19.12).
• Defects in innate immunity to gut commensals. Loss-of-
function mutations in the gene that encodes the NOD2
cytoplasmic innate immune sensor are associated with a
subset of Crohn’s disease and may lead to reduced innate
defenses against intestinal microbes (see Chapters 4 and
14). There also may be defective expression of molecules
such as defensins, leading to increased commensal bacterial
invasion through the intestinal epithelium.
• Abnormal Th17 and Th1 responses. Analysis of T cell
responses in animal models and patients with IBD indicates
that there is an active Th17 response in the aﬀected parts of
the bowel. Genetic studies have shown that polymorphisms
in genes encoding the IL-23 receptor carry increased risk for
IBD, although the eﬀect of the polymorphisms on
expression or function of the receptor are not known.
Crohn’s disease is also characterized by granulomatous
inﬂammation driven by interferon (IFN)-γ–producing Th1
cells.
• Defective function of regulatory T cells. It is possible that
IBD may be caused by inadequate Treg-mediated
suppression of immune responses to commensal
organisms. The evidence supporting this hypothesis
originally came from mouse models in which an absence of
Tregs leads to colitis. In humans, FOXP3 mutations result
in a failure to develop Tregs and cause the disease called
p
g
IPEX (immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy,
enteropathy, X-linked) syndrome, which includes severe gut
inﬂammation in addition to autoimmune involvement of
many other tissues. Mutations in the receptor for IL-10, an
immune-suppressive cytokine made by Tregs (and other
cells) cause early-onset severe colitis.
FIGURE 19.12  Postulated pathogenesis of
Crohn’s disease.Bacteria from the intestinal
lumen enter into the lamina propria, where
they induce the development of Th1 and Th17
cells. Cytokines produced by these cells
cause inflammation and tissue damage. IFN-
γ, Interferon-γ; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
• Polymorphisms of genes that are associated with
macroautophagy and the unfolded protein response to
endoplasmic reticulum stress are risk factors for IBD.
Macroautophagy is a process in which cells sequester
cytoplasmic organelles within autophagosomes, which then
fuse with lysosomes, promoting the destruction of the
organelles. Variants of autophagy genes (including ATG16L1
and IRGM) that are associated with Crohn’s disease impair
autophagy in Paneth cells, and for unclear reasons, this
reduces secretion of lysozyme and defensins into the
intestinal lumen.
Immunotherapies for IBD
TNF antagonists were the ﬁrst biologic agent used to treat IBD. The
ﬁndings of exaggerated Th1 and Th17 responses are the basis for
treating patients with a monoclonal antibody that binds a
polypeptide (p40) shared by IL-23 and IL-12. IL-23 is required for
Th17-mediated immune responses, and IL-12 is required for Th1
responses (see Chapter 10). Clinical trials of IL-17 antagonist
treatment for Crohn’s disease have not shown eﬃcacy, suggesting
that excessive production of IL-17 may not, by itself, be responsible
for this disorder. Another biologic agent approved for Crohn’s
disease is a monoclonal antibody speciﬁc for the α4β7 integrin,
which is expressed on gut-homing lymphocytes.
Celiac Disease
Celiac disease (gluten-sensitive enteropathy) is an inﬂammatory
disease of the small bowel mucosa caused by immune responses
against ingested gliadin, a major protein component of the broader
group of proteins called gluten present in wheat and other grains.
Celiac disease is characterized by chronic inﬂammation in the small
bowel mucosa, leading to atrophy of villi, malabsorption, and
various nutritional deﬁciencies that lead to extraintestinal
manifestations. The disease is treated by restricting diets to gluten-
free foods.
Pathogenesis of Celiac Disease
CD4+ T cell responses to gliadin are likely involved in disease
pathogenesis (Fig. 19.13). T cells speciﬁc for gliadin peptides are
found in patients with celiac disease, and the inﬂammatory process
in the bowel includes T cells and T cell cytokines. The risk of
developing celiac disease is strongly associated with HLA-DQ2 and
DQ8 alleles, and there is evidence that these class II HLA
molecules can present modiﬁed gluten peptides to mucosal CD4+ T
cells in aﬀected individuals. A host enzyme transglutaminase 2
(TG2) converts a neutral amino acid glutamine in gluten peptides to
the negatively charged residue glutamic acid; the negatively
charged peptides bind more eﬃciently to DQ2 and DQ8 and
activate speciﬁc T cells that secrete cytokines that contribute to
intestinal inﬂammation. Patients produce IgA and IgG antibodies
speciﬁc for gluten as well as autoantibodies speciﬁc for TG2.
Whether these antibodies contribute to disease development is not
known, but they are a diagnostic marker for the disease. In addition
to CD4+ T cell responses, killing of intestinal epithelial cells by
CD8+ CTLs and natural killer (NK) cells may also contribute to the
disease, although the source of the peptides recognized by the
CTLs or what the NK cells are responding to is not clear.
FIGURE 19.13  Postulated pathogenesis of celiac
disease.Gliadin is converted to a peptide that is
presented by lamina propria dendritic cells to
CD4+ T lymphocytes. Cytokines produced by the
T cells damage the intestinal epithelium. HLA,
Human leukocyte antigen; IFN-γ, interferon-γ.
Psoriasis
Psoriasis is the prototypic IL-17–mediated chronic inﬂammatory
autoimmune disease. It involves primarily the skin and also aﬀects
the joints and other tissues in some cases. The responsible self
antigens are not clearly deﬁned, but possible candidates include
cathelicidin (an antimicrobial protein) and a keratin, both produced
by keratinocytes, and other proteins made by melanocytes. The
autoimmune response may be triggered by infection or other
unknown stimuli. Several lines of evidence have established the
central role of IL-17–producing cells in the resulting inﬂammation.
High levels of IL-17 and the Th17-inducing cytokine IL-23 are found
in psoriatic lesions, as are large numbers of IL-17–producing CD4+
and CD8+ T cells. The contribution of IL-17–producing γδ T cells
and ILCs has been suggested but not clearly established. Genome-
wide 
association 
studies 
have 
revealed 
disease-associated
polymorphisms in the IL-23 receptor gene and other genes
associated with Th17 development. It is postulated that once IL-17–
producing T cells are activated, presumably by one or more self
antigens, the IL-17 they produce stimulates inﬂammation and
activates DCs to produce TNF and other, Th17-inducing cytokines.
This reaction sets up a vicious cycle of continuing inﬂammation.
Eﬀective new biologic therapies have been developed based on this
model. The ﬁrst such agents to be used in the disease were TNF
antagonists. These were followed by an antibody speciﬁc for the
p40 chain that is shared by IL-12 and IL-23, mentioned earlier in the
therapy of IBD. The most successful of these biologic agents are
antibodies that block IL-17 or IL-23, which are very eﬀective in most
patients.
Summary
• Disorders caused by abnormal immune responses are called
hypersensitivity diseases. Pathologic immune responses
may be autoimmune responses directed against self
antigens or uncontrolled and excessive responses to foreign
(e.g., microbial) antigens.
• Hypersensitivity diseases may result from antibodies that
bind to cells or tissues (type II hypersensitivity), circulating
immune complexes that are deposited in tissues (type III),
or T lymphocytes reactive with antigens in tissues (type IV).
Immediate hypersensitivity (type I) reactions are the cause
of allergic diseases and are described in Chapter 20.
• The eﬀector mechanisms of antibody-mediated tissue injury
are complement activation and Fc receptor–mediated
inﬂammation. Some antibodies cause disease by opsonizing
host cells for phagocytosis or by interfering with normal
cellular functions without producing tissue injury.
• The eﬀector mechanisms of T cell–mediated tissue injury
are inﬂammatory reactions induced by cytokines secreted
mainly by CD4+ Th1 and Th17 cells and cell lysis by
cytotoxic T lymphocytes. The classical T cell–mediated
reaction is delayed-type hypersensitivity, induced by
activation of previously primed T cells and the production
of cytokines that recruit and activate various leukocytes,
predominantly macrophages.
• The current treatment of autoimmune diseases is targeted
at reducing immune activation and the injurious
consequences of the autoimmune reaction. Agents include
those that block inﬂammation, such as antibodies against
cytokines and integrins, and those that block lymphocyte
activation or destroy lymphocytes. A future goal of therapy
is to inhibit the responses of lymphocytes speciﬁc for self
antigens and to induce tolerance in these cells.
• Autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus
erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis,
type 1 diabetes, inﬂammatory bowel disease, celiac disease,
and psoriasis illustrate many of the eﬀector mechanisms
that cause tissue injury in hypersensitivity reactions and the
roles of susceptibility genes and environmental factors in
the development of these disorders.
Selected Readings
∗Indicates publications of historical interest, generally reporting
the discovery of a phenomenon or process that was later shown to
be of fundamental importance in the immune system. Many (but
not all) of these discoveries led to Nobel Prizes for the
discoverer(s). The nature of the discovery is summarized brieﬂy in
each reference.
General
Barrat F.J, Crow M.K, Ivashkiv L.B. Interferon target-gene expression and epigenomic
signatures in health and disease.  Nat Immunol . 2019;20:1574–1583.
Bombardieri M, Lewis M, Piĵalis C. Ectopic lymphoid neogenesis in rheumatic
autoimmune diseases.  Nat Rev Rheumatol . 2017;13:141–154.
Chu C, Artis D, Chiu I.M. Neuro-immune interactions in the tissues.  Immunity
. 2020;52:464–474.
∗Coombs RRA, Gell PGH. Classiﬁcation of allergic reactions responsible for clinical
hypersensitivity and disease. In: Clinical Aspects of Immunology (3rd ed.) (eds. PGH Gell,
RRA Coombs, PJ Lachmann). London: Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications; 1975;761–781.
(The original classiﬁcation of hypersensitivity disurders.)
Pavlov V.A, Chavan S.S, Tracey K.J. Molecular and functional neuroscience in immunity. 
Annu Rev Immunol . 2018;36:783–812.
Son M, Diamond B, Santiago-Schwarz F. Fundamental role of C1q in autoimmunity and
inﬂammation.  Immunol Res . 2015;63:101–106.
Antibody- and Immune Complex–Mediated Disorders
Faurschou M, Jayne D.R. Anti-B cell antibody therapies for inﬂammatory rheumatic
diseases.  Annu Rev Med . 2014;65:263–278.
Jancar S, Sanchez Crespo M. Immune complex-mediated tissue injury: a multistep
paradigm.  Trends Immunol . 2005;26:48–55.
See Selected Readings in  Chapter 13  for references on the roles of
complement and Fc receptors in antibody- and immune complex–mediated
diseases.
T Cell–Mediated Disorders
Joosten L.A, Abdollahi-Roodsaz S, Dinarello C.A, et al. Toll-like receptors and chronic
inﬂammation in rheumatic diseases: new developments.  Nat Rev Rheumatol
. 2016;12:344–357.
O’Shea J.J, Schwarĵ D.M, Villarino A.V, et al. The JAK-STAT pathway: impact on human
disease and therapeutic intervention.  Annu Rev Med . 2015;66:311–328.
Palmer M.T, Weaver C.T. Autoimmunity: increasing suspects in the CD4+ T cell lineup.  Nat
Immunol . 2010;11:36–40.
Pavlos R, Mallal S, Ostrov D, et al. T cell-mediated hypersensitivity reactions to drugs.  Annu
Rev Med . 2015;66:439–454.
Teng M.W, Bowman E.P, McElwee J.J, et al. IL-12 and IL-23 cytokines: from discovery to
targeted therapies for immune-mediated inﬂammatory diseases.  Nat Med . 2015;21:719–
729.
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
Crow M.K. Type I interferon in the pathogenesis of lupus.  J Immunol . 2014;192:5459–5468.
Hagberg N, Ronnblom L. Systemic lupus erythematosus: a disease with a dysregulated type
I interferon system.  Scand J Immunol . 2015;82:199–207.
Lo M.S, Tsokos G.C. Recent developments in systemic lupus erythematosus pathogenesis
and applications for therapy.  Curr Opin Rheumatol . 2018;30:222–228.
Nundel K, Marshak-Rothstein A. The role of nucleic acid sensors and type I IFNs in patient
populations and animal models of autoinﬂammation.  Curr Opin Immunol . 2019;61:74–
79.
Rheumatoid Arthritis
Malmstrom V, Catrina A.I, Klareskog L. The immunopathogenesis of seropositive
rheumatoid arthritis: from triggering to targeting.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2017;17:60–75.
Smolen J.S, Aletaha D, Barton A, et al. Rheumatoid arthritis.  Nat Rev Dis Primers
. 2018;4:18001.
Tan E.M, Smolen J.S. Historical observations contributing insights on etiopathogenesis of
rheumatoid arthritis and role of rheumatoid factor.  J Exp Med . 2016;213:1937–1950.
Multiple Sclerosis
Axisa P.P, Haﬂer D.A. Multiple sclerosis: genetics, biomarkers, treatments.  Curr Opin
Neurol . 2016;29:345–353.
Ransohoﬀ R.M. How neuroinﬂammation contributes to neurodegeneration.  Science
. 2016;353:777–783.
Ransohoﬀ R.M, Haﬂer D.A, LucchineĴi C.F. Multiple sclerosis: a quiet revolution.  Nat Rev
Neurol . 2015;11:134–142.
Sabatino Jr. J.J, Zamvil S.S, Hauser S.L. B-cell therapies in multiple sclerosis.  Cold Spring
Harb Perspect Med . 2019;9:a032037.
Type 1 Diabetes
Atkinson M.A, Roep B.O, Posgai A, et al. The challenge of modulating beta-cell
autoimmunity in type 1 diabetes.  Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol . 2019;7:52–64.
Pugliese A. Autoreactive T cells in type 1 diabetes.  J Clin Invest . 2017;127:2881–2891.
Reed J.C, Herold K.C. Thinking bedside at the bench: the NOD mouse model of T1DM. 
Nat Rev Endocrinol . 2015;11:308–314.
Unanue E.R. Antigen presentation in the autoimmune diabetes of the NOD mouse.  Annu
Rev Immunol . 2014;32:579–608.
Warshauer J.T, Bluestone J.A, Anderson M.S. New frontiers in the treatment of type 1
diabetes.  Cell Metab . 2020;31:46–61.
Other Immunologic Diseases
Alexander H, Nestle F.O. Pathogenesis and immunotherapy in cutaneous psoriasis: what
can rheumatologists learn?  Curr Opin Rheumatol . 2017;29:71–78.
Graham D.B, Xavier R.J. Pathway paradigms revealed from the genetics of inﬂammatory
bowel disease.  Nature . 2020;578:527–539.
Hawkes J.E, Yan B.Y, Chan T.C, Krueger J.G. Discovery of the IL-23/IL-17 signaling pathway
and the treatment of psoriasis.  J Immunol . 2018;201:1605–1613.
Jabri B, Sollid L.M. T cells in celiac disease.  J Immunol . 2017;198:3005–3014.
Chapter 20: Allergy 
Overview of IgE-Dependent Allergic Reactions,
Production of IgE,
The Nature of Allergens,
Activation of Type 2 Cytokine–Producing
Helper T Cells,
Activation of B Cells and Switching to IgE,
Cells Involved in Allergic Reactions,
Role of Th2 Cells and Innate Lymphoid Cells in
Allergic Disease,
Properties of Mast Cells and Basophils,
Properties of Eosinophils,
Reactions Dependent on IgE and Mast Cells,
The Immediate Reaction,
The Late-Phase Reaction,
Genetic Susceptibility to Allergic Disease,
Environmental Factors in Allergy,
Allergic Diseases in Humans: Pathogenesis and Therapy,
Systemic Anaphylaxis,
Asthma,
Immediate Hypersensitivity Reactions in the
Upper Respiratory Tract, Gastrointestinal
Tract, and Skin,
Specific Immunotherapy (Desensitization) for
Allergic Diseases,
The Protective Roles of Immune Reactions Mediated by
IgE and Mast Cells,
Summary,
A variety of human diseases are caused by immune responses to
nonmicrobial environmental antigens and involve the type 2
cytokines interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-5, and IL-13 produced by Th2 cells
and group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s), IgE (immunoglobulin
E), mast cells, and eosinophils. In the eﬀector phase of these
responses, mast cells and eosinophils are activated to rapidly
release mediators that cause increased vascular permeability,
vasodilation, and bronchial and visceral smooth muscle contraction.
This vascular reaction is called immediate (type I) hypersensitivity
because it begins rapidly, within minutes of antigen challenge, in a
previously sensitized individual (immediate) and has pathologic
consequences (hypersensitivity). After the immediate response,
there is a more slowly developing inﬂammatory component called
the late-phase reaction characterized by the accumulation of mainly
eosinophils and neutrophils. In clinical medicine, these reactions
are called allergy or atopy, and the associated diseases are called
allergic, atopic, or immediate hypersensitivity diseases. (The term
allergy is often imprecisely used in clinical practice to describe
other hypersensitivity reactions to environmental antigens, such as
contact hypersensitivity, which is a T cell– and cytokine-mediated
inﬂammatory reaction.) Repeated bouts of IgE- and mast cell–
dependent reactions can lead to chronic allergic diseases, with
tissue damage and remodeling. The most common of these chronic
g
g
disorders are atopic dermatitis, hay fever (allergic rhinitis), and
asthma. The antigens that elicit allergic reactions are called
allergens. Most of them are common environmental proteins
produced by animals or plants, and chemicals, including drugs,
that can modify self proteins.
Although the term atopy was coined to denote a reaction that is
“out of place” (unusual), we now realize that allergy is the most
common disorder of immunity, aﬀecting about 30% of all
individuals in the United States and Europe, and its prevalence is
increasing worldwide. In this chapter, we will describe the
sequence of events that lead to production of type 2 cytokines and
IgE, mast cell activation, and the roles of various mediators in
immediate hypersensitivity. We will then describe selected clinical
syndromes associated with allergic reactions and the principles of
therapy for these diseases. We conclude with a discussion of the
physiologic role of IgE-mediated immune reactions in host defense.
Overview of IgE-Dependent Allergic
Reactions
All allergic reactions share some common features, although they
diﬀer greatly in the types of antigens that elicit the reactions and
their clinical and pathologic manifestations.
Allergy is the prototypic type 2 inﬂammatory disease, mediated by
the cytokines IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13, diﬀerent combinations of which
are secreted by Th2 cells, T follicular helper (TĢ) cells, ILC2s, and a
few other cell types. The cytokine responses of these cells are often
collectively called type 2 immune responses. Many of the early
events and pathologic features of the reaction are triggered by
these cytokines, which may be produced by TĢ cells in lymphoid
organs and by ILC2s and Th2 cells in tissues. Delayed-type
hypersensitivity (DTH), described in Chapter 19, is the classical
type 1 inﬂammatory reaction and diﬀers in many respects from
allergy.
A hallmark of allergic diseases is the production of IgE antibody,
which depends on the activation of IL-4– and IL-13–producing helper
T cells. Whereas healthy individuals either do not respond to, or
have only harmless T cell and antibody responses to, common
environmental antigens, atopic individuals develop strong type 2
helper T cell responses and produce IgE on exposure to these
substances.
Allergic reactions require previous T cell–dependent allergen-
speciﬁc IgE production by B cells and the binding of the IgE to mast
cells. The typical sequence of events leading to an immediate
hypersensitivity reaction is illustrated in Fig. 20.1. Helper T cell–
dependent IgE produced in response to the allergen binds to Fc
receptors on mast cells; this process is called sensitization of mast
cells. Re-exposure to the allergen then activates the mast cells to
release mediators that cause the harmful reaction. We will describe
each of these steps in detail later in the chapter.
The clinical and pathologic manifestations of allergy consist of the
vascular and smooth muscle reactions that develop rapidly after
allergen 
challenge 
in 
a 
sensitized 
individual 
(immediate
hypersensitivity) and a delayed late-phase inﬂammatory reaction.
All of these reactions may be initiated by IgE-mediated mast cell
activation, but diﬀerent mediators are responsible for the
immediate and late-phase reactions. Because mast cells are
abundant in connective tissues and under epithelial barriers, these
tissues are the most common sites of allergic reactions. Some
immediate hypersensitivity reactions may be triggered by
nonimmunologic stimuli, such as exercise, cold temperatures, and
several drugs. These stimuli induce mast cell degranulation and the
release of mediators without antigen exposure or IgE production.
Such reactions are said to be nonatopic.
Allergic reactions are manifested in diﬀerent ways, depending on
the tissues aﬀected, including skin rashes, sinus and nasal
congestion, inﬂamed conjunctiva, bronchial constriction with
diﬃculty in breathing, abdominal pain, diarrhea, and shock. In the
most extreme systemic form, called anaphylaxis, mast cell–derived
mediators can restrict airways to the point of asphyxiation and
y
p
p y
produce cardiovascular collapse leading to shock, which together
may result in death. (The term anaphylaxis was coined to indicate
that antibodies, in these cases IgE antibodies, could confer the
opposite of protection [prophylaxis] on an unfortunate individual.)
We will return to the pathogenesis of these reactions later in the
chapter.
The development of allergies is the result of complex and poorly
understood gene-environment interactions. There is a genetic
predisposition for the development of allergies, and relatives of
allergic individuals are more likely to have allergies than unrelated
people, even when they do not share environments. Many
susceptibility genes have been identiﬁed that we will discuss later
in this chapter. Various environmental factors besides the exposure
to allergens, especially in industrialized societies, including air
pollution and exposure to microbes, have a profound inﬂuence on
the propensity to develop allergies.
FIGURE 20.1  Sequence of events in immediate
hypersensitivity reactions.Immediate
hypersensitivity diseases are initiated by the
introduction of an allergen, which stimulates IL-4–
and IL-13–producing helper T cell responses and
IgE production. IgE sensitizes mast cells by
binding to FcεRI, and subsequent exposure to the
allergen activates the mast cells to secrete the
mediators that are responsible for the pathologic
reactions of immediate hypersensitivity. Tfh, T
follicular helper cells.
With this introduction, we will proceed to a description of the
steps leading to reactions of immediate hypersensitivity.
Production of IgE
Atopic individuals produce high levels of IgE in response to
environmental allergens, whereas normal individuals generally
produce other Ig isotypes, such as IgM and IgG, and only small
amounts of IgE. IgE is of central importance in allergy because this
isotype is responsible for sensitizing mast cells. IgE is the antibody
isotype that contains the ε heavy chain (see Chapter 5). It binds to
speciﬁc Fc receptors on mast cells and activates these cells upon
antigen binding. The quantity of IgE synthesized depends on the
propensity of an individual to generate allergen-speciﬁc TĢ cells
that produce IL-4 and IL-13, because these cytokines stimulate B
cell antibody class switching to IgE (see Chapter 12). The
development of IL-4– and IL-13–expressing T cell responses against
particular antigens may be inﬂuenced by a variety of factors,
including the nature of the antigens, the history of antigen
exposure, and inherited genes.
The Nature of Allergens
Antigens that elicit immediate hypersensitivity reactions (allergens)
are proteins or chemicals bound to proteins. Typical allergens
include proteins in pollen, house dust mites, animal dander, foods,
and drugs. It is not known why some antigens induce IL-4–
producing helper T cell responses and allergic reactions whereas
others do not. Two important characteristics of allergens are that
individuals are exposed to them repeatedly and, unlike microbes,
they do not generally stimulate the types of innate immune
responses that are associated with macrophage and dendritic cell
(DC) secretion of Th1- and Th17-inducing cytokines.
The ability of an antigen to trigger allergic reactions also may be
related 
to 
its 
chemical 
nature. 
Although 
no 
structural
characteristics of proteins can deﬁnitively predict whether they will
be allergenic, some features are typical of many common allergens.
These include low-to-medium molecular weight (5 to 70 kD),
stability, glycosylation, and solubility in body ﬂuids. These
structural features probably protect the antigens from denaturation
and allow them to be absorbed intact and disseminate widely.
Curiously, many allergens, such as the cysteine protease of the
house dust mite and phospholipase A2 (PLA2) in bee venom, are
enzymes, but the importance of the enzymatic activity to their role
as allergens is not known.
Because immediate hypersensitivity reactions are dependent on
CD4+ T cells, T cell–independent antigens, such as polysaccharides,
cannot elicit these reactions unless they become aĴached to
proteins. Some nonprotein substances, such as penicillin, can elicit
strong IgE responses. These molecules react chemically with amino
acid residues in self proteins to form hapten-carrier conjugates (see
Chapter 12), which induce type 2 helper T cell responses and IgE
production.
The natural history of antigen exposure is an important
determinant of the amount of speciﬁc IgE antibodies produced and
the subsequent activation of mast cells. Repeat exposure to a
particular antigen is necessary for development of an allergic
reaction to that antigen because switching to the IgE isotype and
sensitization of mast cells with IgE must happen before an
immediate hypersensitivity reaction to an antigen can occur.
Individuals with allergic rhinitis or asthma often beneﬁt from a
geographic change of residence with a change in indigenous plant
pollens, although environmental antigens in the new residence may
trigger an eventual return of the symptoms. A dramatic example of
the importance of repeated exposure to antigen in allergic disease
is seen in cases of bee sting allergy. The proteins in the insect
venoms are not usually of concern on the ﬁrst encounter because an
atopic individual has no preexisting speciﬁc IgE antibodies.
However, IgE may be produced after a single encounter with
antigen with no harmful consequences, and a second sting by an
insect of the same species may induce fatal anaphylaxis! Similarly,
exposures to small amounts of peanuts can trigger fatal reactions in
previously sensitized individuals.
Activation of Type 2 Cytokine–Producing
Helper T Cells
The development of allergic disease begins with the diﬀerentiation of
IL-4–, IL-5–, and IL-13–producing CD4 +   helper T cells in lymphoid
tissues. The signals that drive the diﬀerentiation of naive CD4+ T
cells into Th2 cells and IL-4– and IL-13–producing TĢ cells in
response to most environmental antigens are not established. As
discussed later, there is a strong genetic propensity to make type 2
responses against some allergens, but this alone does not explain
why atopic individuals are prone to developing such responses. In
some chronic allergic diseases, an initiating event may be epithelial
barrier injury, which results in local production of Th2-inducing
cytokines. For instance, in a chronic allergic reaction of the skin
called atopic dermatitis, the epithelial barrier abnormality is
usually not visible and of unknown cause, but sometimes it is
related to inherited deﬁciency of ﬁlaggrin, which is a keratinocyte
protein needed to maintain normal barrier function of the skin. In
the bronchial tree of the lung, viral infections are considered a
major cause of the initial injury. In both tissues, injury induces
epithelial cells to secrete IL-25, IL-33, and thymic stromal
lymphopoietin (TSLP). DCs exposed to these cytokines are
mobilized to migrate to lymph nodes and to drive diﬀerentiation of
naive T cells in the lymph nodes toward IL-4–, IL-5–, and IL-13–
producing Th2 and TĢ cells. IL-25, IL-33, and TSLP also activate
ILC2s to upregulate GATA3, which enhances the transcription and
secretion of IL-5 and IL-13. Thus, epithelial cell–derived cytokines
may provide a link between allergens and type 2 responses.
The diﬀerentiated Th2 cells migrate to tissue sites of allergen
exposure, where they contribute to the inﬂammatory phase of
allergic reactions, described later. TĢ cells remain in lymphoid
organs, where they help B cells.
Activation of B Cells and Switching to IgE
B cells speciﬁc for allergens are activated by TĢ cells in secondary
lymphoid organs, as in other T cell–dependent B cell responses (see
Chapter 12). In response to CD40 ligand and cytokines, mainly IL-4
and IL-13, produced by these helper T cells, the B cells undergo
heavy chain isotype switching and produce IgE. IgE circulates as a
bivalent antibody and is normally present in plasma at a
concentration of less than 150 ng/mL. In pathologic conditions such
as helminthic infections and severe atopy, this level can increase
signiﬁcantly. Allergen-speciﬁc IgE produced by plasmablasts and
plasma cells enters the circulation and binds to Fc receptors on
tissue mast cells and circulating basophils, so that these cells are
sensitized and poised to react to a subsequent encounter with the
allergen.
Cells Involved in Allergic Reactions
The major eﬀector cells of immediate hypersensitivity reactions and
allergic disease are type 2 cytokine-secreting cells (Th2 cells, TĢ
cells, and possibly ILC2s), mast cells, basophils, and eosinophils.
Although each of these cell types has unique characteristics, all
four secrete mediators involved in allergic reactions. TĢ cells
stimulate IgE production in secondary lymphoid organs, and Th2
cells and ILC2s contribute to tissue inﬂammation by secreting
cytokines. Mast cells, basophils, and eosinophils release their
granule contents and produce other mediators, all of which are
responsible for the pathologic consequences of allergic reactions. In
this section, we will discuss the roles of these cell types in allergy.
Role of Th2 Cells and Innate Lymphoid Cells
in Allergic Disease
Th2 cells and ILC2s secrete cytokines, including IL-4, IL-5, and IL-
13, which promote inﬂammatory responses to allergens within
tissues. The general properties of Th2 cells and the signals that
drive their diﬀerentiation from naive T cells were discussed in
Chapter 10. IL-4 secreted by Th2 cells induces expression of
endothelial VCAM-1 (vascular cell adhesion molecule 1), which
promotes the recruitment of eosinophils and additional Th2 cells
into tissues. IL-5 secreted by Th2 cells enhances eosinophil
production in the bone marrow and activates mature eosinophils in
tissues. IL-13 stimulates epithelial cells (e.g., in the airways) to
secrete increased amounts of mucus, and excessive mucus
production is also a common feature of these reactions.
Consistent with a central role of Th2 cells in immediate
hypersensitivity, more allergen-speciﬁc IL-4–secreting T cells are
found in the blood of atopic individuals than in nonatopic persons.
In atopic patients, the allergen-speciﬁc T cells also produce more
IL-4 per cell than in normal individuals. In animal models, a
disease resembling human asthma can be induced by generation of
Th2 cells speciﬁc for an inhaled antigen or by adoptive transfer of
these cells into naive mice. Accumulations of Th2 cells are found at
sites of immediate hypersensitivity reactions in the skin and
bronchial mucosa.
ILC2s produce many of the same cytokines as Th2 cells,
speciﬁcally IL-5 and IL-13, and therefore may have similar roles in
allergic reactions. Because ILCs normally reside in tissues, their
cytokines may contribute to early allergic inﬂammation before Th2
cells are generated and migrate to the tissues. The ILC2s may also
work in concert with Th2 cells later, to sustain inﬂammation.
Properties of Mast Cells and Basophils
Mast cells, basophils, and eosinophils are myeloid cells that share
some features but diﬀer phenotypically and functionally in
signiﬁcant ways (Table 20.1). All mast cells are derived from
progenitors in the bone marrow. Normally, mature mast cells are
not found in the circulation. Progenitors migrate to the peripheral
tissues as immature cells and undergo diﬀerentiation in response
to local biochemical cues, including stem cell factor released by
tissue cells, which binds to the c-Kit receptor on the mast cell
precursors. Mature mast cells are found throughout the body,
predominantly near blood vessels (Fig. 20.2A) and nerves and
beneath epithelia. They are also present in lymphoid organs.
Human mast cells vary in shape and have round nuclei, and the
cytoplasm contains membrane-bound granules and lipid bodies.
The granules contain acidic proteoglycans that bind basic dyes.
Activated mast cells secrete a variety of mediators that are
responsible for the manifestations of allergic reactions (Table 20.2) .
These include substances that are stored in granules and rapidly
released upon activation and others that are synthesized upon
activation and secreted. The production and actions of these
mediators are described later.
Subsets of mast cells have been described in mice and humans,
which diﬀer in their main location (mucosa versus connective tissue
in mice), or granule protease content (tryptase only or tryptase and
chymase in humans). However, heterogeneity of mast cells appears
to be greater than just two subsets and does not reﬂect distinct
developmental lineages, but rather results from diﬀerent gene
expression proﬁles induced by microenvironmental factors and
stimuli that vary between tissues.
Basophils are blood granulocytes with structural and functional
similarities to mast cells. Like other granulocytes, basophils are
derived from bone marrow progenitors (which are diﬀerent from
the precursors of mast cells), mature in the bone marrow, and
circulate in the blood (Fig. 20.2B). Basophils constitute 0.5% or less
of blood leukocytes. Although they are normally not present in
tissues, basophils may be recruited to some inﬂammatory sites.
Basophils contain granules that bind basic dyes, and they are
capable of synthesizing many of the same mediators as mast cells
(see Table 20.2). Like mast cells, basophils express Fcε receptor type
I (FcεRI), bind IgE, and can be triggered by antigen binding to the
IgE. Therefore, basophils that are recruited into tissue sites where
antigen is present may contribute to immediate hypersensitivity
reactions.
Table 20.1
FcεRI, Fcε receptor type I; IL, interleukin.
Binding of IgE to Mast Cells and Basophils: the Fcε Receptor
Mast cells and basophils express a high-aﬃnity Fc receptor speciﬁc
for ε heavy chains, called Fc ε RI, which binds IgE. IgE, like all other
antibodies, is made exclusively by B cells, yet IgE functions as an
antigen receptor on the surface of mast cells and basophils. This
function is accomplished by IgE binding to FcεRI on these cells.
The aﬃnity of FcεRI for IgE is very high (dissociation constant [K d]
of approximately 1 × 10 −10 M), higher than that of any other Fc
pp
y
g
y
receptor for its antibody ligand. Therefore, although the normal
serum concentration of IgE is low compared to other Ig isotypes (<5
× 10 −10 M), there is full occupancy of FcεRI receptors by IgE, and
the majority of mast cells are always coated with IgE, even in
nonatopic individuals.
Each FcεRI molecule on mast cells is composed of an α chain that
binds the Fc region of IgE and a β chain and two γ chains that are
responsible for signaling (Fig. 20.3) . The amino-terminal
extracellular portion of the α chain includes two Ig-like domains
that form the binding site for IgE. The β chain of FcεRI contains a
single immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM) in
the cytoplasmic carboxy-terminal domain. The two identical γ chain
polypeptides are linked by a disulﬁde bond and are homologous to
the ζ chain of the T cell antigen receptor complex (see Chapter 7).
The cytoplasmic portion of each γ chain contains one ITAM. The
same γ chain serves as the signaling subunit for FcγRI, FcγRIIIA,
and FcαR and is called the FcR γ chain (see Chapter 13). Tyrosine
phosphorylation of the ITAMs of the β and γ chains initiates the
signaling cascade from the receptor that is required for mast cell
activation, described shortly.
FIGURE 20.2  Morphology of mast cells, basophils,
and eosinophils.Photomicrographs of Wright-
Giemsa–stained perivascular dermal mast cells
(A, arrows), peripheral blood basophil (B), and
peripheral blood eosinophil (C) are presented.
Note the characteristic blue-staining cytoplasmic
granules of the basophil and red staining of the
cytoplasmic granules in the eosinophil. 
A, Courtesy Dr. George Murphy. B and C, Courtesy Dr. Jonathan
Hecht, Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts.
Table 20.2
DC, Dendritic cell; FcεRI, Fcε receptor type I; GM-CSF, granulocyte-monocyte colony-
stimulating factor; IL, interleukin; MIP-1α, monocyte inflammatory protein 1α; PAF, platelet-
activating factor; PGD 2 , prostaglandin D2; RANTES, regulated by activation, normal T cell
expressed and secreted; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; TGF-β, transforming growth factor-β.
The 
importance 
of 
FcεRI 
in 
IgE-mediated 
immediate
hypersensitivity reactions has been demonstrated in FcεRI α chain
knockout mice. When these mice are given intravenous injections
of IgE speciﬁc for a known antigen followed by that antigen,
anaphylaxis does not develop or is mild, whereas it is a severe
reaction in wild-type mice treated in the same way. FcεRI
expression on the surface of mast cells and basophils is increased
by IgE, thereby providing a mechanism for the ampliﬁcation of IgE-
mediated reactions.
Whereas FcεRI on mast cells and basophils is expressed as an
αβγ2 tetramer, the receptors on eosinophils are mainly αγ2 trimers
and are expressed at low levels, and there is no convincing evidence
that eosinophils can be activated by antigens binding to IgE
aĴached to FcεRI. Another IgE receptor called FcεRII, also known
as CD23, is a protein related to C-type mammalian lectins whose
aﬃnity for IgE is much lower than that of FcεRI. The biologic role
of FcεRII is not known.
FIGURE 20.3  Polypeptide chain structure of the
high-affinity IgE-specific Fc receptor (FcεRI).IgE
binds to the Ig-like domains of the α chain. The β
chain and the γ chains mediate signal
transduction. The ITAMs in the cytoplasmic region
of the β and γ chains are similar to those found in
the T cell receptor complex (see Fig. 7.8). LYN
and FYN are tyrosine kinases that bind to the N-
terminal cytoplasmic end of the β chain, and SYK
is a tyrosine kinase that binds to phosphorylated
ITAM motifs in the C-terminal cytoplasmic tails of
the β and γ chains. These kinases participate in
signaling events that activate mast cells. ITAM,
Immunoreceptor tyrosine activation motif.
Activation of Mast Cells
Mast cells are activated by cross-linking of FcεRI molecules, which
occurs by binding of multivalent antigens to the IgE molecules that
are aĴached to the Fc receptors (Fig. 20.4) . In an individual allergic
to a particular antigen, a large proportion of the IgE bound to FcεRI
on the surface of mast cells is speciﬁc for that antigen. Exposure to
the antigen will cross-link suﬃcient IgE molecules to trigger mast
cell activation. In contrast, in nonatopic individuals, the IgE
molecules bound to mast cells are speciﬁc for many diﬀerent
antigens, all of which may have induced low levels of IgE
production. Therefore, no single antigen will cross-link enough of
the IgE molecules to cause mast cell activation.
Activation of mast cells results in three types of biologic
responses: secretion of preformed granule contents by exocytosis
(degranulation), synthesis and secretion of lipid mediators, and
synthesis and secretion of cytokines. The signaling cascades
initiated by allergen-mediated FcεRI cross-linking are similar to the
proximal signaling events initiated by antigen binding to
lymphocytes (Fig. 20.5; also see Chapter 7). When FcεR1 is cross-
linked by an allergen binding to the aĴached IgE, the LYN tyrosine
kinase, which is constitutively associated with the cytoplasmic tail
of the FcεRI β chain, phosphorylates the nearby ITAMs in the
cytoplasmic tails of FcεRI β and γ chains. The tyrosine kinase SYK
is then recruited to the ITAMs of the γ chain, becomes activated,
and phosphorylates and activates other proteins in the signaling
cascade, including several adaptor molecules and enzymes that
participate in the formation of multicomponent signaling
complexes, as described in T cells. The complex includes
phospholipase Cγ (PLCγ), which catalyzes phosphatidylinositol
bisphosphate breakdown to yield inositol trisphosphate (IP3) and
diacylglycerol (DAG), which in turn generate Ca++ and protein
kinase C (PKC) signals, respectively (see Chapter 7). FYN, a
tyrosine kinase that is also constitutively associated with the
cytoplasmic tail of the FcεRI β chain, phosphorylates the docking
protein GAB2, leading to PI3-kinase activation, which contributes to
the generation of Ca++ and PKC signals. These signaling events lead
to the three major responses:
• Degranulation. Activated PKC phosphorylates the myosin
light chain component of actin-myosin complexes located
beneath the plasma membrane, leading to disassembly of
the complex. This allows cytoplasmic granules to come in
contact with the plasma membrane. The mast cell granule
membrane then fuses with the plasma membrane, a
process that is mediated by members of the SNARE protein
family, which are involved in many other membrane fusion
events. Diﬀerent SNARE proteins present on the granule
membranes and plasma membranes interact to form a
multimeric complex that catalyzes fusion. The formation of
SNARE complexes is regulated by several accessory
molecules, including RAB3 guanosine triphosphatases and
RAB-associated kinases and phosphatases. In resting mast
cells, these enzymes inhibit mast cell granule membrane
fusion with the plasma membrane. On FcεRI cross-linking,
the resulting increase in cytoplasmic calcium
concentrations and the activation of PKC block the activity
of the inhibitory molecules. In addition, calcium sensor
proteins respond to the elevated calcium concentrations by
promoting SNARE complex formation and membrane
fusion. After membrane fusion, the contents of the mast
cell granules are released into the extracellular
environment. This process can occur within seconds of
FcεRI cross-linking and can be visualized morphologically
by loss of the dense granules of mast cells (see Fig. 20.4).
The biologic actions of the granule contents released upon
mast cell degranulation are described later.
• Lipid mediator production. Synthesis of lipid mediators is
controlled by the cytosolic enzyme phospholipase A2
(PLA2) (see Fig. 20.5). This enzyme is activated by two
signals: elevated cytoplasmic Ca++ and phosphorylation
catalyzed by a MAP (mitogen-activated protein) kinase,
such as ERK (extracellular receptor-activated kinase). ERK is
activated as a consequence of a kinase cascade initiated
through the FcεRI ITAMs, probably using the same
intermediates as in T cells (see Chapter 7). Once activated,
PLA2 hydrolyzes membrane phospholipids to release
arachidonic acid, which is converted by cyclooxygenase or
lipoxygenase into diﬀerent mediators (discussed later).
• Cytokine production. Cytokine secretion by activated mast
cells is a consequence of newly induced cytokine gene
transcription. The biochemical events that regulate cytokine
gene transcription in mast cells appear to be similar to the
events that occur in T cells. Recruitment and activation of
various adaptor molecules and kinases in response to FcεRI
cross-linking lead to nuclear translocation of NFAT (nuclear
factor of activated T cells) and NF-κB (nuclear factor κB), as
well as activation of AP1 (activator protein 1) by protein
kinases such as c-JUN N-terminal kinase. These
transcription factors stimulate expression of several
cytokines (IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-13, and tumor necrosis factor
[TNF], among others) but, in contrast to T cells, not IL-2.
FIGURE 20.4  Mast cell activation.Antigen
binding to immunoglobulin E IgE cross-links
FcεRI molecules on mast cells, which induces
the release of mediators that cause the
hypersensitivity reaction (A and B). Other
stimuli, including the complement fragment
Toll-like receptor (TLR) ligands, the
complement fragment C5a, cytokines,
neuropeptides, and cationic secretagogue,
can also activate mast cells independent of
FcεRI. A photomicrograph of a resting mast
cell with abundant purple-staining
cytoplasmic granules is shown in C. These
granules are also seen in the electron
micrograph of a resting mast cell shown in E.
In contrast, the depleted granules of an
activated mast cell are shown in the
photomicrograph (D) and electron micrograph
(F). 
Courtesy Dr. Daniel Friend, Department of Pathology,
Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts.
Mast cell activation through the FcεRI pathway is regulated by
various inhibitory receptors, which contain immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based inhibition motifs (ITIMs) within their cytoplasmic
tails (see Chapter 7). One such inhibitory receptor is FcγRIIB,
which co-aggregates with FcεRI during mast cell activation. The
ITIM of FcγRIIB is phosphorylated by LYN, and this leads to
recruitment of the phosphatase called SHIP (SH2 domain–
containing inositol 5-phosphatase) and inhibition of FcεRI
signaling. Experiments in mice indicate that FcγRIIB inhibits mast
cell degranulation in vivo. Several other inhibitory receptors are
also expressed on mast cells, but their importance in vivo is not
known.
In addition to allergen-induced cross-linking of FcεRI, many
other inﬂammatory stimuli can activate mast cells in the absence of
allergens or synergize with allergens. The complement fragments
C3a and C5a can cause mast cell degranulation, and this is why they
were named anaphylatoxins. Other stimuli induce selective
activation of mast cells to produce arachidonic acid metabolites,
cytokines, and chemokines, but not degranulation. These stimuli
include Toll-like receptor (TLR) ligands; substances released from
injured cells, including released ATP; fungal glucans; antimicrobial
peptides; cytokines such as stem cell factor (SCF), IL-3, IL-4, IL-9,
and IL-33; leukotrienes; and several chemokines. These additional
IgE-independent modes of mast cell activation are likely important
for the physiologic role of mast cells as sentinel cells of innate
immunity, initiating inﬂammatory responses to infection or tissue
injury (see Chapter 4).
Many neuropeptides, including substance P, somatostatin, and
vasoactive intestinal peptide, induce mast cell histamine release
and may mediate neuroendocrine-linked mast cell activation. The
nervous system is known to modulate allergic reactions, and
neuropeptides may be involved in this eﬀect. The ﬂare produced at
the edge of the wheal in elicited immediate hypersensitivity
reactions is in part mediated by the nervous system, as shown by
the observation that it is markedly diminished in skin sites lacking
innervation. Cold temperatures and intense exercise also trigger
mast cell degranulation, but the mechanisms involved are not
known.
Mast cell degranulation also can be stimulated by many diﬀerent
cationic substances, collectively called secretagogues. These include
endogenous inﬂammatory peptides, drugs known to cause adverse
allergy-like reactions, and the compounds 48/80 and mastoparan
used experimentally as pharmacologic triggers for mast cells.
Many agents activate mast cells independent of FcεRI by binding
to a receptor called MAS-related G protein–coupled receptor-X2
(MRGPRX2), which is highly expressed only by skin and other
g
y
p
y
y
tissue mast cells and neurons of the dorsal root ganglion, but not
mucosal mast cells. Ligands that bind to MRGPRX2 and thereby
activate mast cells include several antibiotics and anesthetic drugs,
components of insect venoms, antimicrobial peptides, molecules
secreted by eosinophil and neuropeptides. MRGPRX2 is considered
to be a likely mediator of many allergy-like reactions to drugs and
other pathologic conditions characterized by urticaria (superﬁcial
dermal edema with itching).
FIGURE 20.5  Biochemical events of mast cell
activation.Cross-linking of bound immunoglobulin E
by antigen promotes LYN phosphorylation of other
signaling molecules, which leads to activation of
protein tyrosine kinase SYK, which in turn causes
activation of a mitogen-activated protein (MAP)
kinase cascade and phospholipase Cγ (PLCγ).
PLCγ catalyzes the release of inositol
trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG) from
membrane phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate
(PIP2). IP3 causes release of intracellular calcium
from the endoplasmic reticulum. Calcium and DAG
activate protein kinase C (PKC). FYN
phosphorylation of GAB2 leads to PI3K activation,
which contributes to PKC activation. Calcium,
MAP kinases, and PKC promote cytokine gene
transcription, leading to secretion of cytokines.
PKC and calcium also enhance granule
exocytosis, releasing histamine and other
preformed mediators. Calcium and MAP kinases
combine to activate the enzyme cytosolic
phospholipase A2 (PLA 2 ), which initiates the
synthesis of lipid mediators, including
prostaglandin D2 (PGD 2 ) and leukotriene
C4 (LTC 4 ).
Mast cells also express Fc receptors for IgG heavy chains, and the
cells can be activated by cross-linking bound IgG. This IgG-
mediated reaction is the likely explanation for the ﬁnding that Ig ε
chain knockout mice are not completely resistant to antigen-
induced mast cell–mediated anaphylaxis. However, IgE is the major
antibody isotype involved in most immediate hypersensitivity
reactions.
Mast cell activation is not an all-or-nothing phenomenon, and
diﬀerent types or levels of stimuli may elicit partial responses, with
production of some mediators but not others. Such variations in
activation and mediator release may account for variable clinical
presentations.
Mediators Derived From Mast Cells
The eﬀector functions of mast cells are mediated by soluble
molecules released from the activated cells (Fig. 20.6; see also Table
20.2) . These mediators may be divided into preformed mediators,
which include vasoactive amines, and newly synthesized mediators,
which include lipid mediators and cytokines.
FIGURE 20.6  Biologic effects of mediators of
immediate hypersensitivity.Mast cell and basophil
mediators include vasoactive amines and enzymes
stored preformed in granules, as well as
cytokines and lipid mediators, which are largely
newly synthesized on cell activation. The biogenic
amines and lipid mediators induce vascular
leakage, bronchoconstriction, and intestinal
hypermotility, all components of the immediate
response. Cytokines and lipid mediators
contribute to inflammation, which is part of the
late-phase reaction. Enzymes probably contribute
to tissue damage. Activated eosinophils release
preformed cationic proteins and enzymes that are
toxic to parasites and host cells. Some eosinophil
granule enzymes probably contribute to tissue
damage in chronic allergic diseases. LTC 4 ,
Leukotriene C4; PAF, platelet-activating factor;
PGD 2 , prostaglandin D2; TNF, tumor necrosis
factor.
Vasoactive Amines
Many of the biologic eﬀects of mast cell activation are mediated by
vasoactive amines that are released from cytoplasmic granules and
act on blood vessels and smooth muscle. Vasoactive amines are low-
molecular-weight compounds that contain an amine group and act
directly on blood vessels. In human mast cells, the major mediator
of this class is histamine, but in some rodents, serotonin may also
be important. Histamine acts by binding to target cell receptors,
and diﬀerent cell types express distinct classes of histamine
receptors (e.g., H1, H2, H3) that can be distinguished by their
sensitivity to diﬀerent pharmacologic inhibitors. The actions of
histamine are short-lived because histamine is rapidly removed
from the extracellular milieu by amine-speciﬁc transport systems.
Histamine binding to cellular receptors initiates intracellular
events, such as phosphatidylinositol breakdown to IP3 and DAG,
and these products cause diﬀerent changes in diﬀerent cell types.
Histamine actions on endothelium include contraction of the
endothelial cells, leading to increased interendothelial spaces,
increased vascular permeability, and leakage of plasma into the
tissues. Histamine also stimulates endothelial cells to synthesize
vascular smooth muscle cell relaxants, such as prostacyclin (PGI2)
and nitric oxide, which cause vasodilation. These actions of
histamine produce the wheal-and-ﬂare response of immediate
hypersensitivity 
(described 
later). 
H1 
receptor 
antagonists
(commonly called antihistamines) can inhibit the vascular
responses 
to 
intradermal 
allergen. 
Histamine 
also 
causes
contraction of intestinal and bronchial smooth muscle. Thus,
histamine may contribute to the increased peristalsis and
bronchospasm associated with ingested and inhaled allergens,
respectively. However, in some allergic disorders, and especially in
asthma, antihistamines are not eﬀective at suppressing the
reaction. Moreover, bronchoconstriction in asthma is more
prolonged than are the eﬀects of histamine, indicating that other
mast cell–derived mediators are important in some forms of
allergy.
Granule Enzymes and Proteoglycans
Neutral serine proteases, including tryptase and chymase, are the
most abundant protein constituents of mast cell secretory granules
and may contribute to tissue damage in immediate hypersensitivity
reactions. Tryptase is present in all human mast cells and is not
known to be present in any other cell type. Therefore, the presence
of tryptase in human biologic ﬂuids is interpreted as a marker of
mast cell activation, and serum tryptase assays have been used to
diagnose anaphylaxis and other disorders associated with mast cell
activation. Chymase is found in some human mast cells, and its
presence or absence is one criterion for characterizing human mast
cell subsets, as discussed earlier. The functions of these enzymes
in 
vivo 
are 
not 
established; 
however, 
several 
activities
demonstrated in vitro suggest important biologic actions. For
example, tryptase cleaves and activates collagenase, thereby causing
tissue damage, whereas chymase can convert angiotensin I to
angiotensin II, which causes transient vasoconstriction. Chymase
also degrades epidermal basement membranes and stimulates
mucus secretion. Other enzymes found within mast cell granules
include carboxypeptidase A and cathepsin G. Basophil granules
also contain several enzymes, some of which are the same as those
in mast cell granules, such as neutral proteases.
Proteoglycans, including heparin and chondroitin sulfate, are
also major constituents of mast cell and basophil granules. These
molecules are composed of a polypeptide core and multiple
unbranched glycosaminoglycan side chains that impart a strong net
negative 
charge 
to 
the 
molecules. 
Within 
the 
granules,
proteoglycans serve as storage matrices for positively charged
amines, proteases, and other mediators and prevent their
accessibility to the rest of the cell. The mediators are released from
the proteoglycans at diﬀerent rates after granule exocytosis, with
vasoactive amines dissociating more rapidly than tryptase or
chymase. In this way, the proteoglycans may control the kinetics of
immediate hypersensitivity reactions.
Lipid Mediators
Mast cell activation results in the rapid de novo synthesis and
release of lipid mediators that have a variety of eﬀects on blood
vessels, bronchial smooth muscle, and leukocytes. The most
important of these mediators are derived from arachidonic acid,
which is generated by PLA2-mediated hydrolysis of membrane
phospholipids, as discussed earlier. Arachidonic acid is then
metabolized by either the cyclooxygenase or lipoxygenase pathways
to produce mediators of allergic reactions.
The major arachidonic acid–derived mediator produced by the
cyclooxygenase pathway in mast cells is prostaglandin D2 (PGD2).
Released PGD2 binds to receptors on smooth muscle cells and acts
as a vasodilator and a bronchoconstrictor. PGD2 also promotes
neutrophil chemotaxis and accumulation at inﬂammatory sites.
PGD2 synthesis can be prevented by cyclooxygenase inhibitors,
such as aspirin and other nonsteroidal antiinﬂammatory agents.
These 
drugs 
may 
paradoxically 
exacerbate 
asthmatic
bronchoconstriction because they shunt arachidonic acid toward
production of leukotrienes, discussed next.
The major arachidonic acid–derived mediators produced by the
lipoxygenase pathway are the leukotrienes, especially LTC4 and its
degradation products LTD4 and LTE4, all of which are called
cysteinyl leukotrienes. LTC4 is made mainly by mast cells in
mucosa and by basophils, but not by mast cells in connective
tissues. Mast cell–derived leukotrienes bind to speciﬁc receptors on
smooth muscle cells, diﬀerent from the receptors for PGD2, and
cause prolonged bronchoconstriction. Collectively, the cysteinyl
leukotrienes constitute what was once called slow-reacting
substance of anaphylaxis (SRS-A) and are now known to be
important mediators of bronchoconstriction in asthma. When
injected into the skin, these leukotrienes produce a long-lived
wheal-and-ﬂare reaction.
A third type of lipid mediator produced by mast cells and
basophils, as well as several other cell types, is platelet-activating
factor (PAF), named for its discovery as an inducer of rabbit platelet
aggregation. PAF is synthesized as a derivative of membrane
phospholipids. It has direct bronchoconstricting actions, causes
retraction of endothelial cells, and relaxes vascular smooth muscle.
However, PAF is hydrophobic and is rapidly destroyed by a plasma
enzyme called PAF hydrolase, which limits its biologic actions.
Individuals with an inherited deﬁciency of PAF hydrolase are at
high risk for developing early-onset asthma. Levels of PAF and its
metabolites are elevated in anaphylaxis. In rodent models,
pharmacologic inhibitors of PAF receptors ameliorate some aspects
of immediate hypersensitivity in the lung, but PAF antagonists
have not proved useful in clinical trials. PAF also may be important
in late-phase reactions, in which it can activate inﬂammatory
leukocytes.
Cytokines
Mast cells produce many cytokines that contribute to allergic
inﬂammation (the late-phase reaction). These cytokines include
TNF, IL-1, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-9, IL-13, CCL3, CCL4, and various
colony-stimulating 
factors, 
such 
as 
IL-3 
and 
granulocyte-
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). As mentioned
earlier, mast cell activation induces transcription and synthesis of
these cytokines. Th2 cells that are recruited into the sites of allergic
reactions also produce some of these cytokines. The cytokines that
are released from activated mast cells, Th2 cells, and possibly ILC2s
are mainly responsible for the inﬂammation associated with the
late-phase reaction. TNF activates endothelial expression of
adhesion molecules and together with chemokines accounts for
neutrophil and monocyte recruitment to the reaction site (see
Chapter 3). In addition to allergic inﬂammation, mast cell cytokines
also contribute to innate immune responses to infections. For
example, as we will discuss later, mouse models indicate that mast
cells are required for eﬀective defense against some bacterial
infections, and this eﬀector function is mediated largely by TNF.
Properties of Eosinophils
Eosinophils are bone marrow–derived granulocytes that are
abundant in the inﬂammatory inﬁltrates of late-phase reactions and
are involved in many of the pathologic processes in allergic diseases.
GM-CSF, IL-3, and IL-5 promote eosinophil diﬀerentiation from
myeloid precursors in the bone marrow, and after maturation they
circulate in the blood. Eosinophils are normally present in
peripheral tissues, especially in mucosal linings of the respiratory,
gastrointestinal, and genitourinary tracts. The granules of
eosinophils contain basic proteins that bind acidic dyes such as
eosin (see Table 20.2 and Fig. 20.2C). Eosinophils express very low
levels of FcεRI, and the receptor lacks a signaling chain, so its
function in these cells is unclear.
Cytokines produced by Th2 cells and ILC2s promote the activation
of eosinophils and their recruitment to late-phase reaction sites.
Both Th2 cells and ILC2s are sources of IL-5. IL-5 stimulates bone
marrow production of eosinophils and is a potent activator of
mature eosinophils that enhances the ability of these cells to
release granule contents. In the absence of this cytokine (e.g., in IL-
5 knockout mice), there is a deﬁciency of eosinophil numbers and
functions. Asthma patients treated with anti–IL-5 or anti–IL-5
receptor antibodies also show decreased eosinophil numbers and
amelioration of symptoms. Eosinophils are recruited into late-
phase reaction sites, as well as sites of helminthic infection, and
their recruitment is mediated by a combination of adhesion
molecule interactions and chemokines. Eosinophils bind to
endothelial cells expressing E-selectin and VCAM-1, the ligand for
the VLA-4 integrin. IL-4 produced by Th2 cells may enhance
expression of adhesion molecules for eosinophils. Eosinophil
recruitment and inﬁltration into tissues also depend on the
chemokine eotaxin (CCL11), which is produced by epithelial cells at
sites of allergic reactions and binds to the chemokine receptor
CCR3, which is expressed on eosinophils. In addition, the
complement product C5a and the lipid mediators PAF and LTB4
produced by mast cells also function as chemoaĴractants for
eosinophils.
Upon activation, eosinophils release granule proteins that are
toxic to microbes and may injure normal tissues. The granule
contents of eosinophils include lysosomal hydrolases found in
other granulocytes as well as eosinophil-speciﬁc proteins that are
particularly toxic to helminthic organisms, including major basic
protein and eosinophil cationic protein. These two cationic
polypeptides have no known enzymatic activities, but they damage
the integument of helminths and the cell walls of bacteria, as well
as cells in normal tissues. In addition, eosinophilic granules contain
eosinophil peroxidase, which is distinct from the myeloperoxidase
found in neutrophils and catalyzes the production of hypochlorous
or hypobromous acid. These products are also toxic to helminths,
protozoa, and host cells.
Activated eosinophils, like mast cells and basophils, produce and
release lipid mediators, including PAF, prostaglandins, and the
cysteinyl leukotrienes. These eosinophil-derived lipid mediators
may contribute to the pathologic processes of allergic diseases.
Eosinophils also produce a variety of cytokines, including IL-4 and
TGF-β, which may promote inﬂammatory responses and ﬁbrosis
receptively. Eosinophils produce large amounts of the protein
galectin-10 compared to other cell types, and when released from
activated and dying eosinophils, the galectin 10 aggregates to form
crystals, historically called Charcot-Leyden crystals. These crystals
are often found in sites of chronic type 2 inﬂammation, such as the
bronchi of allergic asthma patients. Experimental evidence
indicates 
that 
Charcot-Leyden 
crystals 
have 
a 
variety 
of
proinﬂammatory activities, including inﬂammasome activation and
priming of DCs to induce Th2 cell diﬀerentiation. These eﬀects are
reduced in experimental animals by treatment with antibodies that
specially block crystallization of galectin 10.
Reactions Dependent on IgE and Mast Cells
The cells and mediators we have discussed are responsible for the
immediate vascular changes and the later inﬂammatory reactions
that occur in allergies (Fig. 20.7). In the following sections, we will
describe these immediate and late-phase reactions.
The Immediate Reaction
The 
early 
vascular 
changes 
that 
occur 
during 
immediate
hypersensitivity reactions are demonstrated by the wheal-and-ﬂare
reaction to intradermal injection of an allergen (Fig. 20.8). When an
individual who has previously encountered an allergen and
produced IgE antibody is challenged by intradermal injection of the
same antigen, the injection site becomes red from locally dilated
blood vessels engorged with red blood cells. The site then rapidly
swells as a result of leakage of plasma from the venules. This soft
swelling is called a wheal and can involve an area of skin as large as
several centimeters in diameter. Subsequently, blood vessels at the
margins of the wheal dilate and become engorged with red blood
cells, producing a characteristic red rim called a ﬂare. The full
wheal-and-ﬂare reaction can appear within 5 to 10 minutes after
administration of antigen and usually subsides in less than 1 hour.
FIGURE 20.7  The immediate and late-phase
reactions of allergy. A, Kinetics. The immediate
vascular and smooth muscle reaction to allergen
develops within minutes after challenge (allergen
exposure in a previously sensitized individual), and
the late-phase reaction develops 2 to 24 hours
later. B and C, Morphology. The immediate
reaction (B) is characterized by vasodilation,
congestion, and edema, and the late-phase
reaction (C) is characterized by an inflammatory
infiltrate rich in eosinophils, neutrophils, and T
cells. 
Courtesy of the late Dr. Daniel Friend, Department of Pathology,
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
The wheal-and-ﬂare reaction is dependent on IgE and mast cells.
Histologic examination shows that mast cells in the area of the
wheal-and-ﬂare have discharged their cytoplasmic granules (i.e.,
released their preformed mediators). A causal association of IgE
and mast cells with immediate hypersensitivity was ﬁrst deduced
from experiments involving the passive transfer of IgE antibodies
from an allergic individual into a normal recipient. For example,
immediate hypersensitivity reactions against an allergen can be
elicited in unresponsive individuals if the local skin site is ﬁrst
injected with IgE from an allergic individual. Such adoptive transfer
experiments were ﬁrst performed with serum from immunized
individuals, and the serum factor responsible for the reaction was
originally called reagin. For this reason, IgE molecules are still
sometimes called reaginic antibodies. Subsequent experiments
showed that a wheal and ﬂare response could be reproduced by
injection of anti-IgE antibodies that cross-link mast cell FcεRI to
which IgE is aĴached. The antigen-initiated skin reaction that
follows adoptive transfer of IgE is called passive cutaneous
anaphylaxis.
The wheal-and-ﬂare reaction results from sensitization of dermal
mast cells by IgE binding to FcεRI, cross-linking of IgE by the
antigen, and activation of mast cells with release of mediators,
notably histamine. Histamine binds to histamine receptors on
venular endothelial cells; the endothelial cells synthesize and
release PGI2 and nitric oxide, and these mediators cause
vasodilation and vascular leak, as described earlier. Skin mast cells
appear to produce only small amounts of long-acting mediators
such as leukotrienes, so the wheal-and-ﬂare response subsides
rapidly. Allergists often test patients for allergies to diﬀerent
antigens by examining the ability of these antigens applied in skin
patches or administered through small needle pricks to elicit
wheal-and-ﬂare reactions.
The Late-Phase Reaction
The immediate wheal-and-ﬂare reaction is followed 2 to 4 hours
later by a late-phase reaction consisting of the accumulation of
inﬂammatory 
leukocytes, 
including 
neutrophils, 
eosinophils,
basophils, and helper T cells (see Fig. 20.7) . The inﬂammation is
maximal by about 24 hours and then gradually subsides. Like the
immediate wheal-and-ﬂare reaction, the capacity to mount a late-
phase reaction also can also be adoptively transferred with IgE, and
the reaction can be mimicked with anti-IgE antibodies or with mast
cell–activating agents. Cytokines produced by mast cells, including
TNF, upregulate endothelial expression of leukocyte adhesion
molecules, such as E-selectin and ICAM-1 (intercellular adhesion
molecule 1), and chemokines, which results in the recruitment of
blood leukocytes (see Chapter 3). Thus, mast cell activation
promotes the inﬂux of leukocytes into tissues. The types of
leukocytes that are typical of late-phase reactions are eosinophils
and helper T cells. Although Th2 cells are the dominant T cell
population in uncomplicated late-phase reactions, the cellular
inﬁltrates in chronic atopic dermatitis and asthma contain Th1 and
Th17 cells, as well as T cells that produce both IL-17 and IFN-γ.
Neutrophils are also often present in these reactions. Eosinophils
and Th2 cells both express CCR4 and CCR3, and the chemokines
that bind to these receptors are produced by many cell types at
sites of immediate hypersensitivity reactions, including epithelial
cells.
FIGURE 20.8  The wheal-and-flare reaction in the
skin and allergy skin tests. A, In a clinical test for
allergies, different antigens are introduced into the
skin by short needles. Patients with allergies to an
antigen will have antigen-specific IgE already
bound to mast cells in the skin, and the mast cells
will be activated. In response to antigen-
stimulated release of mast cell mediators, local
blood vessels first dilate and then become leaky
to fluid and macromolecules, which produces
redness and local swelling (a wheal). Subsequent
dilation of vessels on the edge of the swelling
produces the appearance of a red rim (the flare).
B, Photograph of a typical positive skin test
showing wheal-and-flare reactions in the skin in
response to injection of allergens. 
Courtesy Dr. David Sloane, Department of Medicine, Brigham and
Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
The late-phase reaction may occur without a detectable preceding
immediate hypersensitivity reaction. Bronchial asthma is a disease
in which there may be repeated bouts of inﬂammation with
accumulations of eosinophils and Th2 cells without the vascular
changes that are characteristic of the immediate response. In such
disorders, there may be liĴle mast cell activation, and the cytokines
that sustain the late-phase reaction may be produced mainly by T
cells.
Genetic Susceptibility to Allergic Disease
The propensity to develop allergies is inﬂuenced by the inheritance of
several genes. Atopic disease often aﬀects several members of the
same family, and studies have shown autosomal transmission of
atopy, but the full inheritance paĴern is multigenic. Within the
same family, the target organ of atopic disease is variable. Thus,
allergic rhinitis (hay fever), asthma, and atopic dermatitis (eczema)
can be present to various degrees in diﬀerent members of the same
kindred and may appear at diﬀerent times. All these individuals
may show higher than average plasma IgE levels.
Various approaches have been taken to identify genes that carry a
risk for allergic diseases, including positional cloning, candidate
gene studies, and genome-wide association studies. These
approaches have identiﬁed many diﬀerent gene variants that confer
increased susceptibility for asthma and other atopic diseases (Table
20.3). Based on the known functions of the proteins encoded by
many of these genes, rational speculations can be made about how
altered expression or activity of these proteins might aﬀect the
development or severity of allergic diseases. Nonetheless, we still
know very liĴle about whether the genetic polymorphisms that are
associated with increased risk for allergy actually alter expression
or function of the encoded proteins, and, in many cases, it is not
clear how the function of many of the encoded proteins could aﬀect
the development of allergy.
One of the ﬁrst signiﬁcant ﬁndings from genetic studies of
allergy was the identiﬁcation of a susceptibility locus for atopy on
chromosome 5q, near the site of the gene cluster encoding the
cytokines IL-4, IL-5, IL-9, and IL-13. This region is of great interest
because of the connection between several genes located there and
the mechanisms of IgE regulation and mast cell and eosinophil
growth and diﬀerentiation. Among the genes in this cluster,
polymorphisms in the IL33 gene appear to have the strongest
association with asthma. The loci containing genes encoding IL33, a
component of the IL33 receptor, and the transcription factor RORα
have been identiﬁed in genome-wide association studies of asthma
susceptibility. As discussed earlier, IL-33 is a cytokine released by
damaged epithelial cells and is an inducer of type 2 inﬂammation,
in which Th2 cells and ILC2s release IL-5 and IL-13. RORα may be
required for ILC2 diﬀerentiation.
Mutations that result in loss of expression or function of the
protein ﬁlaggrin result in signiﬁcant risk for development of atopic
dermatitis in early childhood, and subsequent allergic diseases,
y
q
g
including asthma. As mentioned earlier, ﬁlaggrin is required for
skin barrier functions and water retention, and a lack of this protein
is thought to promote keratinocyte damage and cytokine release, as
well as allergen entry into the dermis. Thus, ﬁlaggrin mutations
may enhance risk for allergic disease by increasing the access of
allergens to the immune system.
Table 20.3
ADAM33, Disintegrin and metalloprotease domain 33; cAMP, cyclic adenosine
monophosphate; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; FcεRI, Fcε receptor type I; IFN-γ, interferon- γ;
Ig, immunoglobulin; IL, interleukin; ILCs, innate lymphoid cells; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; MHC,
major histocompatibility complex; ORMDL3, orosomucoid like 3; PHF11, plant homeodomain
finger protein 11; STAT6, signal transducers and activators of transcription-6; TLR, Toll-like
receptors; TSLP, Thymic stromal lymphopoietin.
Some genes whose products regulate the innate immune
response to infections have been associated with allergy and
asthma. 
These 
include 
CD14, 
a 
component 
of 
the
lipopolysaccharide receptor, and TLR2 and TLR4. It is possible that
polymorphisms or mutations in genes that result in enhanced or
diminished innate responses to common infectious organisms may
inﬂuence the risk for development of atopy. Other genome-wide
association studies have found signiﬁcant associations of common
variants of numerous other genes with asthma and other atopic
diseases. However, either the products of these genes are of
unknown function, or the connection between their known
functions and the development of atopic disease is not known.
Environmental Factors in Allergy
It is clear that environmental inﬂuences have a signiﬁcant impact
on the development of allergy, and they synergize with genetic risk
factors. Environmental inﬂuences include exposure to allergens
themselves, to infectious organisms, and possibly other factors that
have an impact on mucosal barrier function, such as air pollution.
Furthermore, the time of life when exposure to these environmental
factors occurs, especially early-life exposure, appears to be
important.
Exposure to microbes during early childhood may reduce the risk
for developing allergies. One possible explanation for the increased
prevalence of asthma and other atopic diseases in industrialized
countries is that the frequency of infections or exposure to
microbial products in these countries is generally lower. A variety
of epidemiologic data show that early childhood exposure to
environmental microbes, such as those found on farms but not in
cities, is associated with decreased prevalence of allergic disease.
Based on these data, the hygiene hypothesis was proposed, which
states that early-life and even perinatal exposure to environmental
and commensal microbes and infections leads to a regulated
maturation of the immune system and perhaps early development
of regulatory T cells. As a result, later in life these individuals are
less likely to mount Th2 responses to noninfectious environmental
antigens and less likely to develop allergic diseases.
Respiratory viral and bacterial infections are a predisposing factor
in the development of asthma and exacerbations of preexisting
asthma. It is estimated that respiratory viral infections precede up
to 80% of asthma aĴacks in children. This may seem contradictory
to the hygiene hypothesis, but these asthma-associated infections
are due to human pathogens that may damage pulmonary mucosal
barriers; the data supporting the hygiene hypothesis focus on
exposure to a broad range of environmental bacteria not necessarily
related to tissue injury. Some epidemiologic studies indicate that a
failure to colonize the respiratory or gastrointestinal tract early in
life by particular commensal microbes can increase the risk for
respiratory viral infections that induce asthma.
Allergic Diseases in Humans: Pathogenesis
and Therapy
The manifestations of allergic diseases depend on the tissues in
which the mast cell mediators and type 2 cytokines have eﬀects, as
well as the chronicity of the resulting inﬂammatory process. Atopic
individuals may have one or more types of allergy, the most
common forms being allergic rhinitis, bronchial asthma, atopic
dermatitis, and food allergies. Frequently, an individual will
develop more than one atopic disorder. The clinical presentation of
atopic dermatitis in babies followed later in childhood by allergic
rhinitis and asthma is known as the atopic march, and these three
conditions, described later, are together called the atopic triad.
The clinical and pathologic features of allergic reactions vary with
the anatomic site of the reaction, for several reasons. The point of
contact with the allergen can determine the organs or tissues where
mast cells and Th2 cells are activated. For example, inhaled antigens
cause rhinitis or asthma and ingested antigens often cause
vomiting and diarrhea. Although there is a propensity for local
reactions to depend on the site of allergen entry, many allergens
can become widely disseminated whether inhaled or ingested and
can cause symptoms throughout the body regardless of the site of
entry. Injected antigens, such as drugs, can rapidly cause systemic
eﬀects. The concentration of mast cells in various target organs also
inﬂuences the severity of responses. Mast cells are particularly
abundant in the skin and the mucosa of the respiratory and
gastrointestinal tracts, and these tissues frequently suﬀer the most
injury in immediate hypersensitivity reactions. The local mast cell
phenotype may inﬂuence the characteristics of the immediate
hypersensitivity reaction. For example, connective tissue mast cells
produce abundant histamine and are responsible for wheal-and-
ﬂare reactions in the skin.
In the following section, we will discuss the major features of
allergic diseases manifested in diﬀerent tissues.
Systemic Anaphylaxis
Anaphylaxis is a systemic immediate hypersensitivity reaction
characterized by edema in many tissues and a decrease in blood
pressure secondary to vasodilation and vascular leak. These eﬀects
usually result from the systemic presence of antigen introduced by
injection, an insect sting, or absorption across an epithelial surface
such as gut mucosa. The allergens that most often cause
anaphylaxis include penicillin family antibiotics and proteins in
peanuts, tree nuts, ﬁsh, shellﬁsh, milk, eggs, and bee venom, but
there are many other drug, food, and environmental culprits. The
allergen activates mast cells in many tissues, resulting in the release
of mediators that gain access to vascular beds throughout the body.
The decrease in vascular tone and leakage of plasma caused by
mast cell mediators can lead to a signiﬁcant decrease in blood
pressure, or shock, called anaphylactic shock, which is often fatal.
Mast cell mediators may impair breathing by causing laryngeal
edema, 
bronchoconstriction 
and 
excess 
bronchial 
mucus
production. There is often diarrhea as a result of intestinal
hypermotility and outpouring of mucus in the gut and urticarial
lesions (hives) in the skin. Anaphylaxis usually occurs within
seconds to an hour of exposure to an allergen. In about 20% of
patients a second recurrence of symptoms is seen without known
reexposure to the allergen, up to 12 hours after the ﬁrst episode.
This is often called a late-phase anaphylactic reaction but should
not be confused with the late-phase reaction to allergen discussed
earlier. It is not known which mast cell mediators are the most
important in anaphylactic shock. The mainstay of treatment is
epinephrine injection, which can be lifesaving by reversing the
bronchoconstrictive and vasodilatory eﬀects of mast cell mediators.
Epinephrine also improves cardiac output, further aiding survival
from threatened circulatory collapse. Antihistamines are often
given to patients with anaphylaxis, but their eﬀectiveness is not
proved.
Asthma
 Asthma includes   a group of pulmonary diseases characterized by
recurrent reversible airﬂow obstruction and bronchial smooth
muscle cell hyperresponsiveness, most often caused by repeated
immediate-type hypersensitivity and late-phase reactions (Fig. 20.9)
. Patients have paroxysms of bronchoconstriction and increased
production of thick mucus, which lead to bronchial obstruction and
respiratory diﬃculties. Asthma in adults frequently coexists with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and the combination of
these diseases can cause severe irreversible airﬂow obstruction.
Aﬀected individuals may have considerable morbidity, and asthma
can be fatal. Asthma aﬀects approximately 25 million people in the
United States, and the frequency of this disease has increased over
the past 30 to 40 years. The prevalence rate is similar in other
industrialized countries and higher than in lower-income areas of
the world.
Approximately 70% of cases of asthma are associated with IgE-
mediated reactions reﬂecting atopy. In the remaining 30% of
patients, asthma may be triggered by nonimmune stimuli, such as
drugs, cold, and exercise. Even among nonatopic asthmatics, the
pathophysiologic process of airway constriction is similar, which
suggests that alternative mechanisms of mast cell degranulation
(e.g., by locally produced neurotransmiĴers) may underlie the
disease.
The pathophysiologic sequence in atopic asthma is probably
initiated by mast cell activation in response to allergen binding to
IgE and by Th2 cells reacting to allergens (Fig. 20.10). The lipid
mediators and cytokines produced by the mast cells and T cells lead
to the recruitment of eosinophils, basophils, and more Th2 cells.
The chronic inﬂammation in this disease may continue without
mast cell activation. There is experimental evidence that other T cell
subsets, including Th1 and Th17 cells and IL-9–secreting T cells,
may contribute to the pathologic processes in established disease.
Smooth muscle cell hypertrophy and hyperreactivity are thought to
result from leukocyte-derived mediators and cytokines. Mast cells,
basophils, and eosinophils all produce mediators that constrict
airway 
smooth 
muscle. 
The 
most 
important 
of 
the
bronchoconstricting mediators are cysteinyl leukotrienes, including
LTC4 and its metabolites. Increased mucus secretion results from
the action of cytokines, mainly IL-13, on bronchial epithelial cells.
FIGURE 20.9  Histopathologic features of bronchial
asthma.Atopic bronchial asthma results from
repeated immediate hypersensitivity reactions in
the lungs with chronic late-phase reactions. A
cross-section of a normal bronchus (A) and a
cross-section of a bronchus from a patient with
asthma (B) are shown. The diseased bronchus
has excessive mucus (M) production, many
submucosal inflammatory cells (including
eosinophils), smooth muscle (SM) hypertrophy,
and many more goblet cells than in the normal
bronchus (black arrows in insets). 
From Galli SJ, Tsai M, Piliponsky AM. The development of allergic
inflammation. Nature 2008;454:445–454. Courtesy G. J. Berry,
Stanford University, California.
Subsets of patients with severe asthma can be segregated based
on high or low levels of biomarkers reﬂecting type 2 inﬂammation.
These markers include sputum and blood eosinophil counts as well
as type 2 cytokine gene expression signatures in bronchial biopsies.
Although there is signiﬁcant heterogeneity of clinical features even
among patients with type 2 high and low disease phenotypes, this
classiﬁcation has proved useful to determine which patients are
most likely to beneﬁt from new cytokine-directed therapies for
asthma, discussed next.
Current therapy for asthma has two major goals: prevention and
reversal of inﬂammation, and relaxation of airway smooth muscle
(see Fig. 20.10). Several classes of drugs are in current use to treat
asthma, but antiinﬂammatory agents are now the primary mode of
treatment. Inhaled corticosteroids block the production of
inﬂammatory cytokines. Corticosteroids also may be given
systemically, especially once an aĴack is under way, to reduce
inﬂammation. Bronchial smooth muscle cell relaxation is achieved
principally by drugs that elevate intracellular cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) levels in smooth muscle cells, which
inhibits contraction. The major drugs used to elevate cAMP are
activators of adenylate cyclase, including inhaled long-acting β2-
adrenergic agonists. Antagonists speciﬁc for LTC4 receptor on
airway 
smooth 
muscle 
cells 
are 
eﬀective 
in 
reducing
bronchoconstriction. A humanized monoclonal anti-IgE antibody is
an approved therapy that eﬀectively reduces serum IgE levels in
patients. Several monoclonal antibody drugs speciﬁc for cytokines
or cytokine receptors have been approved for treatment of asthma,
including antibodies speciﬁc for IL-5, IL-5 receptor, IL-4RA (which
is shared by both IL-4 and IL-13 receptors), and TSLP. These
biologic drugs are mainly used in patients with severe type 2-high
disease that is refractory to other treatments. Because histamine
has liĴle role in airway constriction, antihistamines (histamine-1
[H1] receptor antagonists) are not useful in the treatment of
asthma. 
Indeed, 
because 
many 
antihistamines 
are 
also
anticholinergics, these drugs may worsen airway obstruction by
causing thickening of mucus secretions.
Immediate Hypersensitivity Reactions in the
Upper Respiratory Tract, Gastrointestinal
Tract, and Skin
Allergic rhinitis, also called hay fever, is perhaps the most prevalent
allergic disease and is a consequence of immediate hypersensitivity
reactions to common allergens such as plant pollen or house dust
mites localized to the upper respiratory tract by inhalation. The
pathologic and clinical manifestations include mucosal edema,
leukocyte inﬁltration with abundant eosinophils, mucus secretion,
coughing, sneezing, and diﬃculty breathing. Allergic conjunctivitis
with itchy eyes is commonly associated with the rhinitis. Focal
protrusions of the nasal mucosa, called nasal polyps, ﬁlled with
edema ﬂuid and eosinophils may develop in patients who have
frequent repetitive bouts of allergic rhinitis. Antihistamines are
commonly used to treat allergic rhinitis.
Food allergies are immediate hypersensitivity reactions to
ingested foods that lead to the release of mediators from intestinal
mucosal and submucosal mast cells of the gastrointestinal tract,
including the oropharynx. The resulting clinical manifestations
include pruritus, tissue edema, enhanced peristalsis, increased
epithelial ﬂuid secretion, and symptoms of oropharyngeal swelling,
vomiting, and diarrhea. Rhinitis, urticaria, and mild bronchospasm
are also often associated with allergic reactions to food, suggestive
of systemic antigen exposure, and anaphylaxis may occasionally
occur. Individuals may be suﬃciently sensitive to these allergens
that severe systemic reactions can occur in response to small
accidental ingestions. Allergies to foods, including cow’s milk,
eggs, peanuts, tree nuts, shellﬁsh, ﬁsh, soy, and wheat, are
extremely common across the world.
Common allergic reactions in the skin include urticaria and
atopic dermatitis. Urticaria, or hives, is an acute wheal-and-ﬂare
reaction induced by mast cell mediators and occurs in response to
direct local contact with an allergen or after an allergen enters the
circulation. Because the reaction that ensues is mediated largely by
histamine, antihistamines can aĴenuate this response and are the
mainstay of therapy. Urticaria may persist for several hours or days.
Rare cases of chronic urticaria are due to IgG autoantibodies
speciﬁc for FcεR1or the Fc portion of IgE.
FIGURE 20.10  Mediators and treatment of
asthma.Mast cell–derived leukotrienes and
platelet-activating factor (PAF) are thought to be
the major mediators of acute bronchoconstriction.
Therapy is targeted at reducing mast cell
activation with anti–immunoglobulin E (IgE) and
mast cell degranulation with inhibitors such as
cromolyn and at countering mediator actions on
bronchial smooth muscle by leukotriene
antagonists and bronchodilators such as inhaled
β-adrenergic receptor agonists. Mast cell–derived
cytokines are thought to be the major mediators
of sustained airway inflammation, which is an
example of a late-phase reaction; corticosteroid
therapy is used to inhibit cytokine synthesis, and
antibodies are used block the actions of the
cytokines. Cytokines are also produced by helper
T cells (not shown). IL, Interleukin; LTC 4 ,
leukotriene C4; PAF, platelet-activating factor;
TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
Atopic dermatitis (commonly called eczema) is characterized by
acute ﬂares of itchy red exudative papules and chronically dry scaly
skin. It is part of the atopic triad (atopic dermatitis, allergic rhinitis,
and asthma) discussed earlier, but it can also occur in isolation. It is
a common skin disorder, sometimes associated with ﬁlaggrin
mutations that result in defective skin barrier function. As a result,
there is increased exposure to environmental antigens and
activation of keratinocytes to secrete cytokines that promote type 2
immune responses. Patients with eczema go on to develop chronic
late-phase reactions in the skin. As may be expected for a cytokine-
mediated response, the late-phase inﬂammatory reaction is not
inhibited by antihistamines but can be treated with corticosteroids,
which inhibit cytokine synthesis. Anti–IL-4R antibody is approved
for the treatment of atopic dermatitis and chronic urticaria.
Specific Immunotherapy (Desensitization) for
Allergic Diseases
In addition to therapy aimed at the consequences of immediate
hypersensitivity that we have discussed, clinical immunologists
often try to reduce the onset of allergic reactions by altering the
allergen-speciﬁc immune response in the patient. Several empirical
immunotherapy protocols have been used, which induce multiple
immunologic alterations that may account for the clinical beneﬁt.
In one approach, called desensitization, or speciﬁc allergen
immunotherapy, small quantities of the allergen are repeatedly
administered subcutaneously or sublingually. As a result of this
treatment, speciﬁc IgE levels decrease and IgG titers often rise,
perhaps further inhibiting IgE production by neutralizing the
antigen and by antibody feedback (see Chapter 12). It is possible
that desensitization may work by inducing speciﬁc T cell tolerance,
by changing the predominant phenotype of antigen-speciﬁc T cells
from Th2 to Th1, by inducing production of non-allergy isotypes of
IgG speciﬁc for the allergen, or by inducing allergen-speciﬁc
regulatory T cells; however, there is no clear evidence to support
any of these hypotheses. The beneﬁcial eﬀects of desensitization
may occur in a maĴer of hours, much earlier than changes in IgE
levels. Although the precise mechanism is not known, this
approach has been eﬀective in preventing acute anaphylactic
responses to protein antigens (e.g., insect venom) or vital drugs
(e.g., penicillin). Many people with more common chronic atopic
conditions, such as hay fever and asthma, also beneﬁt from
desensitization therapy, but the overall eﬀectiveness for allergic
disorders is more variable. It is now possible to identify the
allergens that bind to IgE in each patient, using chip-based
antibody-binding assays, and this may greatly facilitate the
development of antigen-speciﬁc immunotherapy.
Epidemiologic and clinical trial data have shown that exposure of
infants 4 to 11 months of age to peanut-containing foods reduces
the risk of developing peanut allergy later in life. These results have
led to reversal of standard clinical recommendations, from peanut
avoidance to peanut exposure, for all children at risk for developing
peanut allergy (e.g., children with a strong family history or severe
eczema). In the trials, prevention of allergy by early-life exposure
correlated with induction of non-allergenic IgG4 antibodies speciﬁc
for the peanut allergens, but it is not known if this or other
mechanisms are the basis of tolerance induction, and it is not
known if this approach of early-life exposure will be eﬀective for
other food allergens. A preparation of powdered peanuts taken
orally has been shown to reduce risks for severe allergic reactions
to peanuts in children older than 4 years with known peanut allergy
and is approved for use in children 4 to 17 years of age.
The Protective Roles of Immune Reactions
Mediated by IgE and Mast Cells
Although IgE- and mast cell–mediated reactions are implicated
mostly in immediate hypersensitivity, it is reasonable to assume
that these responses have evolved because they provide protective
functions. This assumption is supported by the correlation of some
infections with elevated IgE levels and eosinophilia. Studies in mice
that were deﬁcient in IgE, Th2 cytokines, or mast cells have
provided evidence that IgE- and mast cell–mediated responses are
important for defense against certain types of infection.
IgE-initiated immune reactions may contribute to the eradication
of various microbes, including helminthic parasites. Eosinophil-
mediated killing of helminths is an eﬀective defense against these
organisms (see Chapter 10). Some evidence indicates that the
activities of IL-4 and IL-13 in IgE production and IL-5 in eosinophil
activation contribute to a coordinated defense against helminths. In
addition, IgE-dependent mast cell activation in the gastrointestinal
tract promotes the expulsion of parasites by increasing peristalsis
and by an outpouring of mucus. Studies in mice have highlighted
these important roles of IgE and mast cells. For example, mice
treated with anti–IL-4 antibody and IL-4 knockout mice do not
make IgE and appear to be more susceptible than normal animals
to some helminthic infections. IL-5 knockout mice, which are
unable to activate eosinophils, also show increased susceptibility to
some helminths. Furthermore, genetically mast cell–deﬁcient mice
show increased susceptibility to infection by tick larvae, and
immunity can be provided to these mice by adoptive transfer of
speciﬁc IgE and mast cells (but not by either component alone).
The larvae are eradicated by the late-phase reaction. Nonetheless,
the role of type 2 responses in protecting humans from helminths
is controversial, and human worm infections are frequently
sustained for decades in the face of chronic type 2 responses.
Mast cells play an important protective role as part of the innate
immune response to bacterial infections and venoms. Studies in mice
have indicated that mast cells can be activated by IgE-independent
mechanisms in the course of an acute bacterial infection and that
the mediators they release are critical for clearing the infection.
Mast cell–deﬁcient mice are less capable of clearing and are more
likely to die of acute bacterial infection of the peritoneum than are
normal mice. The protective role of mast cells in this seĴing is
mediated by TNF and depends on TNF-stimulated inﬂux of
neutrophils into the peritoneum, speciﬁcally the late-phase
reaction. The mechanisms by which mast cells are activated during
innate immune responses to bacterial infection include binding of
pathogen-associated molecular paĴerns to TLRs on mast cells and
complement activation by the alternative pathway, leading to the
release of C5a, which directly triggers mast cell degranulation.
Mast cell–derived proteases have been shown to destroy some
snake and insect venoms in mice, and venom-speciﬁc IgE confers
protection from envenomation. This is an unusual form of
immunity against a potentially lethal encounter with nonmicrobial
organisms and their toxins.
Summary
• Immediate hypersensitivity is an immune reaction triggered
by mast cell activation, usually by antigen binding to IgE
(immunoglobulin E) aĴached to mast cells.
• The steps in the development of immediate hypersensitivity
are exposure to an antigen (allergen) that stimulates type 2
responses, characterized by production of the cytokines
interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-5, and IL-13, IgE production, binding
of the IgE to Fcε receptors on mast cells, cross-linking of the
bound IgE by the allergen, activation of mast cells, and
release of mediators.
• Individuals who are susceptible to immediate
hypersensitivity reactions are called atopic and often have
more IgE in the blood and more IgE-speciﬁc Fc receptors
per mast cell than do nonatopic individuals. IgE synthesis
by B cells is induced by exposure to antigen and IL-4 and
IL-13 secreted by T follicular helper (TĢ) cells.
• Atopic diseases are characterized by repetitive bouts of type
2 inﬂammation involving various cell types, including Th2
cells, innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s), mast cells, basophils,
and eosinophils.
• Mast cells are derived from bone marrow precursors that
mature in tissues. They express high-aﬃnity receptors for
IgE (FcεRI) and contain cytoplasmic granules in which
various inﬂammatory mediators are stored. Basophils are a
type of circulating granulocyte that also express high-
aﬃnity Fcε receptors and contain granules with contents
similar to those of mast cells.
• Eosinophils are a special class of granulocyte; they are
recruited into inﬂammatory reactions by chemokines and
IL-4 and are activated by IL-5. Eosinophils are eﬀector cells
that are involved in killing parasites. In allergic reactions,
eosinophils contribute to tissue injury.
• On binding of antigen to IgE on the surface of mast cells or
basophils, the high-aﬃnity Fcε receptors become cross-
linked and activate intracellular signaling pathways that
lead to granule exocytosis, releasing histamine and other
vasoactive amines and proteases. In response to allergen,
mast cells and basophils are also activated to synthesize
and secrete lipid mediators, such as prostaglandins,
leukotrienes, and platelet-activating factor, and cytokines,
such as tumor necrosis factor, IL-4, IL-13, and IL-5.
• Vasoactive amines and lipid mediators cause the rapid
vascular and smooth muscle reactions of immediate
hypersensitivity, such as vasodilation, vascular leakage and
edema, bronchoconstriction, and gut hypermotility.
Cytokines released by mast cells and Th2 cells mediate the
y
y
late-phase reaction, which is an inﬂammatory reaction
involving neutrophil and eosinophil inﬁltration.
• Susceptibly to allergic diseases is inherited, and allelic
variations of several genes have been associated with
allergic asthma. Genetic susceptibly interacts with
environmental factors to result in atopy.
• Various organs show distinct forms of immediate
hypersensitivity involving diﬀerent mediators and target
cell types. The most severe and often fatal form is a
systemic reaction called anaphylactic shock, characterized
by diﬀuse edema with reduced blood volume, and airway
obstruction. Asthma is a chronic airway disease with
bronchial inﬂammation and episodes of reversible
bronchial constriction. Most cases of asthma are a
manifestation of repetitive immediate hypersensitivity
reactions in the lung. Allergic rhinitis (hay fever) is the
most common allergic disease of the upper respiratory
tract. Food allergens can cause diarrhea and vomiting. In
the skin, immediate hypersensitivity is manifested as
wheal-and-ﬂare (hives) and late-phase reactions and may
lead to chronic atopic dermatitis (eczema).
• Drug therapy is aimed at inhibiting mast cell mediator
production and at blocking or counteracting the eﬀects of
released mediators on target organs. Monoclonal antibodies
against cytokines, cytokine receptors, and IgE are approved
for some allergic diseases, including asthma.
Desensitization immunotherapy involves controlled
exposure to speciﬁc allergens with a goal of preventing or
reducing Th2 cell responses and the production of IgE
speciﬁc for those allergens.
• Immediate hypersensitivity reactions provide protection
against helminthic infections by promoting eosinophil-
mediated cytotoxicity and gut peristalsis. Mast cells may
also play a role in innate immune responses to bacterial
infections.
Selected Readings
∗Indicates publications of historical interest, generally reporting
the discovery of a phenomenon or process that was later shown to
be of fundamental importance in the immune system. Many (but
not all) of these discoveries led to Nobel Prizes for the
discoverer(s). The nature of the discovery is summarized brieﬂy in
each reference.
Mast Cells and Eosinophils
Dudeck A, Koberle M, Goldmann O, et al. Mast cells as protectors of health.  J Allergy Clin
Immunol . 2019;144:S4–S18.
Espinosa E, ValituĴi S. New roles and controls of mast cells.  Curr Opin Immunol
. 2018;50:39–47.
Galli S.J. The mast cell-IgE paradox: from homeostasis to anaphylaxis.  Am J Pathol
. 2016;186:212–224.
Karasuyama H, Miyake K, Yoshikawa S, Yamanishi Y. Multifaceted roles of basophils in
health and disease.  J Allergy Clin Immunol . 2018;142:370–380.
Klion A.D, Ackerman S.J, Bochner B.S. Contributions of eosinophils to human health and
disease.  Annu Rev Pathol . 2020;15:179–209.
Kubo M. Mast cells and basophils in allergic inﬂammation.  Curr Opin Immunol
. 2018;54:74–79.
Olivera A, Beaven M.A, Metcalfe D.D. Mast cells signal their importance in health and
disease.  J Allergy Clin Immunol . 2018;142:381–393.
Rigoni A, Colombo M.P, Pucillo C. Mast cells, basophils and eosinophils: from allergy to
cancer.  Semin Immunol . 2018;35:29–34.
Siebenhaar F, Redegeld F.A, Bischoﬀ S.C, et al. Mast cells as drivers of disease and
therapeutic targets.  Trends Immunol . 2018;39:151–162.
Weller PF, Spencer LA. Functions of tissue-resident eosinophils.  Nat Rev Immunol
. 2017;17:746–760.
Immune Responses Underlying Atopic Disorders
Bonnelykke K, Sparks R, Waage J, Milner J.D. Genetics of allergy and allergic sensitization:
common variants, rare mutations.  Curr Opin Immunol . 2015;36:115–126.
Goleva E, Berdyshev E, Leung D.Y. Epithelial barrier repair and prevention of allergy.  J Clin
Invest . 2019;129:1463–1474.
Gowthaman U, Chen J.S, Eisenbarth S.C. Regulation of IgE by T follicular helper cells.  J
Leukocyte Biol . 2020;107:409–418.
Haspeslagh E, Heyndrickx I, Hammad H, Lambrecht B.N. The hygiene hypothesis:
immunological mechanisms of airway tolerance.  Curr Opin Immunol . 2018;54:102–108.
∗Ishizaka K, Ishizaka T, Hornbrook M.M. Physico-chemical properties of human reaginic
antibody. IV. Presence of a unique immunoglobulin as a carrier of reaginic activity.  J
Immunol . 1966;97:75–85 (The discovery of IgE as the substance in plasma, previously called
reagin, that sensitized leukocytes to mediate hypersensitivity reactions in the skin.
Kabesch M, Tost J. Recent ﬁndings in the genetics and epigenetics of asthma and allergy. 
Semin Immunopathol . 2020;42:43–60.
Kemter A.M, Nagler C.R. Inﬂuences on allergic mechanisms through gut, lung, and skin
microbiome exposures.  J Clin Invest . 2019;130:1483–1492.
Lambrecht B.N, Hammad H. The immunology of the allergy epidemic and the hygiene
hypothesis.  Nat Immunol . 2017;18:1076–1083.
Muehling L.M, Lawrence M.G, Woodfolk J.A. Pathogenic CD4(+) T cells in patients with
asthma.  J Allergy Clin Immunol . 2017;140:1523–1540.
Noti M. New perspectives on the initiation of allergic immune responses at barrier sites. 
Curr Opin Immunol . 2018;54:130–136.
Perdijk O, Marsland B.J. The microbiome: toward preventing allergies and asthma by
nutritional intervention.  Curr Opin Immunol . 2019;60:10–18.
∗Portier P, Richet C. De Faction anaphylactique de certains venins.  C R Soc Biol
. 1902;54:170 (One of a series of papers by Portier and Richet describing the ﬁrst experimental
induction [and naming] of anaphylaxis by repeated injection of Physalia toxin into dogs.
Richet received the Nobel Prize for this work.
See. hĴps://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/1913/richet/lecture.
Roan F, Obata-Ninomiya K, Ziegler S.F. Epithelial cell-derived cytokines: more than just
signaling the alarm.  J Clin Invest . 2019;129:1441–1451.
Valenta R, Karaulov A, Niederberger V, et al. Molecular aspects of allergens and allergy.  Adv
Immunol . 2018;138:195–256.
Allergic Diseases
Anvari S, Miller J, Yeh C.Y, Davis C.M. IgE-mediated food allergy.  Clin Rev Allergy
Immunol . 2019;57:244–260.
Boonpiyathad T, Sozener Z.C, Satitsuksanoa P, Akdis C.A. Immunologic mechanisms in
asthma.  Semin Immunol . 2019;46:101333.
Gieseck 3rd. R.L, Wilson M.S, Wynn T.A. Type 2 immunity in tissue repair and ﬁbrosis. 
Nat Rev Immunol . 2018;18:62–76.
Holgate S.T, Wenzel S, Postma D.S, et al.  Asthma. Nat Rev Dis Primers.  2015;1:15025.
Huang C, Li F, Wang J, Tian Z. Innate-like lymphocytes and innate lymphoid cells in
asthma.  Clin Rev Allergy Immunol . 2019 doi: 10.1007/s12016-019-08773-6.
Lambrecht B.N, Hammad H, Fahy J.V. The cytokines of asthma.  Immunity . 2019;50:975–
991.
Mavissakalian M, Brady S. The current state of biologic therapies for treatment of refractory
asthma.  Clin Rev Allergy Immunol . 2020;59:195–207..
Milner JD. Primary atopic disorders. Annu Rev Immunol. 2020;38:785–808
Reber L.L, Hernandez J.D, Galli S.J. The pathophysiology of anaphylaxis.  J Allergy Clin
Immunol . 2017;140:335–348.
Renz H, Allen K.J, Sicherer S.H, et al. Food allergy.  Nat Rev Dis Primers . 2018;4:17098.
Sampath V, Nadeau K.C. Newly identiﬁed T cell subsets in mechanistic studies of food
immunotherapy.  J Clin Invest . 2019;129:1431–1440.
Schmiechen Z.C, Weissler K.A, Frischmeyer-Guerrerio P.A. Recent developments in
understanding the mechanisms of food allergy.  Curr Opin Pediatr . 2019;31:807–814.
Weidinger S, Beck L.A, Bieber T, et al. Atopic dermatitis.  Nat Rev Dis Primers . 2018;4:1.
Chapter 21: Primary and
Acquired Immunodeﬁciencies
Overview of Immunodeficiency Diseases,
Primary (Congenital) Immunodeficiencies,
Defects in Innate Immunity,
Severe Combined Immunodeficiency,
Antibody Deficiencies: Defects in B Cell
Development and Activation,
Defects in T Lymphocyte Activation and
Function,
Multisystem Disorders With Immunodeficiency,
Therapeutic Approaches for Primary
Immunodeficiencies,
Secondary (Acquired) Immunodeficiencies,
Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired
Immunodeficiency Syndrome,
An Overview of HIV Virology,
Pathogenesis of HIV Infection and AIDS,
Clinical Features of HIV Disease,
Immune Responses to HIV,
Elite Controllers and Long-Term
Nonprogressors: A Possible Role for Host
Genes,
Treatment and Prevention of AIDS and Vaccine
Development,
Summary,
Integrity of the immune system is essential for defense against
infectious organisms and their toxic products and therefore for the
survival of all individuals. Defects in one or more components of
the immune system can lead to serious and often fatal disorders,
which are collectively called immunodeﬁciency diseases. These
diseases 
are 
broadly 
classiﬁed 
into 
two 
groups. 
The
primary immunodeﬁciencies are genetic defects that result in an
increased susceptibility to infection that is frequently manifested in
infancy and early childhood but is sometimes ﬁrst clinically
detected later in life. A large number of individuals may inherit
mutant genes that compromise the function of the immune system.
However, a smaller fraction inherit deleterious mutations that on
their own have large enough eﬀects on the development or function
of 
the 
immune 
system 
to 
be 
categorized 
as 
primary
immunodeﬁciency disorders. Estimates of how prevalent primary
immunodeﬁciencies are in the United States range from 1 in 1200 to
1 in 10,000, although only a small proportion of these are aﬀected
severely enough for development of life-threatening complications.
Secondary, or acquired, immunodeﬁciencies are not inherited
diseases 
but 
develop 
as 
a 
consequence 
of 
malnutrition,
disseminated cancer, treatment with immunosuppressive drugs, or
infection of cells of the immune system, most notably with the
human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV), the etiologic agent of
acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome (AIDS). This chapter
describes 
the 
major 
types 
of 
congenital 
and 
acquired
immunodeﬁciencies, with an emphasis on their pathogenesis and
the components of the immune system that are involved in these
disorders.
Overview of Immunodeficiency Diseases
Before beginning our discussion of individual diseases, it is
important 
to 
summarize 
some 
general 
features 
of
immunodeﬁciencies.
The principal consequence of immunodeﬁciency is increased
susceptibility to infection. The nature of the infection in a particular
patient depends largely on the component of the immune system
that is defective (Table 21.1). Deﬁcient humoral immunity usually
results in infection by encapsulated, pus-forming bacteria and
some viruses, whereas defects in cell-mediated immunity lead to
infection by viruses and other intracellular microbes or the
reactivation of latent infections. Combined deﬁciencies in both
humoral and cell-mediated immunity make patients susceptible to
infection by all classes of microorganisms. Immunodeﬁcient
patients often present with infections by microbes that are
commonly encountered but eﬀectively eliminated by healthy
persons; such infections are said to be opportunistic. Defects in
innate immunity can result in infections by diﬀerent categories of
microbes, depending on the pathway or cell type aﬀected. In
addition to the clinically well-deﬁned immunodeﬁciency diseases,
there is growing evidence that adults with recurrent or severe
infections may harbor mutations in genes that regulate immune
function.
Table 21.1
Features of Immunodeficiencies Affecting T or B Lymphocytes
Feature
B Cell Deﬁciency
T Cell Deﬁciency
Susceptibility to
infection
Pyogenic bacteria
(otitis, pneumonia,
meningitis,
osteomyelitis),
enteric bacteria and
viruses, some
parasites
Pneumocystis
jiroveci, many
viruses,
atypical
mycobacteria,
fungi
Serum
immunoglobulin
levels
Reduced
Normal or
reduced
DTH reactions to
common
antigens
Normal
Reduced
Morphology of
lymphoid
tissues
Absent or reduced
follicles and
germinal centers (B
cell zones)
Usually normal
follicles, may
be reduced
parafollicular
cortical
regions (T cell
zones)
DTH, Delayed-type hypersensitivity.
Patients with immunodeﬁciencies are also susceptible to certain
types of cancer. Many of these cancers appear to be caused by
oncogenic viruses, such as the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and human
papillomaviruses (HPVs), and hence reﬂect defective antiviral
immunity, but the incidence of lymphoma and cancers of the skin,
stomach, and other organs with no known association with viral
infections is also increased.
In this chapter, we ﬁrst describe primary (congenital)
immunodeﬁciencies, including defects in components of the innate
immune system and defects in the humoral and cell-mediated arms
of the adaptive immune system. We conclude with a discussion of
secondary (acquired) immunodeﬁciencies, with an emphasis on
AIDS.
Primary (Congenital) Immunodeficiencies
Primary immunodeﬁciencies are monogenic diseases caused by
germline mutations in genes that regulate the development or
function of the immune system. Although the earliest primary
immunodeﬁciency disorders in which precise genetic defects were
identiﬁed were X-linked recessive diseases, the majority of primary
immunodeﬁciencies exhibit an autosomal recessive inheritance.
Autosomal recessive alleles are often seen in consanguineous
families when the same mutation is inherited from both parents. In
other cases, especially in oﬀspring of nonconsanguineous
marriages, one defective allele of a speciﬁc gene is inherited from
one parent and a diﬀerent defective mutation in the same gene is
inherited from the other parent; individuals with this kind of
autosomal recessive inheritance paĴern are referred to as
compound heterozygotes. Sometimes a compound heterozygote
may include one or both partially defective or hypomorphic alleles.
Some primary immunodeﬁciencies are associated with autosomal
dominant inheritance. These include gain-of-function mutations,
such as activating mutations in PIK3CD (encoding a hyperactive
form of PI3 kinase δ). Other dominantly inherited mutations
include loss-of-function mutations in one allele of a gene that leads
to impaired function but not complete loss of a speciﬁc protein.
These may cause disease because of haploinsuﬃciency, seen with
mutations in CTLA4, or because of a dominant negative eﬀect
whereby one defective gene product impairs the activity of the
protein product of the normal allele. Occasionally, the causative
mutation arises de novo in the patient and is not present in either
parent. These noninherited germline mutations typically occur in a
germ cell of one of the parents or in the fertilized egg.
The expression and clinical presentation of diseases caused by
the same mutation may be variable. Multiple factors may contribute
to the phenotypic variability, including the coinheritance of
modiﬁer 
genes, 
environmental 
factors, 
and 
epigenetic
modiﬁcations of genes that vary from one individual to another.
However, in most cases, diﬀerent phenotypic manifestations of the
same mutation remain unexplained.
Primary immunodeﬁciency diseases generally come to light
because of a clinical history of repeated infections. Some diagnoses
are quite easily made by measurement of serum immunoglobulin
(Ig) levels, ﬂow cytometry of immune cells, or assessment of
neutrophil function in vitro. However, more detailed investigations
are often necessary to obtain an accurate diagnosis. Primary T cell
immunodeﬁciencies are diagnosed by reduced numbers of
peripheral blood T cells, low proliferative responses of blood
lymphocytes 
to 
polyclonal 
T 
cell 
activators 
such 
as
phytohemagglutinin, 
and 
deﬁcient 
cutaneous 
delayed-type
hypersensitivity (DTH) reactions to ubiquitous microbial antigens,
such as Candida antigens. In the United States, it is now required
that newborns be screened using an assay for T cell receptor
excision circles (TRECs) in blood cells, looking for DNA that is
deleted during T cell receptor (TCR) gene rearrangement in
developing T cells. The failure to detect these DNA circles indicates
an absence of T cell development. This assay is used to diagnose
severe combined immunodeﬁciency, discussed later, immediately
after birth and allows for timely correction of the defect by
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Early diagnosis may also
make gene therapy feasible before signiﬁcant disease has
developed.
Immunodeﬁciency may result from defects in lymphocyte
development or activation or from defects in the eﬀector mechanisms
of innate and adaptive immunity. Immunodeﬁciency diseases are
clinically and pathologically heterogeneous, in part because
diﬀerent diseases involve diﬀerent components of the immune
p
system. Abnormalities in lymphocyte development may be caused
by mutations in genes encoding receptors and other molecules
involved in signaling, including enzymes, adaptors, transport
proteins, and transcription factors. These inherited defects, and the
corresponding targeted disruptions in mice, have been instructive
in elucidating mechanisms of lymphocyte development and
function (see Chapter 8).
The availability of new rapid and eﬃcient DNA sequencing
technology has greatly increased our ability to identify speciﬁc
genes that, when mutated, confer susceptibility to pathogens. One
of the surprising lessons that is emerging from the analysis of
immunodeﬁciencies caused by single-gene mutations is that many
of them make individuals susceptible to a restricted set of
infections. This observation suggests that in humans, distinct
protective mechanisms are often critical for defense against speciﬁc
pathogens, so that defects in any one mechanism make individuals
susceptible to only some infections.
Paradoxically, certain immunodeﬁciencies are associated with an
increased incidence of autoimmunity. Autoimmunity is generally
seen in immunodeﬁciencies in which there is an incomplete loss of
an immune population or function because of a hypomorphic
mutation, possibly resulting in aĴenuation of some regulatory
mechanism. It is also possible that the persistent infections
associated 
with 
immunodeﬁciencies 
cause 
innate 
immune
activation and tissue injury and promote the activation of
autoreactive lymphocytes.
In the following sections, we will describe immunodeﬁciencies
caused by inherited mutations in genes encoding components of
the innate immune system or in genes required for lymphocyte
development and activation. Many of the known mutations are
listed in the tables, and only the most common and those that
illustrate important principles are described in the text. We
conclude with a brief discussion of therapeutic strategies for these
diseases.
Defects in Innate Immunity
Innate immunity constitutes the ﬁrst line of defense against
infectious organisms; hence, congenital disorders of components of
innate immunity often result in recurrent infections. The
mechanisms of innate immunity were described in Chapter 4. In
this section of the chapter, we will discuss some examples of
congenital phagocyte disorders, natural killer (NK) cell deﬁciencies,
and genetic defects in Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling and in the
interleukin-12 (IL-12)/interferon-γ (IFN-γ) pathway (Table 21.2).
Phagocyte defects generally result in infections of the skin and
respiratory tract with bacteria or fungi, the laĴer predominantly
involving Aspergillus and Candida species. Deep-seated abscesses
and oral stomatitis are also common. Defects in TLR signaling and
in type 1 IFN signaling may contribute to recurrent pyogenic
infections and to severe viral infections; defects in IL-12 and the
IFN-γ pathway increase susceptibility to intracellular pathogens,
particularly mycobacterial infections. Complement deﬁciencies are
described in Chapter 13.
Defective Microbicidal Activity of Phagocytes: Chronic
Granulomatous Disease
Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is caused by mutations in
components of the phagocyte oxidase (PHOX) enzyme complex. It is
a rare disease, estimated to aﬀect approximately 1 in 200,000
individuals in the United States. Approximately two-thirds of cases
show an X-linked recessive paĴern of inheritance, and the
remainder are autosomal recessive. In the X-linked form of the
disease, there is a mutation in the gene encoding the 91-kD α
subunit of cytochrome b558, an integral membrane protein also
known as PHOX-91. Many diﬀerent mutations in this X-linked gene
have been identiﬁed, and these mutations result in defective
production of superoxide anion, one of several reactive oxygen
species that constitute a major microbicidal mechanism of
phagocytes, especially neutrophils (see Chapter 4). Defective
production of reactive oxygen species results in a failure to kill
phagocytosed microbes. Mutations in other components of the
PHOX complex cause autosomal recessive forms of CGD.
CGD is characterized by recurrent infections with fungi and
bacteria, such as Staphylococcus, usually from early childhood.
Invasive infection with the fungus Aspergillus is the leading cause
of death. Many of the organisms that are particularly troublesome
in patients with CGD produce catalase, which destroys the
microbicidal hydrogen peroxide that may be produced by host cells
from the residual reactive oxygen radical, superoxide. Because the
infections are not controlled by neutrophils, they stimulate chronic
cell-mediated immune responses, resulting in T cell–mediated
macrophage activation and the formation of granulomas composed
of activated macrophages, which try to eliminate the microbes. This
histologic appearance is the basis for the name of the disorder. The
disease was often fatal in the past, even with aggressive antibiotic
therapy, but the prognosis has improved signiﬁcantly now because
of earlier recognition and beĴer control of infections.
The cytokine IFN-γ enhances transcription of the gene encoding
PHOX-91 and also stimulates other components of the PHOX
enzyme complex. Therefore, IFN-γ stimulates the production of
superoxide by CGD neutrophils, especially in cases in which the
coding portion of the PHOX-91 gene is intact but its transcription is
reduced. If neutrophil superoxide production is restored to at least
10% of normal levels, resistance to infection is greatly improved. In
the United States, IFN-γ therapy is now used in some medical
centers for the treatment of X-linked CGD.
Leukocyte Adhesion Deficiencies
The leukocyte adhesion deﬁciencies are a group of autosomal
recessive disorders caused by defects in leukocyte and endothelial
adhesion molecules. These diseases are characterized by a failure of
leukocyte, particularly neutrophil, recruitment to sites of infection,
resulting in severe periodontitis and other recurrent bacterial
infections starting early in life, and an inability to make pus.
Diﬀerent types of leukocyte adhesion deﬁciencies are caused by
mutations in diﬀerent genes.
Table 21.2
Congenital Disorders of Innate Immunity
Disease
Functional Deﬁciencies
Mechanism of
Defect
Chronic
granulomatous
disease
Defective production of
reactive oxygen
species by phagocytes;
recurrent bacterial
and fungal infections
Mutation in
genes
encoding
proteins of
the phagocyte
oxidase
complex;
PHOX91
(cytochrome
b558 α
subunit) is
mutated in
the X-linked
form
Leukocyte
adhesion
deﬁciency type
1
Defective leukocyte
adhesion to
endothelial cells and
migration into tissues
linked to decreased or
absent expression of
β2 integrins; recurrent
bacterial and fungal
infections
Mutations in
gene
encoding the
β chain
(CD18) of β2
integrins
Disease
Functional Deﬁciencies
Mechanism of
Defect
Leukocyte
adhesion
deﬁciency type
2
Defective leukocyte
rolling and migration
into tissues linked to
decreased or absent
expression of
leukocyte ligands for
endothelial E- and P-
selectins, causing
failure of leukocyte
migration into tissues;
recurrent bacterial
and fungal infections
Mutations in
gene
encoding
GDP-fucose
transporter-1,
required for
transport of
fucose into
the Golgi and
its
incorporation
into sialyl
Lewis X, the
ligand for
selectins
Leukocyte
adhesion
deﬁciency type
3
Defective leukocyte
adhesion and
migration into tissues
linked to defective
chemokine-stimulated
integrin activation
Mutations in
gene
encoding
KINDLIN-3,
a cytoskeletal
protein
linked to
integrin
activation
Disease
Functional Deﬁciencies
Mechanism of
Defect
Chédiak-Higashi
syndrome
Defective vesicle fusion
and lysosomal
function in
neutrophils,
macrophages,
dendritic cells, NK
cells, cytotoxic T cells,
and many other cell
types; recurrent
infections by pyogenic
bacteria
Mutation in LYST
leading to
defect in
secretory
granule
exocytosis
and
lysosomal
function
NK cell
deﬁciencies
Reduced or absent NK
cells
Mutations in the
gene
encoding the
GATA2
transcription
factor and in
the gene
encoding the
MCM4 DNA
helicase
TLR signaling
defects
Recurrent infections
caused by defects in
TLR and CD40
signaling and
defective type I
interferon production
Mutations in
TLR3, TRIF,
TBK1, NEMO,
UNC93B,
MyD88, IκBα,
and IRAK4
compromise
NF-κB
activation
downstream
of TLR
Disease
Functional Deﬁciencies
Mechanism of
Defect
Mendelian
susceptibility
to
mycobacterial
diseases
Severe disease caused by
nontuberculous
environmental
mycobacteria, BCG,
Salmonella, and other
intracellular bacteria
Mutations in IL-
12p40, IL-
12RB,
IFNGR1,
IFNGR2,
STAT1,
NEMO, and
ISG15
BCG, Bacillus Calmette-Guérin; GDP, guanosine diphosphate; IRAK-4, IL-1 receptor–
associated kinase 4; LYST, lysosomal trafficking protein; NEMO, NF-κB essential modulator;
NK cells, natural killer cells; TLR, Toll-like receptor.
• Leukocyte adhesion deﬁciency type 1 (LAD-1) is a rare
autosomal recessive disorder characterized by recurrent
bacterial and fungal infections and impaired wound
healing. Umbilical cord separation (which normally occurs
as a consequence of inﬂammation and neutrophil
inﬁltration) is delayed, and leukocytosis is common. In
these patients, most adhesion-dependent functions of
leukocytes are defective, including adherence to
endothelium, neutrophil aggregation and chemotaxis,
phagocytosis, and cytotoxicity mediated by neutrophils, NK
cells, and T lymphocytes. The molecular basis of the defect
is absent or reduced expression of the β2 integrins
(heterodimers of CD18 and the CD11 family of
glycoproteins) as a result of mutations in the CD18 gene.
The β2 integrins include leukocyte function–associated
antigen 1 (LFA-1 or CD11aCD18), MAC-1 (CD11bCD18),
and p150,95 (CD11cCD18). These proteins participate in the
adhesion of leukocytes to other cells, notably endothelial
cells, and the binding of T lymphocytes to antigen-
presenting cells (APCs) (see Chapter 3).
• Leukocyte adhesion deﬁciency type 2 (LAD-2) is another rare
disorder in which, as in LAD-1, children present with
recurrent infections and leukocytosis, but they also exhibit
severe developmental abnormalities. LAD-2 results from an
absence of sialyl Lewis X, the tetrasaccharide carbohydrate
ligand on neutrophils and other leukocytes that is required
for binding of these cells to E-selectin and P-selectin on
cytokine-activated endothelium (see Chapter 3). This defect
is caused by a mutation in a guanosine diphosphate (GDP)-
fucose transporter responsible for the transport of fucose
into the Golgi, resulting in an inability to synthesize sialyl
Lewis X. The absence of sialyl Lewis X results in defective
aĴachment of leukocytes to endothelium, the absence of
leukocyte rolling, and therefore the defective recruitment of
leukocytes to sites of infection. This abnormality in
fucosylation seen in LAD-2 also contributes to a Bombay
blood group phenotype, which is a lack of the fucosylated H
glycan that forms the core of the A, B, and O blood group
antigens. Because LAD-2 has many nonimmunological
manifestations related to defective fucose metabolism, it is
also called congenital disorder of glycosylation (CDG).
• Leukocyte adhesion deﬁciency type 3 (LAD-3) patients
present clinically with repeated bacterial infections and
delayed umbilical cord separation as in LAD-1 but also
have a life-threatening bleeding disorder that requires
blood transfusions because of defective platelet
aggregation, even though blood platelet counts are normal.
This deﬁciency is caused by a defect in the inside-out
signaling pathway that mediates chemokine-induced
integrin activation that is required for leukocytes to bind
ﬁrmly to endothelium (see Chapter 3) and for platelets to
aggregate. In a subset of patients, it is caused by mutations
in the gene encoding KINDLIN-3, a protein that binds to
the cytoplasmic tail of some integrins and is involved in
signaling.
Defects in NK Cells and Phagocytes
Rare patients lack NK cells because of autosomal dominant
mutations in the gene encoding the GATA2 transcription factor.
The loss of GATA2 activity results in diminished precursor
populations in the bone marrow and a resulting loss of NK cells, as
well as decreases in monocytes, dendritic cells (DCs), and B cells.
Autosomal recessive mutations in MCM4 (minichromosome
maintenance complex component 4), a DNA helicase, also result in
the loss of NK cells, accompanied by adrenal insuﬃciency and
growth retardation. Autosomal recessive mutations aﬀecting CD16
(FcγRIIIA), an Fc receptor that mediates antibody-dependent cell-
mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC), result in a loss of NK cell function
that goes beyond the loss of ADCC activity. Why CD16 is required
broadly for NK cell function is unclear. Patients present with severe
infections 
with 
viruses 
mainly 
of 
the 
herpesvirus 
and
papillomavirus families.
Chédiak-Higashi syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive
disorder characterized by recurrent infections by pyogenic bacteria,
partial oculocutaneous albinism, and inﬁltration of various organs
by nonneoplastic lymphocytes. The neutrophils, monocytes, and
lymphocytes of these patients contain giant lysosomes. This disease
is caused by mutations in the gene encoding the protein LYST,
which regulates intracellular traﬃcking of lysosomes. The
mutations result in defective phagosome-lysosome fusion in
neutrophils and macrophages (causing reduced resistance to
infection), defective melanosome formation in melanocytes
(causing albinism), and lysosomal abnormalities in cells of the
nervous system (causing nerve defects) and platelets (leading to
bleeding disorders). Giant lysosomes form in neutrophils during
the maturation of these cells from myeloid precursors. Some of
these neutrophil precursors die prematurely, resulting in moderate
leukopenia. Surviving neutrophils may contain reduced levels of
the lysosomal enzymes that normally function in microbial killing.
These cells are also defective in chemotaxis and phagocytosis,
further contributing to their deﬁcient microbicidal activity. NK cell
function in these patients is impaired, probably because of an
abnormality in the cytoplasmic granules that store proteins
mediating cytotoxicity. The severity of the defect in cytotoxic T
lymphocyte (CTL) function is variable among patients. A mouse
strain called the beige mouse carries a mutation in the mouse
homolog of the gene encoding LYST, and it is characterized by
deﬁcient NK cell function and giant lysosomes in leukocytes.
Inherited Defects in TLR Pathways, NF-κB Signaling, and Type 1
IFNs
Inherited defects in TLR-induced responses are rare and tend to
cause fairly circumscribed clinical phenotypes. TLR3 mutations
result in herpes simplex encephalitis. Almost all viruses, including
DNA viruses such as the herpes virus, generate double-stranded
RNA (dsRNA) transcripts, and these are recognized by TLR3 (see
Chapter 4). The major signaling pathway downstream of most TLRs
and of the IL-1 receptor (IL-1R) involves the MyD88 adaptor and the
IRAK-4 and IRAK-1 kinases (see Chapter 4), and this pathway
results in the NF-κB (nuclear factor-κB)-dependent induction of
proinﬂammatory cytokines. Individuals with mutations in MyD88
and IRAK4 have severe invasive bacterial infections early in life,
especially pneumococcal pneumonia. Later in life, infections tend
to be less severe. TLR3 signaling uses the TRIF adaptor protein,
instead of MyD88, and TBK1, a serine-threonine kinase that
functions downstream of TRIF to activate IRF3 and NF-κB by the
noncanonical pathway. Autosomal recessive mutations in TRIF and
autosomal dominant mutations aﬀecting the TRAF3 E3 ligase also
result in susceptibility to herpes simplex encephalitis. A similar
phenotype is observed with autosomal dominant mutations in the
gene encoding TBK1. TLR3, 7, 8, and 9 recognize nucleic acids, are
located in endosomes, and require a protein called UNC93B
(Uncoordinated 93B) for their function. UNC93B is an endoplasmic
reticulum membrane protein that interacts with endosomal TLRs
when they are synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum and helps
deliver these TLRs to the endosomes. The UNC93B protein is also
critical for signaling by the nucleic acid–speciﬁc TLRs. Homozygous
mutations in UNC93B result in reduced type 1 IFN generation and
increased susceptibility to herpes simplex encephalitis.
Signaling downstream of the endosomal TLRs results in the
synthesis and secretion of type 1 IFNs, which bind to type 1 IFN
receptors and activate the STAT1 (signal transducer and activator of
transcription 1) transcription factor. In some patients, loss-of-
function STAT1 mutations are linked to severe viral infections,
notably herpes simplex encephalitis. The ﬁnding that mutations in
TLR3 itself or in genes that aﬀect TLR3 localization and signaling all
result in susceptibility to herpes simplex encephalitis indicates that
type 1 IFN production downstream of TLR3 activation is crucial in
defense against this infection in the central nervous system (CNS).
Interestingly, patients with severe COVID-19 (but not with less
severe disease) frequently have mutations in TLR3 and downstream
genes linked to type I interferon production.
Some immune deﬁciencies are caused by defects that speciﬁcally
aﬀect NF-κB activation. Point mutations in IKKγ (inhibitor of κB
kinase γ), also known as NEMO (NF-κB essential modulator),
which encodes a component of the IκB kinase complex that is
required for NF-κB activation, contribute to the X-linked recessive
disease 
known 
as 
anhidrotic 
ectodermal 
dysplasia 
with
immunodeﬁciency (EDA-ID). In this disorder, diﬀerentiation of
ectoderm-derived structures is abnormal, and immune function is
impaired in a number of ways. Responses to TLR signals as well as
CD40 signals are compromised. These patients suﬀer from
infections with encapsulated pyogenic bacteria as well as with
intracellular bacterial pathogens, including mycobacteria, viruses,
and fungi such as Pneumocystis jiroveci (see also discussion later in
the section on hyper-IgM syndromes).
Defects in the IL-12/IFN-γ Pathway
IL-12 is secreted by DCs and macrophages, and IL-12 receptor (IL-
12R) signaling stimulates the synthesis of IFN-γ by helper T cells,
cytotoxic T cells, and NK cells (see Chapters 4 and 10). Mutations in
the genes encoding IL-12p40, the IL-12Rβ1 chain, and both chains
of the IFN-γ receptor, as well as some mutations in STAT1 and
IKKγ/NEMO, 
result 
in 
susceptibility 
to 
environmental
Mycobacterium species (often called atypical mycobacteria), such as
Mycobacterium avium, Mycobacterium kansasii, and Mycobacterium
fortuitum. The term Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial
disease (MSMD) is used for these disorders, in which patients are
predisposed to severe disease caused by weakly virulent
mycobacteria that do not cause disease in healthy individuals, as
well as other intracellular pathogens, including Salmonella and
various other bacterial, fungal, and viral species.
Defects in Splenic Development
Splenic development may fail because of an autosomal dominant
(and sometimes sporadic) condition called isolated congenital
asplenia. In these patients, heterozygous missense mutations have
been found in NBX2.5, which encodes a transcription factor.
Asplenia also may be caused by mutations in genes controlling left-
right laterality, which also aﬀects other organs. Congenitally
asplenic patients frequently suﬀer from severe infections with
encapsulated bacteria, especially Streptococcus pneumoniae.
Severe Combined Immunodeficiency
Immunodeﬁciencies that aﬀect both humoral and cell-mediated
immunity are called severe combined immunodeﬁciency (SCID)
(Table 21.3) . SCID usually results from impaired T lymphocyte
development, resulting in defective cell-mediated immunity, with
or without defects in B cell maturation. When there is no block in B
cell development, the defect in humoral immunity is due to the
absence of T cell help.
SCID patients suﬀer from severe infections that may be life-
threatening, including pneumonia, meningitis, and bacteremia.
Among the most dangerous organisms in the context of SCID is an
intracellular fungus called P. jiroveci, which can cause a severe
pneumonia in SCID patients. Many viruses cause serious disease in
patients with SCID. Chickenpox (varicella) infection is usually
limited to the skin and mucous membranes in immunologically
normal children and typically resolves in days, but in patients with
SCID, it can progress to involve the lungs, liver, and brain.
Cytomegalovirus (CMV), which is present as a latent infection in
most people, may be easily transmiĴed, often from mothers of
SCID patients to their oﬀspring, and cause fatal pneumonia in
newborns. Children with SCID commonly develop gastrointestinal
infections caused most often by rotavirus, CMV, or the protozoa
Cryptosporidium and Giardia lamblia, leading to persistent diarrhea
and malabsorption.
Children with SCID may also develop infections caused by live
aĴenuated vaccines, which are not harmful in children who have
normal immunity. Vaccines for chickenpox, measles, mumps,
rubella, and rotavirus are live virus vaccines, and children with
SCID can develop serious infections from these vaccines.
Some SCID patients develop a chronic skin rash that is often
mistaken for infection. The rash is actually caused by a graft-versus-
host reaction in which maternal T cells enter the fetus but are not
rejected (because the fetus lacks a competent immune system) and
react against paternal allogeneic antigens in the baby’s tissues.
Mutations in genes involved in diﬀerent steps in lymphocyte
development may cause SCID (Fig. 21.1) . The process of T and B
lymphocyte 
maturation 
from 
hematopoietic 
stem 
cells 
to
functionally competent mature lymphocytes involves proliferation
of lymphocyte progenitors, rearrangement of antigen receptor
genes, and selection of cells with useful speciﬁcities (see Chapter
8). Defects in many of these steps have been described in diﬀerent
forms of SCID, including defects in thymus development, purine
metabolism, and cytokine signaling. Approximately 50% of SCIDs
are autosomal recessive; the rest are X-linked.
X-Linked SCID
X-linked SCID is caused by mutations in the gene encoding the
common γ (γc) chain shared by the receptors for many cytokines,
including IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, IL-15, and IL-21 (see Chapter 7) . X-
linked SCID is characterized by impaired maturation of T cells and
NK cells and greatly reduced numbers of mature T cells and NK
cells, but the number of B cells is usually normal or increased. This
disease is a result of the inability of the lymphopoietic cytokine IL-
7, whose receptor uses the γc chain for signaling, to stimulate the
growth of immature thymocytes. The humoral immunodeﬁciency in
this disease is due to a lack of T cell help for antibody production.
The receptor for IL-15, which is required for NK cell development,
also uses the γc signaling chain, and the failure of IL-15 signaling
accounts for the deﬁciency of NK cells.
Heterozygous females are usually phenotypically normal carriers,
whereas males who inherit the abnormal X chromosome manifest
the disease. Because developing cells in females randomly
inactivate one of the two X chromosomes, the normal allele
encoding a functional γc protein will not be expressed in half the
lymphocyte precursors in a female carrier. These cells will fail to
mature, and, consequently, all the mature lymphocytes in a female
carrier will have inactivated the same X chromosome (carrying the
mutant allele). In contrast, half of all nonlymphoid cells will have
inactivated one X chromosome and half the other. A comparison of
X chromosome inactivation in lymphocytes versus nonlymphoid
cells is sometimes used to identify carriers of the mutant allele. The
nonrandom use of X chromosomes in mature lymphocytes is also
characteristic of female carriers of other mutated X-linked genes
that aﬀect lymphocyte development, as discussed later.
Table 21.3
ADA, Adenosine deaminase; AK2, adenylate kinase 2; ATM, ataxia-telangiectasia mutated;
CRAC, calcium release–activated channel; DNA-PKcs, DNA-dependent protein kinase
catalytic subunit; Ig, immunoglobulin; LIG4, DNA ligase 4; MRE11, meiotic recombination
homologue 11; NBS1, Nijmegen breakpoint syndrome 1; NK cells, natural killer cells; PNP,
purine nucleoside phosphorylase; SCID, severe combined immunodeficiency; TCR, T cell
receptor.
a  Hypomorphic mutations in RAG genes and in ARTEMIS can cause Omenn syndrome.
FIG 21.1  Immunodeficiency caused by defects in B
and T cell maturation.Primary immunodeficiencies
caused by genetic defects in lymphocyte
maturation are shown. Genes encoding the listed
proteins are mutated in immunodeficient patients.
These defects may affect T cell maturation alone,
B cell maturation alone, or both. ADA, Adenosine
deaminase; B-1B, B-1 B cells; BCR, B cell
receptor; CLP, common lymphoid progenitor; DP,
double-positive; FOB, follicular B cells; HSC,
hematopoietic stem cell; IL, interleukin; MHC,
major histocompatibility complex; MZB, marginal
zone B cells; PNP, purine nucleoside
phosphorylase; SCID, severe combined
immunodeficiency.
ADA Deficiency and Other Forms of SCID Caused by Defects in
Nucleotide Metabolism
The most common cause of autosomal recessive SCID is deﬁciency of
an enzyme called adenosine deaminase (ADA) due to mutations in
the ADA gene. ADA functions in the salvage pathway of purine
synthesis and catalyzes the irreversible deamination of adenosine
and 2′-deoxyadenosine to inosine and 2′-deoxyinosine, respectively.
Deﬁciency of the enzyme leads to the accumulation of
deoxyadenosine and its precursors S-adenosylhomocysteine and
deoxyadenosine triphosphate (dATP). These by-products have
many toxic eﬀects, including inhibition of DNA synthesis.
Although ADA is present in most cells, developing lymphocytes
are less eﬃcient than most other cell types at degrading dATP into
2′-deoxyadenosine, and therefore lymphocyte maturation is
particularly sensitive to ADA deﬁciency. Other features of the
disease can include deafness, costochondral abnormalities, liver
damage, and behavioral problems. ADA deﬁciency leads to
reduced numbers of B and T cells; lymphocyte cell numbers are
usually normal at birth but fall oﬀ precipitously during the ﬁrst
year of life. A few patients may have a nearly normal number of T
cells, but these cells do not proliferate in response to antigenic
stimulation.
A rarer autosomal recessive form of SCID is due to the deﬁciency
of purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP), an enzyme that is also
involved in purine catabolism. PNP catalyzes the conversion of
inosine to hypoxanthine and guanosine to guanine, and deﬁciency
of PNP leads to the accumulation of deoxyguanosine and
deoxyguanosine triphosphate, with toxic eﬀects on immature
lymphocytes, mainly T cells. Autoimmune hemolytic anemia and
progressive neurologic deterioration are also features of this
disorder.
A particularly severe form of SCID is seen in a disease called
reticular dysgenesis. This rare disorder is characterized by the
absence of T and B lymphocytes and most myeloid cells, including
granulocytes, and is due to a defect in the development of
lymphoid and myeloid progenitors. This is an autosomal recessive
disease due to a mutation in the adenylate kinase 2 (AK2) gene. The
AK2 protein regulates the level of adenosine diphosphate, and in
the absence of AK2 there is increased apoptosis of lymphoid and
myeloid precursors.
Autosomal Recessive Mutations in Cytokine Signaling
Components
Some patients with a disease clinically identical to X-linked SCID
show an autosomal recessive inheritance. These patients have
mutations aﬀecting the IL-7 receptor α chain or the JAK3 kinase,
which associates with the γc chain and is required for signaling by
this receptor (see Chapter 7). Patients with mutations in the gene
encoding the IL-7Rα chain have a defect in T cell development but
exhibit normal NK cell development because IL-15 signaling is
unaﬀected, and they have normal numbers of B cells.
Severe Combined Immunodeficiency Caused by Defects in V(D)J
Recombination and Pre-TCR Checkpoint Signaling
Absence of V(D)J recombination leads to a failure to express the pre–
TCR and the pre-B cell receptor (BCR) and a block in T and B cell
development. Mutations in the RAG1 or RAG2 genes, which encode
proteins 
that 
mediate 
the 
cleavage 
step 
during 
V(D)J
recombination, or the ARTEMIS gene, which encodes an
endonuclease that resolves coding-end hairpins during V(D)J
recombination, all result in a failure of V(D)J recombination. These
diseases are rare, but they account for a large percentage of the
autosomal recessive forms of SCID. The functions of these proteins
are discussed in Chapter 8. In children with these mutations, B and
T lymphocytes are absent and immunity is severely compromised.
Mutations in genes encoding proteins involved in double-stranded
break repair or nonhomologous end-joining of DNA also lead to
SCID because of defects in V(D)J recombination. These include
genes encoding the catalytic subunit of the DNA-dependent
protein kinase (DNA-PK) and DNA LIGASE 4. Genetic defects in
this end-joining process also result in increased cellular sensitivity
to radiation and can result in other manifestations, such as
microcephaly, 
facial 
dysmorphisms, 
and 
defective 
tooth
development.
Although most autosomal recessive forms of SCID are linked to
mutations in ADA, RAG1, RAG2, and ARTEMIS, other forms of this
syndrome are caused by mutations in the genes encoding the CD45
phosphatase (which is a positive regulator of SRC family kinases,
such as FYN, LCK, and LYN) and mutations in the CD3 δ or ε
chains or in the CD3-associated ζ chain. These mutations
contribute to defective pre-TCR signaling and result in a block in
αβ T cell development.
A speciﬁc defect in αβ T cell development and a clinical
presentation that involves recurrent viral infections is caused by
homozygous mutations in the gene encoding the T cell receptor α
chain (TCRα) constant region. Aﬀected individuals present with
increased susceptibility to infections, including chronic varicella
zoster and EBV infections, as well as autoimmunity and features of
atopy. Clinical features include eosinophilia, vitiligo, eczema,
alopecia areata, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, and the presence
of other autoantibodies. The immune dysregulation may reﬂect the
absence of regulatory T cells. The only T cells present in infants
with this disease are γδ T cells.
Autosomal recessive mutations in LCK, which encodes a tyrosine
kinase required for pre-TCR and TCR signaling, also cause a form of
SCID with T cell deﬁciency, the lack of regulatory T cells, recurrent
infections, and features of immune dysregulation.
Hypomorphic mutations (that only partially reduce function) in
the RAG genes or in ARTEMIS are the cause of a disorder called
g
Omenn syndrome, characterized by reduced generation of T and B
cells, 
immunodeﬁciency, 
and 
autoimmune 
and 
allergic
manifestations. Omenn syndrome is phenotypically very diﬀerent
from SCID that is caused by more severe mutations in these very
same genes, because the immunodeﬁciency in this syndrome
coexists with exaggerated immune activation and autoimmunity.
Although the mechanism underlying the excessive immune
activation in this disease is unclear, it may be the result of an
abnormally low ratio of regulatory T cells to eﬀector T cells, or in
cases with decreased V(D)J recombination, defective receptor
editing in immature B cells. SCID caused by complete loss of RAG
function and Omenn syndrome caused by partial loss illustrate how
the severity of defects in the same gene can greatly inﬂuence the
resulting phenotype.
DiGeorge Syndrome and Other Forms of SCID Due to Defective
Thymic Epithelial Development
Complete or partial failure of development of the thymic anlage can
lead to defective T cell maturation. The most common defect in
thymic development causing SCID is seen in children with
DiGeorge syndrome. This selective T cell deﬁciency results from
defective development of the thymus and the parathyroid glands,
as well as of other structures that arise from the third and fourth
pharyngeal pouches during fetal life. The disease is characterized
by immunodeﬁciency because of hypoplasia or agenesis of the
thymus leading to deﬁcient T cell maturation, abnormal calcium
homeostasis and muscle twitching (tetany) due to an absence of
parathyroid glands, abnormal development of the great vessels,
and facial deformities. Diﬀerent patients may show varying degrees
of these abnormalities. The disease is caused most frequently by a
deletion in the chromosomal region 22q11. A mouse line that has a
similar defect in thymic development carries a mutation in a gene
encoding a transcription factor called T-box 1 (TBX1), which lies
within the same chromosomal region. This suggests that the
immunodeﬁciency associated with DiGeorge syndrome can be
explained, at least in part, by deletion of the TBX1 gene.
In this syndrome, peripheral blood T lymphocytes are absent or
greatly reduced in number, and the cells do not respond to
polyclonal T cell activators or in mixed leukocyte reactions.
Antibody levels are usually normal but may be reduced in severely
aﬀected patients. As in other severe T cell deﬁciencies, patients are
susceptible to mycobacterial, viral, and fungal infections. The
immunodeﬁciency associated with DiGeorge syndrome can be
corrected by fetal thymic transplantation or by bone marrow
transplantation. However, such treatment is usually not necessary,
because T cell function tends to improve with age in a large fraction
of patients and is often normal by 5 years. This improvement is
probably because of some residual thymic tissue or because some
as yet undeﬁned extrathymic sites assume the function of T cell
maturation. It is also possible that as these patients grow older,
thymus tissue develops at ectopic sites (i.e., other than the normal
location).
Autosomal recessive FOXN1 mutations have been described in a
small number of patients who present with SCID, alopecia (hair
loss), and nail dystrophy. FOXN1 is a transcription factor of the
Forkhead family that is required for the development of the thymic
anlage and other ectodermal structures. The nude mouse, a strain
that has been widely used in immunology research, lacks a thymus
and hair because of a mutation in the same gene.
Apart from defects in the thymic anlage, genes that regulate
egress of T cells from the thymus can also cause SCID. A rare
defect in the thymus has been described involving a mutation in
CORONIN1A, which encodes a protein that regulates the actin
cytoskeleton. The absence of functional CORONIN1A results in
defective egress of mature T cells from the thymus. Homozygous
mutations in the MST1 gene, which encodes a serine/threonine
protein kinase, result in the failure of T cells to emigrate from the
thymus and loss of naive T cells in the circulation. Patients present
with recurrent bacterial and viral infections, and some develop
EBV-driven 
lymphomas. 
Some 
patients 
present 
with
y
p
p
p
epidermodysplasia verruciformis, a disorder characterized by HPV-
infected warts and skin carcinomas. MST1 plays diverse roles in
proliferation, cell survival, and cell migration. Although the major
defect is in emigration of T cells from the thymus, there are also
humoral immune defects in some patients who present with
diminished B cell numbers and hypogammaglobulinemia.
Bare Lymphocyte Syndrome and Other Defects in T Cell Positive
Selection
The generation of single-positive CD4+ and CD8+ T cells from
double-positive thymocytes depends on positive selection and
lineage commitment events. Speciﬁc inherited mutations in genes
that regulate the process of positive selection abrogate the
development of CD4+ T cells or of CD8+ T cells.
Class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) deﬁciency,
called bare lymphocyte syndrome, is a rare heterogeneous group of
autosomal recessive diseases in which patients express liĴle or no
HLA (human leukocyte antigen)-DP, HLA-DQ, or HLA-DR on B
lymphocytes, macrophages, and DCs and fail to express class II
MHC molecules in response to IFN-γ. They express normal or only
slightly reduced levels of class I MHC molecules. Most cases of bare
lymphocyte syndrome are due to mutations in genes encoding
proteins that regulate class II MHC gene transcription. For
example, 
mutations 
aﬀecting 
the 
constitutively 
expressed
transcription factor RFX5 or the IFN-γ–inducible transcriptional
activator CIITA lead to reduced class II MHC expression. Failure of
antigen presentation may result in defective positive selection of T
cells in the thymus, leading to a reduction in the number of mature
CD4+ T cells, and defective activation of surviving CD4+ cells in the
periphery. Aﬀected individuals are deﬁcient in DTH responses and
in antibody responses to T cell–dependent protein antigens. The
disease appears within the ﬁrst year of life and is usually fatal
unless it is treated by hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
Autosomal recessive class I MHC deﬁciencies have also been
described and are characterized by decreased CD8+ T cell numbers
and function. In some cases, the failure to express class I MHC
molecules is due to mutations in the TAP-1 or TAP-2 genes, which
encode the subunits of the TAP (transporter associated with
antigen processing) complex. TAP normally transports peptides
from the cytosol into the endoplasmic reticulum, where they are
loaded onto class I MHC molecules (see Chapter 6). Because empty
MHC molecules are degraded intracellularly, the level of cell
surface class I MHC molecules is reduced in these TAP-deﬁcient
patients, a phenotype similar to tap gene knockout mice. Such
patients suﬀer mainly from necrotizing granulomatous skin lesions
and respiratory tract bacterial infections, but not viral infections,
which is surprising considering that a principal function of CD8+ T
cells is defense against viruses. A similar deﬁciency of class I MHC
expression has been observed in patients with mutations in the
gene encoding the TAPASIN protein, which is required for loading
the peptides transported into the ER onto nascent class I MHC
molecules (see Chapter 6).
Patients with ZAP70 deﬁciency have a lineage commitment
defect resulting in reduced CD8+ T cells but normal numbers of
CD4+ T cells; the reason for the selective loss is not clear. Although
CD4+ T cell development or emigration to the periphery is not
compromised, the cells fail to proliferate normally when challenged
with antigens.
SCID Caused by Defective T Cell Activation
Another rare form of SCID is caused by a mutation in the gene
encoding ORAI1, a component of the CRAC (calcium release–
activated calcium) channel (see Chapter 7). Antigen receptor
signaling leads to the activation of the γ isoform of phospholipase
C (PLCγ) and the inositol trisphosphate (IP3)-dependent release of
calcium ions from the endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria.
The released calcium is replenished by CRAC channels that
facilitate an inﬂux of extracellular calcium. This process is crucial
for lymphocyte activation, and it is defective in cells with mutant
ORAI1. A similar phenotype is observed in patients with mutations
in STIM1, which encodes an endoplasmic reticulum protein that
senses the depletion of calcium stores and contributes to the
opening of the CRAC channel. Patients with ORAI1 and STIM1
mutations do not exhibit a defect in T cell development, but their T
cells cannot be properly activated.
Antibody Deficiencies: Defects in B Cell
Development and Activation
Whereas defects in T cell development or in both T and B cell
development cause the SCID phenotype, more circumscribed
defects in B cells result in disorders in which the primary
abnormality is in antibody production (Table 21.4). Some of these
disorders are caused by defects in B cell development (see Fig.
21.1), and others are caused by abnormal B cell activation and
antibody synthesis (Fig. 21.2). In one subset of hyper-IgM
syndromes, discussed later, antibody deﬁciencies are also
accompanied by defects in macrophage and APC activation, which,
in turn, result in defective cell-mediated immunity.
X-Linked Agammaglobulinemia: An X-Linked Pre-BCR Signaling
Defect
X-linked 
agammaglobulinemia, 
also 
called 
Bruton’s
agammaglobulinemia, is caused by mutations or deletions in the gene
encoding an enzyme called Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK), resulting in
a failure of B cells to mature beyond the pre-B cell stage in the bone
marrow (see Fig. 21.1) . The disease is characterized by the absence
of antibodies (gamma globulins) in the blood, as the name implies.
It is one of the most common congenital immunodeﬁciencies and
the prototype of a failure of B cell maturation. BTK is involved in
transducing signals from the pre-BCR that are required for the
survival and diﬀerentiation of pre-B cells (see Chapter 8). In female
carriers of this disease, the only mature B cells are those that have
inactivated the X chromosome carrying the mutant allele. Patients
with 
X-linked 
agammaglobulinemia 
usually 
have 
low 
or
undetectable serum Ig, reduced or absent B cells in peripheral
blood and lymphoid tissues, no germinal centers in lymph nodes,
and no plasma cells in tissues. The maturation, numbers, and
functions of T cells are generally normal, although some studies
have revealed reduced numbers of activated T cells in patients,
which may be a consequence of reduced antigen presentation
caused by the lack of B cells. Autoimmune disorders such as
arthritis develop in almost 20% of patients; whether this is related
to failure of self-tolerance or is a consequence of chronic infections
because of the immunodeﬁciency has not been established. BTK is
also involved in the activation of myeloid cells, and susceptibility to
infection, in addition to reﬂecting the absence or near absence of
antibodies, could also result in part from defective innate immune
function. 
The 
infectious 
complications 
of 
X-linked
agammaglobulinemia are greatly reduced by periodic (e.g., weekly
or monthly) injections of IgG from healthy adult donors. Such
preparations contain preformed antibodies against common
pathogens and provide eﬀective passive immunity.
Autosomal recessive forms of agammaglobulinemia have been
described, most of which can be linked to defects in pre-BCR
signaling. Mutant genes that have been identiﬁed in this context
include genes encoding the µ (IgM) heavy chain, the λ5 surrogate
light chain, Igα (a signaling component of the pre-BCR and BCR),
the p85α subunit of PI3 kinase, and BLNK (an adaptor protein
downstream of the pre-BCR and BCR).
Selective Immunoglobulin Isotype Deficiencies
Many immunodeﬁciencies that selectively involve one or a few Ig
isotypes have been described. The most common is selective IgA
deﬁciency, which aﬀects approximately 1 in 700 individuals of
Caucasian descent, and is thus the most common primary
immunodeﬁciency in North America and Europe. IgA deﬁciency
usually occurs sporadically, but many familial cases with either
autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive paĴerns of inheritance
are also known. The clinical features are variable. Many people with
IgA deﬁciency are normal; others have occasional respiratory
infections and diarrhea; and, rarely, patients have severe, recurrent
infections leading to permanent intestinal and airway damage, with
associated autoimmune disorders. These manifestations reﬂect the
importance of secretory IgA in protection of mucosal barriers from
commensal and pathogenic microbes (see Chapter 14). IgA
deﬁciency is characterized by low serum IgA, usually less than 50
µg/mL (normal, 2 to 4 mg/mL), with normal or elevated levels of
IgM and IgG and low IgA in mucosal secretions. The disease is
genetically heterogeneous, and in some patients there is a defect in
IgA class switching, though the underlying basis for this defect has
not been identiﬁed. In a small proportion of patients with selective
IgA 
deﬁciency, 
mutations 
have 
been 
described 
in 
TACI
(transmembrane activator and calcium modulator and cyclophilin
ligand interactor), one of the three types of receptors for the
cytokines 
BAFF 
(B 
cell–activating 
factor) 
and 
APRIL 
(a
proliferation-inducing ligand), both of which stimulate B cell
survival and proliferation. TACI mutations are also a cause of
common variable immunodeﬁciency (CVID), discussed later.
Table 21.4
AID, Activation-induced cytidine deaminase; BTK, Bruton’s tyrosine kinase; DNMT3B, DNA
methyltransferase 3B; ICF, immunodeficiencies-centromeric instability-facial anomalies;
ICOS, inducible costimulator; Ig, immunoglobulin; NEMO, NF-κB essential modulator; TACI,
transmembrane activator and calcium modulator and cyclophilin ligand interactor; UNG, uracil
N-glycosylase.
Selective IgG subclass deﬁciencies have been described in which
total serum IgG levels are normal but concentrations of one or
more subclasses are below normal. IgG3 deﬁciency is the most
common subclass defect in adults, and IgG2 deﬁciency associated
with reduced IgA is most common in children. Some individuals
with these deﬁciencies have recurrent bacterial infections, but
many do not have any clinical problems. Selective IgG subclass
deﬁciencies are usually due to abnormal B cell diﬀerentiation and
rarely to homozygous deletions of various constant region (Cγ)
genes.
Defects in B Cell Differentiation: Common Variable
Immunodeficiency (CVID)
CVID is a group of heterogeneous disorders deﬁned by reduced levels
of serum Ig, impaired antibody responses to infection and vaccines,
and increased incidence of infections. It is the most common
immunodeﬁciency seen in adolescents and young adults. The
diagnosis is usually one of exclusion when other primary
immunodeﬁciency diseases are ruled out. The presentation and
pathogenesis are, as the name implies, highly variable. The
diagnosis is made based on very low serum IgG levels, decreased
IgM and/or IgA, and poor antibody response to vaccines, with
known genetic causes of hypogammaglobulinemia being ruled out.
The prevalence in Caucasian populations is estimated to be
between 1 in 10,000 and 1 in 50,000. Although Ig deﬁciency and
associated 
pyogenic 
infections, 
typically 
with 
Haemophilus
inﬂuenzae and S. pneumoniae, are major features of these disorders,
autoimmune diseases, including pernicious anemia, hemolytic
anemia, inﬂammatory bowel disease, and rheumatoid arthritis, may
be just as signiﬁcant clinically. A high incidence of malignant
tumors, particularly lymphomas, is also associated with CVID.
These disorders may be diagnosed early in childhood or late in life.
The majority of cases are sporadic, but from 5% to 25% of patients
have a family history. Monogenic forms of CVID exhibit mainly
autosomal dominant inheritance, although some patients show
autosomal recessive inheritance. Mature B lymphocytes are present,
but memory B cells are typically reduced in the blood and plasma
cells are absent in lymphoid tissues, which suggests a block in B
cell diﬀerentiation. The defective antibody production has been
aĴributed to multiple abnormalities, including intrinsic B cell
defects or deﬁcient T cell help.
FIG 21.2  Immunodeficiency caused by defects in B
and T cell activation.Primary immunodeficiencies
may be caused by genetic defects in molecules
required for T or B lymphocyte antigen receptor
signaling, for helper T cell–mediated activation of
B cells and macrophages (and dendritic cells), or
for activation and function of cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTLs) (and natural killer cells).
Genes encoding the listed proteins are mutated in
immunodeficient patients. AID, Activation-induced
cytidine deaminase; CVID, common variable
immunodeficiency; HLH, hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis; ICOS, inducible costimulator;
IgM, immunoglobulin M; TACI, transmembrane
activator and CAML interactor; TCR, T cell
receptor; UNG, uracil N-glycosylase; XLP, X-
linked lymphoproliferative disease.
Monogenic causes account for approximately 10% of cases of
CVID. So far, mutations in over 25 diﬀerent genes have been shown
to be associated with CVID. Mutations in TACI, described earlier in
the context of selective IgA deﬁciency, have been described in some
cases. Activating mutations in PIK3CD, the gene encoding the
catalytic subunit of PI3 kinase δ, lead to hyperactivation of T cells
and a block in B cell development that results in CVID. Loss-of-
function mutations in CTLA4 result in defective function of
regulatory T cells and a poorly explained block in B cell
development, which also causes CVID. A small proportion of
patients with CVID have a mutation in the ICOS (inducible T cell
costimulator) gene. ICOS is required for T follicular helper (TĢ)
cell generation (see Chapter 12). A few cases of CVID have been
linked to mutations in the CD19 gene. CD19 is a signaling
component of the CR2 (CD21) coreceptor complex (see Chapter 7).
Many other gene mutations have been identiﬁed in diﬀerent CVID
patients. Even in patients in whom a mutated gene is identiﬁed, the
inheritance paĴern is often more complex than in usual Mendelian
diseases.
Defects in T Cell–Dependent B Cell Activation: Hyper-IgM
Syndromes
The X-linked hyper-IgM syndrome is caused by mutations in the
gene encoding the T cell eﬀector molecule CD40 ligand (CD154). It is
a rare disorder associated with defective switching of B cells to the
IgG and IgA isotypes; production of these antibodies is therefore
reduced, and the major isotype detected in the blood is IgM.
Production of high-aﬃnity antibodies is also impaired. The mutant
forms of CD40 ligand produced in these patients fail to transduce
signals through CD40 and therefore do not stimulate B cells to
undergo heavy chain isotype switching, which requires engagement
of CD40 on B cells by CD40L on helper T cells (see Chapter 12).
Patients suﬀer from infections similar to those seen in other Ig
deﬁciencies. Patients with X-linked hyper-IgM syndrome also show
defects in cell-mediated immunity, with an increased susceptibility
to infection by the intracellular fungal microbe P. jiroveci. This
defective cell-mediated immunity occurs because CD40 ligand and
CD40 are also involved in T cell–dependent activation of
macrophages and DCs (see Chapter 10). Knockout mice lacking
CD40 or CD40 ligand have a phenotype similar to that of the
human disease.
A small subset of cases of hyper-IgM syndrome show an
autosomal recessive inheritance paĴern. In these patients, the
genetic defects may be in CD40 or in the enzyme activation–
induced deaminase (AID), which is involved in heavy chain isotype
switching and aﬃnity maturation (see Chapter 12). An even rarer
form of hyper-IgM syndrome is caused by autosomal recessive
mutations in the gene encoding uracil N-glycosylase (UNG; see
Chapter 12), an enzyme that removes U residues from Ig genes
during class switching and somatic mutation. An inherited
disorder, EDA-ID, in which hypomorphic NEMO mutations
contribute to a hyper-IgM state and defects in ectodermal
structures, is described earlier in the section on defects in innate
immunity.
AID and UNG mutations aﬀect class-switch recombination and
somatic hypermutation in distinct ways. In the absence of AID,
both switching and hypermutation are defective because AID is
required for both processes. In the absence of UNG, isotype
switching is defective but somatic hypermutation is largely
preserved, although it exhibits less A:T mutations than normal.
Nevertheless, the largely shared phenotypes of mutations aﬀecting
CD40L, CD40, AID, and UNG link all these genes in one pathway of
B cell activation, an excellent example of how genetic diseases
inform our understanding of biologic mechanisms. Predictably,
mutations aﬀecting AID and UNG aﬀect B cell responses but,
unlike CD40 or CD40L mutations, do not compromise cell-
mediated immunity.
Defects in T Lymphocyte Activation and
Function
Congenital abnormalities in the activation of T lymphocytes are
being increasingly recognized as our understanding of the
molecular basis of lymphocyte activation improves (Table 21.5).
Included in this broad category are some disorders of CTL and NK
cell granule composition or exocytosis. Although we classify
disorders linked to defective MHC expression with disorders of T
cell development, these abnormalities also result in defective
activation of T cells that do mature and emerge from the thymus.
Defects in TCR Signal Transduction
Many rare immunodeﬁciency diseases are caused by defects in the
expression of molecules required for T cell activation and function.
Biochemical and molecular analyses of aﬀected individuals have
revealed mutations in the genes encoding various T cell proteins
(see Table 21.5). Examples include impaired TCR complex
expression or function caused by mutations in the CD3 ε or γ genes
or defective TCR-mediated signaling caused by mutations in
ZAP70. These defects are often found in only a few isolated cases or
in a few families, and the clinical features and severity vary widely.
Patients 
with 
these 
abnormalities 
may 
have 
deﬁciencies
predominantly in T cell function or have mixed T cell and B cell
immunodeﬁciencies despite normal or even elevated numbers of
blood lymphocytes. We have previously mentioned the impact of
mutations aﬀecting the CD3 complex, LCK, and other proteins on
the development of all T cells; the eﬀect of ZAP70 mutations on
CD8+ T cell development; the eﬀect of LCK and UNC119 mutations
on CD4+ T cell development; and the relevance of ORAI1 and STIM1
mutations in T cell activation, all in the clinical context of SCID.
Some other syndromes involving the defective activation of mature
T cells are considered here.
Hyper-IgE Syndromes
The hyper-IgE syndromes (HIESs), also known as Job syndrome,
represent a collection of primary immunodeﬁciency syndromes in
which patients have eczema, eosinophilia, recurrent pulmonary
infections, and staphylococcal and fungal skin abscesses. The older
name, Job syndrome, was based on the biblical description: “So
went Satan forth from the presence of the Lord, and smote Job with
sore boils from the sole of his foot unto the crown.” One autosomal
dominant form of HIES results from heterozygous dominant-
negative mutations aﬀecting STAT3, a transcription factor that is
critical for cell responses to IL-6, IL-10, IL-17, IL-21, and IL-22.
Defective STAT3 signaling results in diminished acute-phase
responses downstream of IL-6, defective innate immunity and
defective Th17 responses, and this likely results in the propensity
for Staphylococcus aureus–mediated cold abscesses (see Chapter 10).
The defect in STAT3 has many pleiotropic eﬀects beyond the eﬀect
on Th17 cells and also contributes to defective inhibitory responses
mediated by IL-10. Another autosomal recessive cause of HIES is
mutation in the gene encoding DOCK8, a guanine nucleotide
exchange factor. DOCK8 mutations result in reduced numbers of T
cells, B cells, and NK cells and defects in lymphocyte signaling and
cytoskeletal rearrangements resembling those seen in the WiskoĴ-
Aldrich syndrome. DOCK8 participates in a pathway leading to
ARP2/3 complex–mediated actin polymerization and is also
required for the maintenance of STAT3 phosphorylation. The name
of this syndrome emphasizes increased levels of IgE in the blood;
the basis of this abnormality is likely linked to defective JAK-STAT
signaling leading to an increase in TĢ cells that make IL-4 and IL-
13, which drive IgE responses.
X-Linked Lymphoproliferative Disease
X-linked 
lymphoproliferative 
disease 
(XLP) 
is 
a 
disorder
characterized by an inability to eliminate EBV, eventually leading to
fulminant infectious mononucleosis and the development of B cell
lymphoma. In approximately 80% of cases, the disease is due to
mutations in the gene encoding an adaptor molecule called SLAM
(signaling lymphocyte activation molecule)-associated protein
(SAP) that binds to a family of cell surface molecules involved in
the activation of NK cells and T and B lymphocytes. SAP links the
membrane proteins SLAM and 2B4 (see Chapter 7) to the SRC
family kinase FYN. Defects in SAP contribute to aĴenuated NK and
T cell activation and result in increased susceptibility to viral
infections. As discussed in Chapter 12, SAP is required for TĢ cell
development, and the inability of XLP patients to produce germinal
centers and high-aﬃnity antibodies also likely contributes to the
associated hypogammaglobulinemia and susceptibility to viral
infection. In approximately 20% of cases of XLP, the genetic defect
resides not in SAP but in the gene encoding XIAP (X-linked
inhibitor of apoptosis). The resulting enhanced apoptosis of T cells
and NK-T cells leads to a marked depletion of these cell types. This
immunodeﬁciency is most commonly manifested by severe
opportunistic EBV infections.
Table 21.5
AP3, Adaptor-related protein complex 3; CTL, cytotoxic T lymphocyte; EBV, Epstein-Barr
virus; IgE, immunoglobulin E; ILC3, innate lymphocyte cell 3; LYST, lysosomal trafficking
regulator protein; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; NK cell, natural killer cell; SAP,
SLAM-associated protein; TAP, transporter associated with antigen processing; TCR, T cell
receptor; WASP, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein; WIP, WASP-interacting protein; XIAP, X-
linked inhibitor of apoptosis.
X-Linked Immunodeficiency-Magnesium Defects-EBV Infection-
Neoplasia Syndrome
Mutations in the gene on the X chromosome encoding MAGT1
(magnesium transporter protein 1) result in a defect in NK cell and
CTL function and also contribute to CD4+ T cell lymphopenia.
Patients have recurrent EBV and other infections and lymphomas.
This disorder is known as the XMEN (X-linked immunodeﬁciency-
magnesium 
defects-EBV 
infection-neoplasia) 
syndrome.
Intracellular levels of free magnesium that are induced during T
cell and NK cell activation by MAGT1 contribute to the activation of
PLCγ1 in these cells and help to mediate subsequent calcium
signaling. 
The 
cell 
signaling 
defect 
can 
be 
restored 
by
supplementing the diet with magnesium. B cells (which have high
levels of a diﬀerent PLCγ isoform, PLCγ2) are unaﬀected by the
absence of this transporter. This disorder highlights the role of
magnesium in T cell activation.
Defective CTL and NK Cell Function: Familial Hemophagocytic
Lymphohistiocytosis
Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) syndromes are
a group of life-threatening immunodeﬁciency disorders in which NK
cells and CTLs are defective in their ability to kill infected cells. As a
result, viral infections are not held in check, and compensatory
excessive macrophage activation is a feature of these syndromes.
Because of this feature, another name for these diseases is
macrophage activation syndrome. A late but striking feature of
these disorders is the ingestion of red blood cells by activated
macrophages (hemophagocytosis). Mutations in the perforin gene
are the most common cause of familial HLH, but mutations in
genes encoding the cellular machinery involved in granule
exocytosis are found in some cases of this syndrome. Speciﬁcally,
mutations aﬀecting RAB27A, a small guanosine triphosphatase
involved in vesicular fusion, and MUNC13-4, an adaptor that
participates in granule exocytosis, compromise the fusion of lytic
granules with the plasma membrane and thus contribute to various
subtypes of HLH. Similarly, mutations in the gene for one
component of the AP3 cytosolic adaptor protein complex can also
disrupt intracellular transport and contribute to a form of HLH. It
is thought that T cells and NK cells have defective cytotoxic activity
and cannot clear intracellular infections, and the excessive
compensatory 
IFN-γ–mediated 
macrophage 
activation 
is
manifested by hemophagocytosis and lymphadenopathy in the
context of immunodeﬁciency. An antibody that neutralizes IFN-γ is
approved for the treatment of familial macrophage activation
syndromes.
Multisystem Disorders With
Immunodeficiency
Immunodeﬁciency is often one of a constellation of symptoms in a
number of inherited disorders that aﬀect multiple organs.
Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome
WiskoĴ-Aldrich syndrome is an X-linked disease characterized by
eczema, 
thrombocytopenia 
(reduced 
blood 
platelets), 
and
susceptibility to bacterial infections. Some of the abnormalities in
this disorder can be traced to defective T cell activation, although
intrinsic loss of B cell function also contributes to the pathogenesis.
In the initial stages of the disease, lymphocyte numbers are normal,
and the principal defect is an inability to produce antibodies in
response to T cell–independent polysaccharide antigens, because of
which these patients are particularly susceptible to infections with
encapsulated bacteria. The lymphocytes (and platelets) are smaller
than normal. With increasing age, the patients show reduced
numbers of lymphocytes and more severe immunodeﬁciency.
The gene that is mutated in WiskoĴ-Aldrich syndrome encodes a
cytoplasmic protein called WASP (WiskoĴ-Aldrich syndrome
protein), which is expressed exclusively in bone marrow–derived
cells. WASP interacts with several proteins, including adaptor
molecules downstream of the antigen receptor such as GRB2 (see
Chapter 7), the ARP2/3 complex involved in actin polymerization,
and small G proteins of the RHO family that regulate actin
cytoskeletal rearrangement. Defective formation of immune
synapses between T cells and APCs, resulting in poor activation of
the lymphocytes, and impaired mobility of all leukocytes may
account for the immunodeﬁciency observed in this syndrome. An
autosomal recessive disease that resembles WiskoĴ-Aldrich
syndrome has been described. This disease is caused by mutations
in the gene encoding WIP (WASP-interacting protein), a protein
that binds to WASP and stabilizes it.
Ataxia-Telangiectasia
Ataxia-telangiectasia 
is 
an 
autosomal 
recessive 
disorder
characterized by abnormal gait (ataxia), vascular malformations
(telangiectases), neurologic deﬁcits, increased incidence of tumors,
and immunodeﬁciency. The disease is caused by mutations in a
gene that encodes a protein kinase called ATM (ataxia-
telangiectasia mutated). The immunologic defects are of variable
severity and may aﬀect both B and T cells. ATM is required for
double strand (ds) DNA break repair that is relevant to both V(D)J
recombination and class switch recombination, as described next.
The most common humoral immune defects are IgA and IgG2
deﬁciency, probably because of the crucial role of ATM in class-
switch recombination. The T cell defects, which are usually less
pronounced, are associated with thymic hypoplasia. Patients
experience upper and lower respiratory tract bacterial infections,
multiple autoimmune phenomena, and increasingly frequent
cancers with advancing age.
ATM is related structurally to PI3 kinase and activates cell cycle
checkpoints and apoptosis in response to dsDNA breaks. It also
has been shown to contribute to the stability of double-strand DNA
break 
complexes 
during 
V(D)J 
recombination. 
In 
ataxia-
telangiectasia, these abnormalities in DNA repair account for
abnormal generation of antigen receptors. In addition, ATM
contributes to DNA stability when dsDNA breaks are generated in
the course of Ig class switch recombination, and mutations in ATM
result in defective class switching and reduced levels of IgG, IgA,
and IgE.
Therapeutic Approaches for Primary
Immunodeficiencies
Treatments for immunodeﬁciencies have two aims: to minimize and
control infections and to replace the defective or absent components
of the immune system by antibody replacement or hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation. Passive immunization with pooled
gamma globulin is very beneﬁcial for agammaglobulinemic
patients and has been lifesaving for many boys with X-linked
agammaglobulinemia. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is
currently 
the 
treatment 
of 
choice 
for 
many 
primary
immunodeﬁciency diseases and has been successful in the
treatment of SCID, WiskoĴ-Aldrich syndrome, bare lymphocyte
syndrome, and LADs. Enzyme replacement therapy for ADA
deﬁciency is a common treatment. Injection of bovine ADA,
conjugated to polyethylene glycol to prolong its serum half-life, has
proved successful in some cases, but the beneﬁts are usually short-
lived.
In theory, the ideal therapy for congenital disorders of
lymphocytes is to replace the defective gene in self-renewing stem
cells. Gene replacement has proved successful for some
immunodeﬁciency disorders. The main obstacles to this type of
gene therapy remain diﬃculties in purifying self-renewing stem
cells, which are the ideal target for introduction of the replacement
gene, and in introducing genes into cells to achieve stable, long-
lived, and high-level expression. In addition, transplant recipients
have to be conditioned by depleting their bone marrow cells to
allow transplanted stem cells to engraft, and this carries potential
risks because of transient reduction of blood cells. Considerable
progress has been made in gene therapy for ADA deﬁciency and X-
linked SCID by use of a mild conditioning approach. Patients with
X-linked SCID have been successfully treated by transplantation of
autologous bone marrow cells engineered to express a normal γc
gene. In the early trials, a small number of the treated patients
developed leukemia, apparently because the introduced γc gene
inserted adjacent to an oncogene and activated that gene. The
development of newer self-inactivating lentiviral vectors has
reduced the risk for insertional mutagenesis, and this has led to
successful gene therapy for both ADA-SCID and X-linked SCID.
Table 21.6
Secondary (Acquired) Immunodeficiencies
Cause
Mechanism
HIV infection
Depletion of CD4+ T cells
Protein-calorie malnutrition
Metabolic derangements inhibit
lymphocyte maturation and
function
Irradiation and
chemotherapy for cancer
Decreased bone marrow
lymphocyte precursors
Cancer metastases and
leukemia involving bone
marrow
Reduced site of leukocyte
development
Immunosuppression for
transplants, autoimmune
diseases
Reduced lymphocyte activation,
cytokine blockade, impaired
leukocyte traﬃcking
Loss of the spleen as a result
of trauma, sickle cell
disease, or surgery
Decreased phagocytosis of blood-
borne bacteria
Secondary (Acquired) Immunodeficiencies
Deﬁciencies of the immune system often develop because of
abnormalities that are not genetic but acquired during life (Table
21.6) . Acquired immunodeﬁciency diseases are, in fact, more
common than congenital immunodeﬁciencies and are caused by a
variety of pathogenic mechanisms. First, immunosuppression may
occur as a biologic complication of another disease process. Second,
so-called 
iatrogenic 
immunodeﬁciencies 
may 
develop 
as
complications 
of 
therapy 
for 
other 
diseases. 
Third,
immunodeﬁciency may result from an infection that target cells of
the immune system. The most prominent of these is HIV infection,
which is described separately later in the chapter.
Disorders in which immunodeﬁciency is a frequent complicating
element include malnutrition, cancer, and infections. Protein-calorie
malnutrition is common in lower-income countries and is
associated with impaired cellular and humoral immunity to
microorganisms. Much of the morbidity and mortality that aﬄict
malnourished people is due to infections. The basis for the
immunodeﬁciency is not well deﬁned, but it is reasonable to
assume that the global metabolic disturbances in these individuals,
caused by deﬁcient intake of protein, fat, vitamins, and minerals,
will adversely aﬀect maturation and function of the cells of the
immune system.
Patients with advanced widespread cancer often are susceptible
to infection because of impaired cell-mediated and humoral
immune responses to a variety of microbes. Bone marrow tumors,
including cancers metastatic to marrow and leukemias that arise in
the marrow, may interfere with the growth and development of
normal lymphocytes and other leukocytes. In addition, tumors may
produce substances that interfere with lymphocyte development or
function.
Various types of infections lead to immunosuppression. Viruses
other than HIV are known to impair immune responses; examples
include the measles virus and HTLV-1 (human T cell lymphotropic
virus 1). Both viruses can infect lymphocytes, which may be a basis
for their immunosuppressive eﬀects. Like HIV, HTLV-1 is a
retrovirus with tropism for CD4+ T cells; however, instead of killing
helper T cells, HTLV-1 transforms them and produces an aggressive
malignant neoplasm called adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL).
Patients with ATL typically have severe immunosuppression with
multiple 
opportunistic 
infections. 
Chronic 
infections 
with
Mycobacterium tuberculosis and various fungi frequently result in
anergy to many antigens. Chronic parasitic infections may also lead
to immunosuppression. For example, African children with chronic
malarial infections have depressed T cell function, and this may be
one reason why these children have an increased propensity to
develop EBV-associated malignant tumors.
Iatrogenic immunosuppression is most often due to drug therapies
that kill or functionally inactivate lymphocytes or block the function
of cytokines made by innate immune cells and lymphocytes. Some
drugs are given intentionally to immunosuppress patients, either
for the treatment of inﬂammatory diseases or to prevent rejection
of organ allografts. The most commonly used antiinﬂammatory and
immunosuppressive drugs are corticosteroids and calcineurin
inhibitors, respectively, but many others, including anticytokine
antibodies, are widely used now (see Chapters 17 and 19). Various
chemotherapeutic drugs are administered to patients with cancer,
and these drugs are usually cytotoxic to proliferating cells,
including mature and developing lymphocytes as well as other
leukocyte precursors. Thus, cancer chemotherapy is almost always
accompanied by a period of immunosuppression and increased risk
for infection. Iatrogenic immunosuppression and tumors involving
the 
bone 
marrow 
are 
the 
most 
common 
causes 
of
immunodeﬁciency in higher-income countries.
Another form of acquired immunodeﬁciency results from the
absence of a spleen caused by surgical removal of the organ after
trauma and as treatment of certain hematologic diseases such as
autoimmune hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia, in which
red cells and platelets, respectively, are destroyed by phagocytes in
the spleen, or infarction in sickle cell disease. Patients without
spleens are more susceptible to infection by some organisms,
particularly bacteria such as pneumococci and meningococci, which
have polysaccharide-rich capsules and are normally cleared by
opsonization and phagocytosis. This enhanced susceptibility is
partly due to defective phagocytic clearance of the microbes in the
blood, an important function of the spleen, and partly due to
defective antibody responses resulting from the absence of
marginal zone B cells.
Human Immunodeficiency Virus and
Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
AIDS is the disease caused by infection with HIV and is
characterized by profound immunosuppression with associated
opportunistic infections and malignant tumors, wasting, and
neurocognitive disorders. HIV primarily infects activated CD4+
helper T cells. Macrophages and DCs can also harbor the virus but
do so less eﬃciently than activated CD4+ T cells. HIV emerged as a
human pathogen recently relative to most other known human
pathogens, and the HIV epidemic was ﬁrst identiﬁed only in the
1980s. However, the degree of morbidity and mortality caused by
HIV and the global impact of this infection on health care resources
and economies are already enormous and continue to grow. HIV
has infected 70 to 80 million people and has caused the death of
more than 34 million adults and children. Approximately 38 million
people are living with HIV infection and AIDS, of which
approximately 70% are in Africa and 20% in Asia, and almost a
million people die of the disease every year. An especially
devastating feature of the disease is that half of the approximately 3
million new cases every year occur in young adults (15 to 24 years of
age). AIDS has left approximately 14 million orphans. About 1.7
million children under 15 have HIV and more than 90% of these
children acquired AIDS from their mothers during fetal life,
childbirth, or while breastfeeding. About 100,000 children die of
AIDS every year. Currently, there is no vaccine or permanent cure
for AIDS, but antiretroviral drugs are in use that are very eﬀective
at controlling the infection. In this section of the chapter, we
describe the properties of HIV, the pathogenesis of HIV-induced
immunodeﬁciency, and the clinical and epidemiologic features of
HIV-related diseases.
An Overview of HIV Virology
HIV is a member of the lentivirus family of animal retroviruses.
Lentiviruses, including visna virus of sheep and the bovine, feline,
and simian immunodeﬁciency viruses, are capable of long-term
latent infection of cells and short-term cytopathic eﬀects, and they
all produce slowly progressive, fatal diseases that include wasting
syndromes and CNS abnormalities. Two closely related types of
HIV, designated HIV-1 and HIV-2, have been identiﬁed. HIV-1 is by
far the most common cause of AIDS; HIV-2, which diﬀers in
genomic structure and antigenicity, causes a form of AIDS with
slower progression than HIV-1–linked disease and is mainly
conﬁned to West Africa.
HIV Structure and Genes
An infectious HIV particle consists of two identical strands of RNA
packaged within a core of viral proteins and surrounded by a
phospholipid bilayer envelope derived from the host cell
membrane but including virally encoded membrane proteins (Fig.
21.3). The RNA genome of HIV is approximately 9.2 kb long and
has the basic arrangement of nucleic acid sequences characteristic
of all known retroviruses (Fig. 21.4). Long terminal repeats (LTRs)
at each end of the genome regulate viral gene expression, viral
integration into the host genome, and viral replication. The gag
sequence encodes core structural proteins. The env sequence
encodes the HIV Envelope (Env) protein. Env exists as a trimer of
three molecules of a glycoprotein, gp120, and a stem of three
molecules of gp41 that is inserted in the viral lipid bilayer. The pol
sequence encodes reverse transcriptase, integrase, and viral
protease enzymes, which are required for viral replication. In
addition to these typical retrovirus genes, the HIV-1 genome
contains six other regulatory genes unique to HIV, namely, the tat,
rev, vif, nef, vpr, and vpu genes, whose products regulate viral
replication and host immune evasion in various ways. The functions
of these genes are summarized in Fig. 21.4 and discussed later.
Viral Life Cycle
HIV infection of cells begins when the envelope glycoprotein gp120 of
the virus binds to two proteins on host cells, CD4 and usually a
chemokine receptor that functions as a coreceptor (Fig. 21.5) . The
viral particles that initiate infection are usually in the blood, semen,
or other body ﬂuids of one individual and are introduced into
another individual by sexual contact, needle stick, or transplacental
passage. The two components of Env, the transmembrane gp41
subunit and the external, noncovalently associated gp120 subunit,
are produced by proteolytic cleavage of a gp160 precursor. The
trimeric Env complex mediates a multistep process of fusion of the
virion envelope with the membrane of the target cell (Fig. 21.6). The
ﬁrst step of this process is the binding of gp120 subunits to CD4
molecules, which induces a conformational change that promotes
secondary gp120 binding to a chemokine receptor, generally CCR5
or CXCR4, which functions as a coreceptor for the virus. HIV
binding to the coreceptor induces a conformational change in gp41,
its refolding into a six-helix bundle that exposes a hydrophobic
region, called the fusion peptide, which then inserts into the cell
membrane and enables the viral membrane to fuse with the target
cell membrane. Fusion may occur at the cell surface or in a
macropinocytic or endosomal compartment. After the virus
completes its life cycle in the infected cell (described later), free
viral particles are released from the infected cell and bind to an
uninfected cell, thus propagating the infection. In addition, gp120
and gp41, which are expressed on the plasma membrane of infected
cells before virus is released, can mediate cell-cell fusion with an
uninfected cell that expresses CD4 and coreceptors, and HIV
genomes can then be passed between the fused cells directly.
FIG 21.3  Structure of HIV-1.An HIV-1 virion is
shown next to a T cell surface. HIV-1 consists of
two identical strands of RNA (the viral genome)
and associated enzymes, including reverse
transcriptase, integrase, and protease, packaged
in a cone-shaped core composed of p24 capsid
protein with a surrounding p17 protein matrix, all
surrounded by a phospholipid membrane envelope
derived from the host cell. Virally encoded
membrane proteins (gp41 and gp120) are bound
to the envelope. CD4 and chemokine receptors on
the host cell surface function as HIV-1 receptors. 
Copyright © 2000 by Terese Winslow.
FIG 21.4  HIV-1 genome.The genes along the linear
genome are indicated as differently colored
blocks. Some genes use some of the same
sequences as other genes, as shown by
overlapping blocks, but are read differently by
host cell RNA polymerase. The coding sequences
of the tat and rev genes are separated in the
genome and require RNA splicing to produce
functional mRNA. env, envelope; gag, group-
specific antigen; LTR, long terminal repeat; nef,
negative effector; pol, polymerase; rev, regulator
of viral gene expression; tat, transcriptional
activator; vif, viral infectivity factor; vpr, viral
protein R; vpu, viral protein u. 
Modified from Greene W. AIDS and the immune system. Sci Am.
1993;269[3], 98–105. Copyright © 1993 by Scientific American,
Inc.
FIG 21.5  HIV life cycle.The sequential steps in the
life cycle of HIV are shown, from initial infection of
a host cell to viral replication and release of a new
virion. For the sake of clarity, the production and
release of only one new virion are shown. An
infected cell actually produces many virions, each
capable of infecting cells, thereby amplifying the
infectious cycle. Proviral transcription is activated
by cytokines or antigen (not shown).
The most important chemokine receptors that act as coreceptors
for HIV are CCR5 and CXCR4. More than seven diﬀerent
chemokine receptors have been shown to serve as coreceptors for
HIV entry into cells, and several other proteins belonging to the
seven-transmembrane–spanning 
G 
protein–coupled 
receptor
family, such as the leukotriene B4 receptor, can also mediate HIV
infection of cells. Diﬀerent isolates of HIV and indeed diﬀerent
HIV strains within the same individual have distinct tropisms for
diﬀerent cell populations.
Although CD4+ T cells are the main cellular target of HIV, some
strains of HIV that have Env proteins that possess a very high
aﬃnity for CD4 can infect macrophages as well; these strains are
sometimes called macrophage (M)-tropic strains. The density of
CD4 on macrophages is 20 times lower than it is on CD4+ T cells,
and the expression on the macrophage cell surface of CCR5 and
CXCR4 is also considerably lower than the levels of these proteins
on CD4+ T cells.
Although genetically distinct viruses exist in any infected
individual, typically only a single viral strain is successfully
transmiĴed from an infected individual to a previously uninfected
one. The transmiĴed virus is called the founder strain. Founder
strains that are transmiĴed from one person to another have a
relatively low aﬃnity for CD4 and exclusively use the CCR5
molecule as a coreceptor. These strains, called T-tropic strains,
enter macrophages about 30 times less eﬃciently than M-tropic
strains. Person-to-person transmission almost always involves only
T-tropic strains. The importance of CCR5 in HIV infection in vivo is
supported by the ﬁnding that individuals who do not express this
receptor on the cell surface because of an inherited homozygous
deletion in the CCR5 gene are resistant to HIV infection.
After an HIV virion enters a cell, the enzymes within the
nucleoprotein 
complex 
become 
active 
and 
begin 
the 
viral
reproductive cycle (see Fig. 21.5) . The nucleoprotein core of the
virus becomes disrupted, the RNA genome of HIV is reverse-
transcribed into a dsDNA by viral reverse transcriptase, and the
viral DNA enters the nucleus. The viral integrase also enters the
nucleus and catalyzes the integration of viral DNA into the host
cell genome. The integrated HIV DNA is called the provirus. The
provirus may remain transcriptionally inactive for months or years,
with liĴle or no production of new viral proteins or virions, and in
this way HIV infection of an individual cell can be latent. The
contribution of latent viruses to the HIV reservoir is discussed
later.
FIG 21.6  Mechanism of HIV entry into a cell.In the
model depicted, sequential conformational
changes in gp120 and gp41 are induced by
binding to CD4. These changes promote binding
of the virus to the coreceptor (a chemokine
receptor) and fusion of the HIV-1 and host cell
membranes. The fusion peptide of activated gp41
contains hydrophobic amino acid residues that
mediate insertion into the host cell plasma
membrane.
Transcription of the genes of the integrated DNA provirus is
regulated by the LTR upstream of the viral structural genes, and
cytokines and other stimuli that activate T cells and macrophages
enhance viral gene transcription. The LTRs contain polyadenylation
signal sequences, the TATA box promoter sequence, and binding
sites for two host cell transcription factors, NF-κB and SP1.
Initiation of HIV gene transcription in T cells is linked to activation
of the T cells by antigen or cytokines. For example, polyclonal
activators of T cells, such as phytohemagglutinin, and cytokines,
such as IL-2, tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and lymphotoxin,
stimulate HIV gene expression in infected T cells; various
macrophage-activating cytokines, including IFN-γ and granulocyte-
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), stimulate HIV
gene expression and viral replication in infected monocytes and
macrophages. TCR and cytokine stimulation of HIV gene
transcription probably involves the activation of NF-κB and its
binding to sequences in the viral LTR. This phenomenon is
signiﬁcant to the pathogenesis of AIDS because the normal
response of a latently infected T cell to a microbe may be the way in
which HIV latency is ended and virus production begins.
The Tat protein is required for HIV gene expression and acts by
enhancing the production of complete viral mRNA transcripts.
Even in the presence of optimal signals to initiate transcription, few
if any HIV mRNA molecules are actually synthesized without the
action of Tat because transcription of HIV genes by mammalian
RNA polymerase is ineﬃcient, and the polymerase complex usually
stops before the mRNA is completed. Tat allows DNA-dependent
RNA polymerase to remain bound to the viral DNA molecule long
enough for transcription to be completed and to thus produce a
functional viral mRNA.
Synthesis of mature infectious viral particles begins after full-
length viral RNA transcripts are produced and the viral genes are
expressed as proteins. The mRNAs encoding the various HIV
proteins are derived from a single full-genome-length transcript by
diﬀerential splicing events. HIV gene expression may be divided
into an early stage, during which regulatory genes are expressed,
and a late stage, during which structural genes are expressed and
full-length viral genomes are packaged. The Rev, Tat, and Nef
proteins are early gene products encoded by fully spliced mRNAs
that are exported from the nucleus and translated into proteins in
the cytoplasm soon after infection of a cell. Late genes include env,
gag, and pol, which encode the structural components of the virus
and are translated from singly spliced or unspliced RNA. The Rev
protein initiates the switch from early to late gene expression by
promoting the export of these incompletely spliced late gene RNAs
p
g
p
p
y p
g
out of the nucleus. The pol gene product is a precursor protein that
is sequentially cleaved to form reverse transcriptase, protease,
ribonuclease, and integrase enzymes. As mentioned earlier, reverse
transcriptase and integrase proteins are required to produce a DNA
copy of the viral RNA genome and to integrate it as a provirus into
the host genome. The gag gene encodes a 55-kD protein that is
proteolytically cleaved into the p24 capsid protein, p17 matrix
protein, p7 nucleocapsid protein, p6 domain, and two spacer
peptides, sp1 and sp2, by the action of the viral protease encoded
by the pol gene. These gag-derived peptides and proteins are
required for the assembly of infectious viral particles. The primary
product of the env gene is a 160-kD glycoprotein (gp160) that is
cleaved by cellular proteases within the endoplasmic reticulum into
the gp120 and gp41 proteins required for HIV binding to cells, as
discussed earlier. Current antiviral drug therapy for HIV disease
includes inhibitors of the enzymes reverse transcriptase, protease,
and integrase.
After the transcription of various viral genes, viral proteins are
synthesized in the cytoplasm. Assembly of infectious viral particles
then begins by packaging full-length RNA transcripts of the
proviral genome within a nucleoprotein complex that includes the
gag core proteins and the pol-encoded enzymes required for the
next cycle of integration. This nucleoprotein complex then buds
from the plasma membrane, capturing Env and host glycoproteins
as part of its envelope. The rate of virus production can reach
suﬃciently high levels to cause cell death, as discussed later.
Pathogenesis of HIV Infection and AIDS
 HIV disease   begins with acute infection, which is only partly
controlled by the host immune response, and advances to chronic
progressive infection of peripheral lymphoid tissues (Fig. 21.7) . The
virus typically enters through mucosal epithelia. The subsequent
events in the infection can be divided into several phases.
Acute (early) infection is characterized by infection of activated
CD4 +   T cells in mucosal lymphoid tissues and the death of many
infected CD4 +   T cells. A large number of activated and memory
CD4+ T cells reside at mucosal sites, primarily in the
gastrointestinal tract, and can be infected by HIV. Within 2 to 4
weeks of infection, a large fraction of mucosal CD4+ T cells may be
destroyed.
The transition from the acute phase to the chronic phase of
infection is accompanied by dissemination of the virus, viremia, and
development of host adaptive immune responses. DCs in epithelia at
sites of virus entry capture the virus and then migrate into the
lymph nodes. DCs express a protein with a mannose-binding lectin
domain, called DC-SIGN, which may be particularly important in
binding the HIV envelope, transporting the virus, and mediating
trans-infection of CD4+ T cells. Once in lymphoid tissues, DCs may
pass HIV on to CD4+ T cells through direct cell-cell contact. Within
days after the ﬁrst exposure to HIV, viral replication can be
detected in the lymph nodes and gut lymphoid tissues. This
replication leads to viremia, during which large numbers of HIV
particles are present in the patient’s blood, accompanied by an
acute HIV syndrome that includes a variety of nonspeciﬁc signs and
symptoms typical of many viral infections (described later). The
viremia allows the virus to disseminate throughout the body and to
infect helper T cells, macrophages, and DCs in peripheral lymphoid
tissues. As the HIV infection spreads, the adaptive immune system
mounts both humoral and cell-mediated immune responses
directed at viral antigens, which we will describe later. These
immune responses partially control the infection and viral
production, and such control is reﬂected by a drop in viremia to low
but detectable levels by approximately 12 weeks after the primary
exposure.
In the next, chronic, phase of the disease, lymph nodes, the spleen,
and the gastrointestinal tract are sites of continuous HIV replication
and cell destruction (see Fig. 21.7) . During this period of the
disease, the immune system remains competent at handling most
infections with opportunistic microbes, and few or no clinical
manifestations of the HIV infection are present. Therefore, this
phase of HIV disease is called the clinical latency period. Although
the majority of peripheral blood T cells do not harbor the virus,
destruction of CD4+ T cells within lymphoid tissues steadily
progresses during the latent period, and the number of circulating
blood CD4+ T cells steadily declines (Fig. 21.8). More than 90% of
the body’s approximately 1012 T cells are normally found in
peripheral and mucosal lymphoid tissues, and it is estimated that
HIV destroys up to 1 to 2 × 109 CD4+ T cells every day. Early in the
course of the disease, the individual may continue to make new
CD4+ T cells, and therefore these cells can be replaced almost as
quickly as they are destroyed. At this stage, up to 10% of CD4+ T
cells in lymphoid organs may be infected, but the number of
circulating CD4+ T cells that are infected at any one time may be
less than 0.1% of the total CD4+ T cells in an individual. Eventually,
over a period of years, the continuous cycle of virus infection, T cell
death, and new infection leads to an inexorable loss of CD4+ T cells
from the lymphoid tissues and the circulation.
Mechanisms of Immunodeficiency Caused by HIV
HIV infection ultimately results in impaired function of both the
adaptive and innate immune systems. The most prominent defects
are in cell-mediated immunity, which result mainly from the
destruction of CD4+ T cells. Both infected and possibly noninfected
CD4+ T cells may be lost.
A major cause of the loss of CD4 +   T cells in HIV-infected
individuals is the direct eﬀect of infection of these cells by HIV.
Death of CD4+ T cells is associated with production of virus in
infected cells and may contribute to the decline in the numbers of
these cells. Several direct toxic eﬀects of HIV on infected CD4+ cells
have been described.
• The process of virus production, with expression of gp41 in
the plasma membrane and budding of viral particles, may
lead to increased plasma membrane permeability and the
inﬂux of lethal amounts of calcium, which induces
apoptosis, or osmotic lysis of the cell caused by the inﬂux of
water.
• Viral production can interfere with cellular protein
synthesis and thereby lead to cell death.
Mechanisms in addition to virus-induced death of infected CD4 +  
T cells have been proposed for the depletion and functional
impairment of these cells in HIV-infected individuals. One
mechanism is related to chronic activation of uninfected cells by the
infections that are common in patients infected with HIV and also
by cytokines produced in response to these infections. Chronic
activation of the T cells may predispose them to apoptosis; the
molecular pathway involved in this type of activation-induced cell
death is not yet deﬁned speciﬁcally in the HIV context (in general,
many activated CD4+ T cells, especially Th1 cells, may be eliminated
by 
FASL-FAS 
interactions). 
Apoptotic 
death 
of 
activated
lymphocytes may account for the observation that the loss of T cells
greatly exceeds the numbers of HIV-infected cells. As mentioned
earlier, HIV-speciﬁc CTLs are present in many patients with AIDS,
and these cells may kill infected CD4+ T cells, and some abortively
infected cells might die by pyroptosis. In addition, antibodies
against HIV envelope proteins may bind to HIV-infected CD4+ T
cells and target the cells for ADCC. Binding of gp120 to newly
synthesized intracellular CD4 may interfere with normal protein
processing in the endoplasmic reticulum and block cell surface
expression of CD4, making the cells incapable of responding to
antigenic stimulation. The relative importance of these indirect
mechanisms of CD4+ T cell depletion in HIV-infected patients is
uncertain and controversial.
FIG 21.7  Progression of HIV infection.The
progression of HIV infection correlates with
spread of the virus from the initial site of infection
to lymphoid tissues throughout the body. The
immune response of the host temporarily controls
acute infection but does not prevent the
establishment of chronic infection of cells in
lymphoid tissues. Cytokine stimuli induced by
other microbes serve to enhance HIV production
and progression to AIDS. CTLs, Cytotoxic T
lymphocytes.
Functional defects in the immune system of HIV-infected
individuals exacerbate the immune deﬁciency caused by depletion of
CD4 +   T cells. These functional defects include a decrease in T cell
responses to antigens and nonneutralizing and less vigorous
humoral immune responses, even though total serum Ig levels may
be elevated. The defects may be a result of the direct eﬀects of HIV
infection on CD4+ T cells, including the eﬀects of soluble gp120
released from infected cells binding to uninfected cells. For
example, CD4 that has bound gp120 may not be available to interact
with class II MHC molecules on APCs, and thus T cell responses to
antigens would be inhibited. Also, gp120 binding to CD4 may
deliver signals that downregulate helper T cell function. Some
studies have demonstrated that patients with HIV infection have
increased numbers of CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells, but it is not
yet clear if this is a consistent ﬁnding or if these cells actually
contribute to defective immunity.
Macrophages, DCs, and follicular dendritic cells (FDCs) may be
infected or injured by HIV, and the resulting abnormalities of these
cells also contribute to the progression of immunodeﬁciency.
• Although macrophages are susceptible to HIV infection,
they are relatively resistant to the cytopathic eﬀects of HIV.
Macrophages also may be infected by a gp120/gp41-
independent route, such as phagocytosis of the virus or
other infected cells or Fc receptor–mediated endocytosis of
antibody-coated HIV virions. Because macrophages can be
infected but are not generally killed by HIV, they may
become a reservoir for the virus. In fact, the quantity of
macrophage-associated HIV exceeds T cell–associated virus
in some tissues from patients with AIDS, notably the brain.
HIV-infected macrophages may be impaired in antigen
presentation functions and cytokine secretion.
FIG 21.8  Clinical course of HIV disease. A,
Plasma viremia, blood CD4+ T cell counts,
and clinical stages of disease. Approximately
12 weeks after infection, the blood-borne
virus (plasma viremia) is reduced to very low
levels (detectable only by sensitive reverse
transcriptase–polymerase chain reaction
assays) and stays this way for many years.
Nonetheless, CD4+ T cell counts steadily
decline during this clinical latency period
because of active viral replication and T cell
infection in lymph nodes. When CD4+ T cell
counts drop below a critical level
(∼200/mm3), the risk for infection and other
clinical features of AIDS is high. B, Immune
response to HIV infection. A cytotoxic T
lymphocyte (CTL) response to HIV is
detectable by 2 to 3 weeks after the initial
infection and peaks by 9 to 12 weeks.
Marked expansion of virus-specific CD8+ T
cells occurs during this time, and up to 10%
of a patient’s CTLs may be HIV specific at 12
weeks. The humoral immune response to HIV
peaks at about 12 weeks. 
A, From Pantaleo G, Graziosi C, Fauci AS. New concepts in
the immunopathogenesis of human immunodeficiency virus
infection. N Engl J Med. 1993;328:327–335. Copyright 1993
by Massachusetts Medical Society.
• DCs can also capture HIV and can possibly also be infected.
Like macrophages, DCs are not directly injured by HIV
infection. However, these cells form intimate contact with
naive T cells during the course of antigen presentation. It is
proposed that DCs infect naive T cells during these
encounters and this may be a pathway for spread of the
infection.
• FDCs in the germinal centers of lymph nodes and the
spleen trap large amounts of HIV on their surfaces, in part
by Fc receptor–mediated binding of antibody-coated virus.
Although FDCs are not eﬃciently infected, they contribute
to the pathogenesis of HIV-associated immunodeﬁciency in
at least two ways. First, the FDC surface is a reservoir for
HIV that can infect macrophages and CD4+ T cells in the
lymph nodes. Second, the normal functions of FDCs in
immune responses are impaired, and they may eventually
be destroyed by the virus. Although the mechanisms of
HIV-induced death of FDCs are not understood, the net
result of loss of the FDC network in the lymph nodes and
spleen is a profound dissolution of the architecture of the
peripheral lymphoid system. TĢ cells in germinal centers
may also contribute to the HIV reservoir, discussed in the
following section.
HIV Reservoirs and Viral Turnover
The virus detected in patients’ blood is produced mostly by short-
lived infected CD4 +   T cells and in smaller amounts by other infected
cells. Three phases of decay of plasma viremia have been observed
in patients treated with antiretroviral drugs or predicted by
mathematical modeling, and these decay curves have been used to
surmise the distribution of HIV in diﬀerent cellular reservoirs.
More than 90% of plasma virus is thought to be produced by
activated and memory CD4+ T cells that are major reservoirs and
sources of the virus in infected patients. About two-thirds of the
HIV reservoir exists in the mucosal immune system, mainly in the
gastrointestinal tract, and about one-third is in lymph nodes.
Although there are ongoing aĴempts to enhance host immunity
and clear the virus completely from infected individuals (often
referred to as an HIV cure), the resilience of the HIV reservoir has
proved a confounding factor. Many latent viruses within the
reservoir remain relatively protected from the host immune system.
Latent viruses in TĢ cells in the light zones of germinal centers
have been assumed to be protected from cytotoxic CD8+ T cells.
Some plasma virus may be produced by macrophages, which have a
slower turnover (half-life of ∼2 weeks). It is hypothesized that a
very small fraction of the virus, perhaps as liĴle as 1%, is present in
latently infected memory T cells. Because of the long life span of
memory cells, it could take decades for this reservoir of virus to be
eliminated, even if all new rounds of infection were blocked.
Clinical Features of HIV Disease
A vast amount of information has accumulated about the
epidemiology and clinical course of HIV infection. As antiretroviral
drug therapy is improving, many of the clinical manifestations are
changing. In the following section, we will describe the classic
features of HIV infection and refer to the changing pictures when
relevant.
Transmission of HIV and Epidemiology of AIDS
HIV is transmiĴed from one individual to another by three major
routes:
• Sexual contact is the most frequent mode of transmission,
either between heterosexual couples (the most frequent
mode of transmission in Africa and Asia) or between men
having sex with men. In sub-Saharan Africa, where the
infection rate is the highest in the world (estimated to be
several thousand new cases every day), more than half the
infected individuals are women.
• Mother-to-child transmission of HIV accounts for the
majority of pediatric cases of AIDS. This type of
transmission occurs most frequently in utero or during
childbirth, although transmission through breast milk is
also possible.
• Inoculation of a recipient with infected blood or blood
products is also a frequent mode of HIV transmission.
Needles shared by intravenous drug users account for most
cases of this form of transmission. HIV can remain
infectious in a used infected needle for 6 weeks in
temperate climates. With the advent of routine laboratory
screening, transfusion of blood or blood products in a
clinical seĴing accounts for a negligible proportion of HIV
infections.
Clinical Course of HIV Infection
The course of HIV disease can be followed by measuring the
amount of virus in the patient’s plasma and by the blood CD4+ T
cell count (see Fig. 21.8). Three phases of the disease are
recognized.
• The acute phase, also called acute HIV syndrome, is the
period of viremia characterized by nonspeciﬁc symptoms of
infection. It develops in 50% to 70% of infected adults
typically 3 to 6 weeks after infection. There is a spike of
plasma virus and a modest reduction in CD4+ T cell counts,
but the number of blood CD4+ T cells often returns to
normal. In many patients, however, the infection is occult
and there are no symptoms.
• The chronic phase of clinical latency may last for many
years. During this time, the virus is contained within
lymphoid tissues and the loss of CD4+ T cells is corrected
by replenishment from progenitors. Patients are
asymptomatic or suﬀer from minor infections. Within 2 to 6
months after infection, the concentration of plasma virus
stabilizes at a particular set-point, which diﬀers among
patients. The level of the viral set-point and the number of
blood CD4+ T cells are clinically useful predictors of the
progression of disease. As the disease progresses, patients
become susceptible to other infections, and immune
responses to these infections may stimulate HIV
production and accelerate the destruction of lymphoid
tissues. As discussed earlier, HIV gene transcription can be
enhanced by stimuli that activate infected T cells, such as
antigens and various cytokines. Cytokines, such as TNF,
which are produced during the innate immune response to
microbial infections, are particularly eﬀective in boosting
HIV production. Thus, as the immune system aĴempts to
eradicate other microbes, it brings about its own
destruction by HIV, a tragic example of what has been
called subversion from within.
• HIV disease progresses to the ﬁnal phase, called AIDS, when
the blood CD4 +   T cell count drops below 200 cells/mm 3 .
HIV viremia may climb dramatically as viral replication
accelerates unchecked in reservoirs other than T cells.
Patients with AIDS suﬀer from combinations of
opportunistic infections, neoplasms, cachexia (HIV wasting
syndrome), kidney failure (HIV nephropathy), and CNS
disease (AIDS encephalopathy, now called HIV-associated
neurocognitive disorder, or HAND) (Table 21.7). Because
CD4+ helper T cells are essential for both cell-mediated and
humoral immune responses to various microbes, the loss of
these lymphocytes is the main reason that patients with
AIDS become susceptible to many diﬀerent types of
infections. Furthermore, many of the tumors that arise in
patients with AIDS have a viral cause, and their prevalence
in the seĴing of AIDS reﬂects an inability of the HIV-
infected patient to mount an eﬀective immune response
against oncogenic viruses. Cachexia is often seen in patients
with chronic inﬂammatory diseases and may result from
eﬀects of inﬂammatory cytokines (such as TNF) on appetite
and metabolism. The CNS disease in AIDS may be due to
neuronal damage by the virus or by shed viral proteins,
such as gp120 and Tat, as well as the eﬀects of cytokines
elaborated by infected microglial cells.
Table 21.7
AIDS, Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; HIV, human
immunodeficiency virus.
Although this summary of the clinical course is true for the most
severe cases, the rate of progression of the disease is highly
variable, and some individuals are long-term nonprogressors. The
possible mechanisms underlying long-term nonprogression are
described later. Importantly, antiretroviral therapy, which is now
increasingly available, has changed the course of the disease and
greatly reduced the incidence of severe opportunistic infections
(such as Pneumocystis) and tumors (such as Kaposi sarcoma).
Immune Responses to HIV
Innate Immunity to HIV and Host Restriction Factors
Host restriction factors inhibit viral infection, and many viral
proteins have evolved to counter these restriction factors. Host
restriction factors are best appreciated in the overall context of
innate immune responses to HIV. HIV is sensed by a number of
paĴern recognition receptors, including TLRs and RIG-I. Two key
sensors that recognize viral reverse transcription products early in
infection are IFI16 (interferon inducible protein 16) and cGAS
(cyclic GMP-AMP synthase), both discussed in Chapter 4. IFI16 can
bind to HIV-derived cDNA and signals via the STING (stimulator
of IFN genes) adaptor, the TBK1 protein kinase, and the IRF3 and
IRF7 transcription factors. This signaling induces type I IFN
production and the expression of host restriction factors such as
APOBEC3, TRIM5α, SAMHD1, and tetherin, described next.
Tetherin is a host factor that prevents virion release in certain cell
types. It prevents the pinching oﬀ of certain viruses, including HIV,
and its inhibition of the budding process can be antagonized by an
HIV protein called Vpu. Host cells incorporate certain restriction
factors into the virus particle, including APOBEC3 (apolipoprotein
B mRNA editing enzyme catalytic polypeptide like 3) proteins. This
protein is a cytidine deaminase that interferes with viral replication
in infected cells. The HIV Vif protein helps target APOBEC3
proteins for ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation and thus
promotes viral replication. In infected cells, another important host
restriction factor is TRIM5α, a member of the TRIM (tripartite
motif) family of ubiquitin E3 ligases. TRIM5α interacts with HIV
capsid proteins to cause premature uncoating of the virus and
proteasomal degradation of the viral reverse transcriptase complex.
It can also block nuclear translocation of the viral pre-integration
complexes. SAMHD1 (SAM domain and HD domain 1) is a host
enzyme that hydrolyzes and depletes intracellular deoxynucleoside
triphosphates and thus prevent synthesis of viral DNA by reverse
transcription. The HIV-2 virus strain produces a protein called Vpx
that antagonizes the depleting activity of SAMHD1.
Many other innate immune responses against HIV have been
described. These include production of antimicrobial peptides
(defensins) and activation of NK cells, DCs (particularly
plasmacytoid DCs producing type I IFNs), and the complement
system.
Adaptive Immune Responses to HIV
HIV-speciﬁc humoral and cell-mediated immune responses develop
after infection but generally provide limited protection. The early
immune response to HIV infection is, in fact, similar to the
response to other viruses and serves to clear most of the virus
present in the blood and in circulating T cells. Nonetheless, it is
clear that these immune responses fail to eradicate HIV, and the
infection eventually overwhelms the immune system in most
untreated individuals. Despite the poor eﬀectiveness of antiviral
immune responses, it is important to characterize them for three
reasons. First, the immune responses may be detrimental to the
host, for example, by stimulating the uptake of opsonized virus into
uninfected cells by Fc receptor–mediated endocytosis. Second,
antibodies against HIV are diagnostic markers of HIV infection that
are widely used for screening purposes. Third, the design of
eﬀective 
vaccines 
for 
immunization 
against 
HIV 
requires
knowledge of the types of immune responses that are most likely to
be protective (the immunologic correlates of protection).
The initial adaptive immune response to HIV infection is
characterized by expansion of CD8 +   T cells speciﬁc for HIV
peptides. As many as 10% or more of circulating CD8+ T cells may
be speciﬁc for HIV gag and other viral proteins during acute
infection. These CTLs control infection in the early phase (see Fig.
21.8) but ultimately prove ineﬀective because of the emergence of
viral escape mutants (variants with mutated antigens). CD4+ T cells
also respond to the virus, and these CD4+ T cells may contribute to
viral control in a number of ways. An eﬀective CD4+ T cell response
is required as a source of help for the generation of CD8+ memory T
cells, but CD4+ T cells have also been shown to kill HIV-infected
cells. The importance of CTL responses in HIV control is
underscored by the evolution of the virus under immune pressure,
resulting in viral isolates that have lost their original CTL epitopes.
The evolution of the virus also results in the loss of epitopes
recognized by CD4+ T cells, indicating that both CD8+ and CD4+
cells contribute to host defense against the virus.
Antibody responses to a variety of HIV antigens are detectable
within 6 to 9 weeks after infection. The most immunogenic HIV
molecules that elicit antibody responses appear to be the envelope
glycoproteins, and high titers of anti-gp120 and anti-gp41
antibodies are present in most HIV-infected individuals. Other
anti-HIV antibodies found frequently in patients’ sera include
antibodies to p24, reverse transcriptase, and gag and pol products
(see Fig. 20.8). The eﬀect of these antibodies on the clinical course
of HIV infection is uncertain. The early antibodies are generally not
neutralizing and are thus poor inhibitors of viral infectivity or
cytopathic eﬀects. Neutralizing antibodies against gp120 develop 2
to 3 months after primary infection, but even these antibodies
cannot cope with a virus that is able to rapidly change the most
immunodominant 
epitopes 
of 
its 
envelope 
glycoproteins.
Sequencing of antibody heavy- and light-chain genes from gp-140–
speciﬁc B cells in subjects who have been infected with HIV-1 for a
few years has revealed the presence of broadly neutralizing
antibodies. Intriguingly, for unknown reasons, only approximately
10% to 15% of chronically infected individuals develop broadly
neutralizing antibodies. These antibodies bind to a site on a viral
protein that the virus cannot aﬀord to mutate, such as the CD4
binding site of gp140. They are, therefore, eﬀective in clearing the
virus. A striking feature of all of these antibodies is that they have
been selected after extensive somatic hypermutation, implying
helper T cell–dependent antibody responses. The implication is
that the starting naive HIV-speciﬁc B cell repertoire primarily
consists of B cells whose antigen receptors bind weakly to certain
antigenic epitopes, such as the CD4 binding site of gp140. Many
rounds of somatic hypermutation and selection that may occur in a
long-standing infection can eventually generate B cell populations
that bind with high aﬃnity to the original weakly recognized
epitope. One of the goals of vaccination is to generate such high-
aﬃnity broadly neutralizing antibodies, but inducing the high rate
of somatic hypermutation necessary to achieve this has proved a
challenge, and this has not yet been achieved with any consistency.
Mechanisms of Immune Evasion by HIV
HIV is the prototype of an infectious pathogen that evades host
defenses by destroying the immune system. We have earlier
considered some mechanisms by which this virus evades host
restriction factors and innate immunity. In addition, several
features of HIV may help the virus to evade adaptive immunity.
HIV has an extremely high mutation rate because of error-prone
reverse transcription, and in this way it may evade detection by
antibodies or T cells generated in response to viral proteins. A
region of the gp120 molecule, called the V3 loop, is one of the most
antigenically variable parts of the virus; it diﬀers even in HIV
isolates taken from the same individual at diﬀerent times. Many
epitopes of the virus that could potentially serve as targets for
broadly neutralizing antibodies are also shielded by bulky N-linked
sugars that make up what is known as the HIV-glycan shield.
HIV-infected cells may evade CTLs through downregulation of
class I MHC molecule expression. The HIV Nef protein inhibits
expression of class I MHC molecules, mainly by promoting
internalization of these molecules. Other mechanisms of inhibiting
cell-mediated immunity have been demonstrated in some cases. As
mentioned earlier, these include a preferential inhibition of Th1
cytokines, activation of regulatory T cells, and suppression of
dendritic cell functions. The mechanisms of these actions of the
virus and their pathogenic signiﬁcance are not established.
Elite Controllers and Long-Term
Nonprogressors: A Possible Role for Host
Genes
Although most individuals infected with HIV eventually develop
AIDS, approximately 1% of individuals who are infected do not
develop clinical disease. Such individuals have high CD4+ and CD8+
T cell counts, do not require therapy, and may have persistent
viremia but no disease for at least 10 to 15 years. On the basis of the
degree of viremia, this group can be divided into two subsets: long-
term nonprogressors have detectable viremia of approximately 5000
copies of HIV-1 RNA per milliliter of blood, and a much smaller
subset of elite controllers maintain viral loads of approximately 50
copies or less of HIV-1 RNA per milliliter of blood. There is
considerable interest in understanding the genetic basis of HIV
control by examining these cohorts of individuals in detail. So far, a
strong role for the MHC locus in protecting individuals and
preventing progression has been suggested by genetic association
studies. Speciﬁc HLA class I loci have been linked to the absence of
disease progression. Some elite controllers generate strong CD8+ T
cell responses to highly conserved peptides in the virus so that the
virus cannot mutate without losing infectivity. We have previously
mentioned the importance of the inheritance of the CCR5
homozygous 32-bp deletion in protection from infection, and other
genetic factors contributing to resistance are likely to be revealed in
the coming years.
Treatment and Prevention of AIDS and
Vaccine Development
Active research eﬀorts have been aimed at developing drugs that
interfere with the viral life cycle. Treatment of HIV infection and
AIDS now typically involves the administration of three antiviral
drugs, used in combination, that target viral molecules for which no
human homologues exist. The ﬁrst antiretroviral drugs to be widely
used were nucleoside analogues that bind to viral reverse
transcriptase and inhibit its activity. These drugs include
deoxythymidine nucleoside analogues such as AZT (3′-azido-3′-
deoxythymidine), 
deoxycytidine 
nucleoside 
analogues, 
and
deoxyadenosine analogues. When these drugs are used alone, they
are often eﬀective in signiﬁcantly reducing plasma HIV RNA levels
for several months to years, but they usually do not halt
progression of HIV-induced disease, largely because of the
evolution of virus with mutated forms of reverse transcriptase that
are resistant to the drugs. Nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors directly bind to the enzyme and inhibit its function. Viral
protease inhibitors have been developed that block the processing
of precursor proteins into mature viral capsid and core proteins.
When these protease inhibitors are used alone, mutant viruses
resistant to their eﬀects emerge. However, protease inhibitors are
now a common component of a three-drug therapeutic regimen
with two diﬀerent reverse transcriptase inhibitors. This triple-drug
therapy, commonly referred to as highly active antiretroviral
therapy (HAART) or antiretroviral therapy (ART), has proved to be
eﬀective in reducing plasma viral RNA to undetectable levels in
most treated patients for years. An integrase inhibitor is now also
available for antiviral therapy. Entry inhibitors, which prevent viral
entry by targeting either CD4 or CCR5 on the host cell are another
novel category of therapeutics. Fusion inhibitors are drugs that
target gp41 and prevent fusion of the viral envelope with the host
cell plasma membrane. Although antiretroviral therapy has
reduced viral titers to below detection for up to 10 years in some
patients, it is unlikely that such treatment can eliminate the virus
from all reservoirs (especially long-lived infected cells), and
resistance to the drugs may ultimately develop. Other formidable
problems associated with these new drug therapies, which will
p
g
p
impair their eﬀective use in many parts of the world, include high
expense and signiﬁcant adverse eﬀects. Furthermore, in some
patients the virus evolves to become resistant to the drugs being
used. This problem is often managed by sequencing the viral
genome to identify mutations that may make the virus drug-
resistant, and change the drug regimen accordingly. Inconsistent
use of these drugs by patients is also a major problem. Pre-
exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) using a single pill that contains two
mechanistically 
diﬀerent 
reverse 
transcriptase 
inhibitors 
is
designed to protect individuals who do not have HIV but who are at
high risk for geĴing the disease. Although PrEP has been eﬀective
in some contexts, its inconsistent use has proved a major problem
and the rollout of PrEP has so far not blunted the epidemic in those
parts of the world where the need is greatest.
A proportion of patients receiving ART experience an aberrant
manifestation of immune reconstitution, namely overexuberant
inﬂammation that may be triggered by the recognition by the
immune system of preexisting pathogens. It usually accompanies
the restoration of CD4+ T cell counts and a decline in viral load.
This clinical phenomenon is called the immune reconstitution
inﬂammatory syndrome (IRIS).
The individual infections experienced by patients with AIDS are
treated 
with 
the 
appropriate 
prophylaxis, 
antibiotics, 
and
supportive measures. More aggressive antibiotic therapy is often
required than for similar infections in less compromised hosts.
Although antiretroviral therapy has led to longer survival rates
after HIV infection, chronic HIV infection is associated with an
increased risk for non–AIDS-related morbidity and mortality than
seen in age-matched uninfected individuals. In these patients there
is a well-documented increase in cardiovascular disease, liver
disorders, disorders of neurocognition, kidney disease, and some
cancers. Chronic HIV is now recognized as a chronic inﬂammatory
disease with manifestations that may be linked to local or systemic
inﬂammation. This syndrome is the focus of many ongoing studies.
Eﬀorts at prevention of HIV infection are extremely important
and potentially eﬀective in controlling the HIV epidemic. In the
United States, the routine screening of blood products for evidence
of donor HIV infection has already reduced the risk for this mode
of transmission to negligible levels. Various public health measures
to increase condom use and to reduce the use of contaminated
needles by intravenous drug users are now widespread. Perhaps the
most eﬀective eﬀorts at prevention are campaigns to increase
public awareness of HIV. Clinical trials have shown that
administration of antiretroviral drugs to pregnant mothers is
eﬀective at preventing infection of the newborns. Prophylactic use
of these drugs in high-risk patients also reduces the rate of
infection, as mentioned.
The development of an eﬀective vaccine against HIV is a priority
for biomedical research institutions worldwide. The task has been
complicated by the ability of the virus to mutate and vary many of
its immunogenic antigens. It is likely that an eﬀective vaccine will
have to stimulate both humoral and cell-mediated responses to
viral antigens. To achieve this goal, several approaches are being
tried for HIV vaccine development. Much of the preliminary work
has involved infection of macaques with simian immunodeﬁciency
virus (SIV), and eﬀective vaccines against SIV have been developed.
This success is encouraging because SIV is molecularly closely
related to HIV and causes a disease in macaques that is similar to
AIDS in humans. Various live virus vaccines have been tested in the
hope that they will induce strong CTL responses. Such vaccines
include nonvirulent recombinant hybrid viruses composed of part
SIV and part HIV sequences or viruses that have been aĴenuated
by deletions in one or more parts of the viral genome, such as the
nef gene. One concern with live virus vaccines is their potential to
cause disease if they are not completely aĴenuated and possibly to
recombine with wild-type HIV to produce a pathogenic variant.
Another approach that avoids this safety concern but retains
eﬃcacy in inducing CTL-mediated immunity is the use of live
recombinant non-HIV viral vectors carrying HIV genes. Many DNA
vaccines also have been studied; these vaccines are composed of
p
combinations of structural and regulatory genes of SIV or HIV
packaged in mammalian DNA expression vectors. T cell vaccines
focusing on conserved regions of the viral proteome represent an
interesting approach that is being undertaken and is currently in its
early stages.
Most current vaccination aĴempts involve recombinant subunit
vaccines with HIV trimers and are aimed at generating broadly
neutralizing antibodies to gp140. A broadly neutralizing antibody
is one that can prevent the infectivity of a large number of HIV
strains, and such an antibody would therefore have to recognize
some part of gp140, such as the CD4 binding site for instance,
which is highly conserved. Human trials are currently under way
with recombinant gp140 trimers in adenoviral vectors, based on
adenoviral strains with low human seroprevalence. An interesting
and inventive approach has involved the identiﬁcation of the
rearranged Ig genes that encode broadly neutralizing monoclonal
human antibodies derived from individual clonal B cells isolated
from a subset of chronic progressors. These antibodies may arise
too late to be useful for the patients who generate them, but they
provide lessons about how such antibodies evolve in vivo and have
proved to be important for current vaccine generation aĴempts. It
is possible to identify naive B cells that have rearranged Ig heavy
and light chain genes that can somatically mutate after activation
and give rise to these speciﬁc protective broadly neutralizing
antibodies. These advances have led to the rational design of gp140
immunogens, based on structural biology, that can potentially
activate B cells in a way that facilitates the stepwise evolution of
somatically mutated broadly neutralizing antibodies. These
promising approaches have surprisingly proved successful in mice
engineered to express human Ig genes and may enter the clinical
realm one day.
Other approaches for protection against HIV include the use of
passive immunity with mixtures of broadly neutralizing antibodies,
derived as described earlier, that have been recombinantly
generated for clinical use. Early clinical studies have been
promising. Vectored immunoprophylaxis is a form of immunity in
p
g
p
p y
y
which a protein that can mediate immune protection is synthesized
in the host typically after injection of speciﬁc DNA into the skeletal
muscle. In one approach that is currently being aĴempted in a
clinical trial, the Ig heavy and light chain genes that encode a
broadly neutralizing antibody against HIV have been cloned into
an adenovirus-associated virus vector, and this DNA has been
injected into the muscle of volunteers. An alternative approach that
has worked well in simian models is the expression in the host of a
fusion gene made up of CD4-Ig linked to a small CCR5-mimetic
sulfopeptide. This fusion protein eﬀectively prevents the entry of
SIV into CD4+ T cells. It is possible that if a vaccine against HIV
does 
not 
prove 
successful, 
vectored 
immunoprophylaxis
approaches may be used to staunch the spread of HIV.
Summary
• Immunodeﬁciency diseases are caused by congenital or
acquired defects in lymphocytes, phagocytes, and other
mediators of adaptive and innate immunity. These diseases
are associated with an increased susceptibility to infection,
the nature and severity of which depend largely on which
component of the immune system is abnormal and the
extent of the abnormality.
• Disorders of innate immunity include defects in microbial
killing by phagocytes (e.g., chronic granulomatous disease
or Chédiak-Higashi syndrome), leukocyte migration and
adhesion (e.g., leukocyte adhesion deﬁciency), Toll-like
receptor signaling, and complement.
• Severe combined immunodeﬁciencies include defects in
lymphocyte development that aﬀect both T and B cells and
are caused by defective cytokine signaling, abnormal purine
metabolism, defective V(D)J recombination, and mutations
that aﬀect T cell maturation.
• Antibody immunodeﬁciencies include diseases caused by
defective B cell maturation or activation and defects in T-B
cell collaboration (X-linked hyper-IgM syndrome).
• T cell immunodeﬁciencies include diseases in which the
expression of major histocompatibility complex molecules
is defective, T cell signaling disorders, and rare diseases
involving cytotoxic T lymphocyte and natural killer cell
functions.
• Treatment of congenital immunodeﬁciencies involves
transfusions of antibodies, stem cell transplantation, or
enzyme replacement. Gene therapy may oﬀer improved
treatments in the future.
• Acquired immunodeﬁciencies are caused by infections,
malnutrition, disseminated cancer, and
immunosuppressive therapy for transplant rejection or
autoimmune diseases.
• AIDS is a severe immunodeﬁciency caused by infection with
HIV. This retrovirus infects CD4+ T lymphocytes,
macrophages, and dendritic cells and causes progressive
dysfunction of the immune system. Most of the
immunodeﬁciency in AIDS can be aĴributed to the
depletion of CD4+ T cells.
• HIV enters cells by binding to both the CD4 molecule and a
coreceptor of the chemokine receptor family. After it is
inside the cell, the viral genome is reverse-transcribed into
DNA and incorporated into the cellular genome. Viral gene
transcription and viral reproduction are stimulated by
signals that normally activate the host cell. Production of
virus is accompanied by death of infected cells.
• The acute phase of infection is characterized by death of
activated and memory CD4+ T cells in mucosal tissues and
dissemination of the virus to lymph nodes. In the
subsequent latent phase, there is low-level virus replication
in lymphoid tissues and slow, progressive loss of T cells.
Persistent activation of T cells promotes their death, leading
to rapid loss and immune deﬁciency in the chronic phase of
the infection.
• CD4+ T cell depletion in HIV-infected individuals is largely
due to direct cytopathic eﬀects of the virus.
• Several reservoirs of HIV exist in infected individuals,
including short-lived activated CD4+ T cells, longer-lived
macrophages, follicular helper T cells and very long-lived,
latently infected memory T cells especially in mucosal sites.
• HIV-induced depletion of CD4+ T cells results in increased
susceptibility to infection by a number of opportunistic
microorganisms. In addition, HIV-infected patients have an
increased incidence of tumors, particularly Kaposi sarcoma
and EBV-associated B cell lymphomas, and encephalopathy.
The incidence of these complications has been greatly
reduced by antiretroviral therapy.
• HIV has a high mutation rate, which allows the virus to
evade host immune responses and become resistant to drug
therapies. Genetic variability also poses a problem for the
design of an eﬀective vaccine against HIV. HIV infection
can be treated by a combination of inhibitors of viral
enzymes.
Selected Readings
∗Indicates publications of historical interest, generally reporting the discovery of a
phenomenon or process that was later shown to be of fundamental importance in the
immune system. Many (but not all) of these discoveries led to Nobel Prizes for the
discoverer(s). The nature of the discovery is summarized brieﬂy in each reference.
Congenital (Primary) Immunodeficiencies
Bogaert D.J, Dullaers M, Lambrecht B.N, et al. Genes associated with common variable
immunodeﬁciency: one diagnosis to rule them all?  J Med Genet . 2016;53:575–590.
∗Bruton O.C. Agammaglobulinemia.  Pediatrics . 1952;9:722–728 (This was the ﬁrst report of
a primary human immunodeﬁciency.).
Casanova J.L, Abel L. Human genetics of infectious diseases: unique insights into
immunological redundancy.  Semin Immunol . 2018;36:1–12.
Castagnoli R, Delmonte O.M, Calzoni E, Notarangelo L.D. Hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation in primary immunodeﬁciency diseases: current status and future
perspectives.  Front Pediatr . 2019;7:295.
Delmonte O.M, Castagnoli R, Calzoni E, Notarangelo L.D. Inborn errors of immunity with
immune dysregulation: from bench to bedside.  Front Pediatr . 2019;7:353.
Fischer A, Rausell A. What do primary immunodeﬁciencies tell us about the
essentiality/redundancy of immune responses?  Semin Immunol . 2018;36:13–16.
High K.A, Roncarolo M.G. Gene therapy.  N Engl J Med . 2019;381:455–464.
Jouanguy E, Beziat V, Mogensen T.H, et al. Human inborn errors of immunity to herpes
viruses.  Curr Opin Immunol . 2020;62:106–122.
Marciano B.E, Holland S.M. Primary immunodeﬁciency diseases: current and emerging
therapeutics.  Front Immunol . 2017;8:937.
Meyts I, Bosch B, Bolze A, et al. Exome and genome sequencing for inborn errors of
immunity.  J Allergy Clin Immunol . 2016;138:957–969.
Picard C, Al-Herz W, Bousﬁha A, et al. Primary immunodeﬁciency diseases: an update on
the classiﬁcation from the International Union of Immunological Societies Expert
CommiĴee for Primary Immunodeﬁciency 2015.  J Clin Immunol . 2015;35:696–726.
Schmidt R.E, Grimbacher B, WiĴe T. Autoimmunity and primary immunodeﬁciency: two
sides of the same coin?  Nat Rev Rheumatol . 2017;14:7–18.
HIV and AIDS
Altfeld M, Gale Jr. M. Innate immunity against HIV-1 infection.  Nat Immunol
. 2015;16:554–562.
Bekker L.G, Tatoud R, Dabis F, et al. The complex challenges of HIV vaccine development
require renewed and expanded global commitment.  Lancet . 2020;395:384–388.
Boriĵ E.A, Douek D.C. Perspectives on human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) cure: HIV
persistence in tissue.  J Infect Dis . 2017;215:S128–S133.
Caskey M, Klein F, Nussenzweig M.C. Broadly neutralizing anti-HIV-1 monoclonal
antibodies in the clinic.  Nat Med . 2019;25:547–553.
Cohn L.B, Chomont N, Deeks S.G. The biology of the HIV-1 latent reservoir and
implications for cure strategies.  Cell Host Microbe . 2020;27:519–530.
Goulder P.J, Lewin S.R, Leitman E.M. Paediatric HIV infection: the potential for cure.  Nat
Rev Immunol . 2016;16:259–271.
Haynes B.F, Burton D.R, Mascola J.R. Multiple roles for HIV broadly neutralizing
antibodies.  Sci Transl Med . 2019;11:eaaz2686.
McBrien J.B, Kumar N.A, Silvestri G. Mechanisms of CD8(+) T cell-mediated suppression of
HIV/SIV replication.  Eur J Immunol . 2018;48:898–914.
McMichael A.J, Picker L.J. Unusual antigen presentation oﬀers new insight into HIV vaccine
design.  Curr Opin Immunol . 2017;46:75–81.
Ndung’u T, McCune J.M, Deeks S.G. Why and where an HIV cure is needed and how it
might be achieved.  Nature . 2019;576:397–405.
Sengupta S, Siliciano R.F. Targeting the latent reservoir for HIV-1.  Immunity . 2018;48:872–
895.
Stephenson K.E, D’Couto H.T, Barouch D.H. New concepts in HIV-1 vaccine development. 
Curr Opin Immunol . 2016;41:39–46.
Glossary
A
αβ T cell receptor (αβ TCR) The most common form of TCR,
expressed on CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. The αβ TCR recognizes
peptide antigen bound to an MCH molecule. Both α and β chains
contain highly variable (V) regions that together form the
antigen-binding site as well as constant (C) regions. TCR V and C
regions are structurally homologous to the V and C regions of Ig
molecules.
ABO blood group antigens Carbohydrate antigens aĴached mainly
to cell surface proteins or lipids that are present on many cell
types, including red blood cells and endothelial cells. These
antigens diﬀer among individuals, depending on inherited
alleles encoding the enzymes required for synthesis of the
carbohydrate antigens. The ABO antigens act as alloantigens that
are responsible for blood transfusion reactions and hyperacute
rejection of allografts.
Acquired immunodeﬁciency A deﬁciency in the immune system
that is acquired after birth, often because of bone marrow
damage or infection (e.g., AIDS) and that is not related to a
genetic defect. Synonymous with secondary immunodeﬁciency.
Acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome (AIDS) A disease caused
by human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) infection that is
characterized by depletion of CD4+ T cells, leading to a profound
immune deﬁciency. Clinically, AIDS includes opportunistic
infections, malignant tumors, wasting, and encephalopathy.
Activation-induced cell death (AICD) Apoptosis of activated
lymphocytes, generally used for T cells.
Activation-induced (cytidine) deaminase (AID) An enzyme
expressed in B cells that catalyzes the conversion of cytosine into
uracil in DNA, which is a step required for somatic
hypermutation and aﬃnity maturation of antibodies and for Ig
class switching.
Activation protein 1 (AP-1) A family of DNA-binding transcription
factors composed of dimers of two proteins that bind to one
another through a shared structural motif called a leucine zipper.
The best-characterized AP-1 factor is composed of the proteins
FOS and JUN. AP-1 is involved in transcriptional regulation of
many diﬀerent genes that are important in the immune system,
such as cytokine genes.
Active immunity The form of adaptive immunity that is induced by
exposure to a foreign antigen and activation of lymphocytes and
in which the immunized individual plays an active role in
responding to the antigen. This type contrasts with passive
immunity, in which an individual receives antibodies or
lymphocytes from another individual who was previously actively
immunized.
Acute-phase proteins Proteins, mostly synthesized in the liver in
response to inﬂammatory cytokines such as IL-1, IL-6, and TNF,
whose plasma concentrations increase shortly after infection.
Examples include C-reactive protein, complement proteins,
ﬁbrinogen, and serum amyloid A protein. Acute-phase proteins
play various roles in the innate immune response to microbes.
Also called acute-phase reactants.
Acute-phase response The increase in plasma concentrations of
several proteins, called acute-phase proteins (reactants), that
occurs as part of the early innate immune response to infections.
Acute rejection A form of graft rejection involving vascular and
parenchymal injury mediated by T cells, macrophages, and
antibodies that usually ﬁrst occurs days or weeks after
transplantation but may occur later if pharmacologic
immunosuppression becomes inadequate.
Adaptive immunity The form of immunity that is mediated by
lymphocytes and stimulated by exposure to infectious agents. In
contrast to innate immunity, adaptive immunity is characterized
by exquisite speciﬁcity for distinct antigens and by long-term and
speciﬁc memory, manifest as more rapid and vigorous responses
on repeated exposure to the same antigen. Adaptive immunity is
also called speciﬁc immunity or acquired immunity.
Adaptor protein A protein involved in intracellular signal
transduction pathways that serves as a bridge molecule or
scaﬀold for the recruitment of other signaling molecules. During
lymphocyte antigen receptor or cytokine receptor signaling,
adaptor molecules may be phosphorylated on tyrosine residues
to enable them to bind other proteins containing SRC homology
2 (SH2) domains. Adaptor molecules involved in T cell activation
include LAT, SLP76, and GRB2.
Addressin An adhesion molecule expressed on endothelial cells in
diﬀerent anatomic sites that directs organ-speciﬁc lymphocyte
homing. Mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule 1 (MAdCAM-
1) is an example of an addressin expressed in Peyer’s patches in
the intestinal wall that binds to the integrin α4β7 on gut-homing
T cells.
Adhesion molecule A cell surface molecule whose function is to
promote adhesive interactions with other cells or the
extracellular matrix. Leukocytes express various types of
adhesion molecules, such as selectins, integrins, and members of
the Ig superfamily, and these molecules play crucial roles in cell
migration and cellular activation in innate and adaptive immune
responses.
Adjuvant A substance, distinct from antigen, that enhances T and B
cell activation mainly by promoting the accumulation and
activation of APCs at the site of antigen exposure. Adjuvants,
which are routinely used in clinical vaccines and experimental
animal immunizations, stimulate expression of T cell–activating
costimulators and cytokines by APCs and may also prolong the
expression of peptide-MHC complexes on the surface of APCs.
Adoptive transfer The process of transferring cells from one
individual into another or back into the same individual after
in vitro expansion and activation. Adoptive transfer is used in
research to deﬁne the role of a particular cell population (e.g., T
cells) in an immune response. Clinically, adoptive transfer of
tumor-speciﬁc T lymphocytes and tumor antigen-presenting
dendritic cells is used in cancer therapy.
Aﬃnity The strength of the binding between a single binding site
of a molecule (e.g., an antibody) and a ligand (e.g., an antigen).
The aﬃnity of a molecule X for a ligand Y is represented by the
dissociation constant (K d), which is the concentration of Y that is
required to occupy the combining sites of half the X molecules
present in a solution. A smaller K d indicates a stronger or higher
aﬃnity interaction, because a lower concentration of ligand is
needed to occupy the sites.
Aﬃnity maturation The process that leads to increased aﬃnity of
antibodies for a particular antigen as a T cell–dependent
p
g
p
antibody response progresses. Aﬃnity maturation takes place in
germinal centers of lymphoid tissues and is the result of somatic
mutation of Ig genes, followed by selective survival of the B cells
producing the highest aﬃnity antibodies.
AKT A serine/threonine protein kinase involved in regulating
many cellular processes, including growth, cell cycle,
metabolism, genome stability, and apoptosis. In immune cells,
AKT is activated by signals from antigen receptors, cytokine
receptors, and GPCR ligands, leading to downstream signaling
events that include mTOR activation. It is also known as protein
kinase B (PKB).
Allele One of diﬀerent variations of the same gene present at a
particular chromosomal locus, each diﬀering in nucleotide
sequence, which often results in a diﬀerent amino acid sequence
of the encoded protein. An individual who is heterozygous at a
locus has two diﬀerent alleles, each on a diﬀerent member of a
pair of chromosomes, one inherited from the mother and one
from the father. If a particular gene in a population has diﬀerent
alleles, the gene or locus is said to be polymorphic. MHC genes
have many alleles (i.e., they are highly polymorphic).
Allelic exclusion The exclusive expression of only one of two
inherited alleles encoding Ig heavy and light chains and TCR β
chains. Allelic exclusion occurs when the protein product of one
productively recombined antigen receptor locus on one
chromosome blocks rearrangement and expression of the
corresponding locus on the other chromosome. This ensures that
most lymphocytes will express a single antigen receptor and that
all antigen receptors expressed by one clone of lymphocytes will
have the identical speciﬁcity. Because the TCR α chain locus does
not show allelic exclusion, some T cells express two diﬀerent
TCRs.
Allergen An antigen that elicits an immediate hypersensitivity
(allergic) reaction. Allergens are proteins or chemicals bound to
proteins that induce IgE antibody responses in atopic
individuals.
Allergy A disorder caused by immediate hypersensitivity reactions,
often named according to the type of antigen (allergen) that
elicits the disease, such as food allergy, bee sting allergy, and
penicillin allergy. All of these conditions are the result of IgE
production stimulated by IL-4- and IL-13–producing helper T
cells, followed by allergen and IgE-dependent mast cell
activation.
Alloantibody An antibody speciﬁc for an alloantigen (i.e., an
antigen present in some individuals of a species but not in
others).
Alloantigen A cell or tissue antigen that is present in some
individuals of a species but not in others and that is recognized
as foreign on an allograft. Alloantigens are usually products of
polymorphic genes.
Alloantiserum The alloantibody-containing serum of an individual
who has previously been exposed to one or more alloantigens.
Allograft An organ or tissue graft from a donor who is of the same
species but genetically nonidentical to the recipient.
Alloreactive Reactive to alloantigens; describes T cells or antibodies
from one individual that will recognize antigens on cells or
tissues of another genetically nonidentical individual.
Allotype The property of a group of antibody molecules deﬁned by
their sharing of a particular antigenic determinant found on the
antibodies of some individuals but not others. Allotype is also
often used synonymously with allotope.
Alternative macrophage activation Macrophage activation by IL-4
and IL-13 leading to an antiinﬂammatory and tissue-reparative
phenotype, in contrast to classical macrophage activation
induced by IFN-γ and TLR ligands.
Alternative pathway of complement activation An antibody-
independent pathway of activation of the complement system
that occurs when the spontaneously generated C3b fragment of
the C3 protein binds to microbial cell surfaces. The alternative
pathway is a component of the innate immune system and
mediates inﬂammatory responses to infection as well as direct
lysis of microbes. The alternative pathway, as well as the classical
and lectin pathways, terminate with formation of the membrane
aĴack complex.
Anaphylatoxins The C5a, C4a, and C3a complement fragments that
are generated during complement activation. The anaphylatoxins
bind speciﬁc cell surface receptors and promote acute
inﬂammation by stimulating neutrophil chemotaxis and
activating mast cells.
Anaphylaxis A severe form of immediate hypersensitivity in which
there is systemic mast cell or basophil activation, and the
released mediators cause bronchial constriction, tissue edema,
and cardiovascular collapse.
Anchor residues The amino acid residues of a peptide that ﬁt into
pockets in the ﬂoor of the peptide-binding cleft of an MHC
molecule. These amino acids bind to complementary amino acids
in the MHC molecule and therefore serve to anchor the peptide
in the cleft of the MHC molecule.
Anergy A state of unresponsiveness to antigenic stimulation.
Lymphocyte anergy (also called clonal anergy) is the failure of
clones of T or B cells to react to antigen and is a mechanism for
maintaining immunologic tolerance to self. Clinically, anergy
describes the lack of T cell–dependent cutaneous delayed-type
hypersensitivity reactions to common antigens.
Angiogenesis New blood vessel formation regulated by a variety of
protein factors elaborated by cells of the innate and adaptive
immune systems and often accompanying chronic inﬂammation.
Antibody A type of glycoprotein molecule, also called
immunoglobulin (Ig), produced only by B lymphocytes and
plasma cells derived from B cells, which binds antigens, often
with a high degree of speciﬁcity and aﬃnity. Membrane-bound
antibodies serve as antigen receptors that initiate B cell
activation. Secreted antibodies perform various eﬀector
functions, including neutralizing antigens, activating
complement, and promoting leukocyte-dependent destruction of
microbes. The basic structural unit of an antibody is composed of
two identical heavy chains and two identical light chains. The N-
terminal variable regions of the heavy and light chains form the
antigen-binding sites, whereas the C-terminal constant regions of
the heavy chains of secreted antibodies interact with other
molecules in the immune system. Every individual has millions
of diﬀerent antibodies, each with a unique antigen-binding site.
Antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) A process
by which NK cells are targeted to IgG-coated cells, resulting in
lysis of the antibody-coated cells. A speciﬁc receptor for the
constant region of IgG, called FcγRIII (CD16), is expressed on
the NK cell membrane and mediates binding to the IgG.
Antibody feedback The downregulation of antibody production by
secreted IgG antibodies that occurs when antigen-antibody
complexes simultaneously engage B cell membrane Ig and one
type of Fcγ receptor (FcγRIIb). Under these conditions, the
cytoplasmic tail of FcγRIIb transduces inhibitory signals inside
the B cell.
Antibody repertoire The collection of diﬀerent antibody
speciﬁcities expressed in an individual.
Antibody-secreting cell A B lymphocyte that has undergone
diﬀerentiation and produces the secreted form of Ig. Antibody-
secreting cells are generated from naive B cells in response to
antigen and other stimuli and reside in the spleen, lymph nodes,
and bone marrow. Often used synonymously with plasma cells.
Antigen A molecule that binds to an antibody or a TCR. Antigens
that bind to antibodies include all classes of molecules. Most
TCRs bind only peptide fragments of proteins complexed with
MHC molecules.
Antigen presentation The display of peptides bound by MHC
molecules on the surface of an antigen presenting cell that
permits speciﬁc recognition by TCRs and activation of T cells.
Antigen-presenting cell (APC) A cell that displays peptide
fragments of protein antigens, in association with MHC
molecules, on its surface and activates antigen-speciﬁc T cells. In
addition to displaying peptide-MHC complexes, APCs also
express costimulatory molecules to optimally activate T
lymphocytes.
Antigen processing The intracellular conversion of protein antigens
derived from the extracellular space or the cytosol into peptides
and loading of these peptides onto MHC molecules for display to
T lymphocytes.
Antigenic variation The process by which antigens expressed by
microbes may change by various genetic mechanisms, and
therefore allow the microbe to evade immune responses. One
example of antigenic variation is the change in inﬂuenza virus
surface proteins hemagglutinin and neuraminidase that
necessitates the use of new vaccines each year.
Antimicrobial peptide One of a group of peptides with both
positively charged and hydrophobic amino acid residues, which
insert into and disrupt the function of the outer membranes of
bacteria and some viruses. Antimicrobial peptides, including
cathelicidins, defensins, and regIII peptides, are produced by
epithelial barrier cells and leukocytes and serve as innate
immune eﬀector molecules.
Antiretroviral therapy (ART) Combination chemotherapy for HIV
infection, usually consisting of nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors and either a viral protease inhibitor or a
nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor. ART can reduce
plasma virus titers to below detectable levels and slow the
progression of HIV disease. Also called highly active
antiretroviral therapy (HAART).
Antiserum Serum from an individual previously immunized with
an antigen that contains antibody speciﬁc for that antigen.
Apoptosis A process of cell death characterized by activation of
intracellular caspases, DNA cleavage, nuclear condensation and
fragmentation, and plasma membrane blebbing that leads to
phagocytosis of cell fragments without inducing an inﬂammatory
response. Apoptosis is important in development of
lymphocytes, return to homeostasis after an immune response to
an infection, maintenance of tolerance to self antigens, and
killing of infected cells by cytotoxic T lymphocytes and natural
killer cells. Apoptosis is one form of programmed cell death;
others include autophagy and pyroptosis.
Arthus reaction A localized form of experimental immune
complex–mediated cutaneous vasculitis induced by injection of
an antigen subcutaneously into a previously immunized animal
or into an animal that has been given intravenous antibody
speciﬁc for the antigen. Circulating antibodies bind to the
injected antigen and form immune complexes that are deposited
in the walls of small arteries at the injection site and give rise to a
local vasculitis with necrosis.
Asthma An inﬂammatory disease characterized by intermiĴent and
reversible airway obstruction, due to bronchial smooth muscle
cell hypertrophy and hyperreactivity, chronic bronchial
inﬂammation with eosinophils, and excess bronchial mucus
production. Most cases are caused by Th2, IgE, and mast cell–
mediated allergic reactions (atopic asthma), but a minority are
caused by nonimmune stimuli such as exercise, exposure to cold,
or certain drugs (nonatopic asthma).
Atopy The propensity of an individual to mount Th2 responses and
produce IgE antibodies in response to various environmental
antigens and to develop strong immediate hypersensitivity
(allergic) responses. People who have allergies to environmental
antigens, such as pollen or house dust, are said to be atopic.
Autoantibody An antibody speciﬁc for a self antigen.
Autoantibodies can cause damage to cells and tissues and are
produced in excess in autoimmune diseases, such as systemic
lupus erythematosus.
Autocrine factor A molecule that acts on the same cell that
produces the factor. For example, IL-2 is an autocrine T cell
growth factor that stimulates proliferation of the T cell that
produces it.
Autoimmune disease A disease caused by a breakdown of self-
tolerance such that the adaptive immune system responds to self
antigens and mediates cell and tissue damage. Autoimmune
diseases can be caused by immune aĴack against one organ or
tissue (e.g., multiple sclerosis, thyroiditis, or type 1 diabetes) or
against multiple and systemically distributed antigens (e.g.,
systemic lupus erythematosus).
Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) A protein that functions to
stimulate expression of peripheral tissue protein antigens in
medullary thymic epithelial cells, which is required for tolerance
to those antigens. Mutations in the gene encoding AIRE in
humans and mice impair expression of tissue antigens in the
thymus and cause an autoimmune disease because of failure to
delete T cells or to generate regulatory T cells speciﬁc for these
antigens.
Autoimmunity The state of adaptive immune system
responsiveness to self antigens that occurs when mechanisms of
self-tolerance fail.
Autologous graft A tissue or organ graft in which the donor and
recipient are the same individual. Autologous bone marrow and
skin grafts are performed in clinical medicine.
Autophagy The physiological process by which a cell degrades its
own components by lysosomal digestion. Autophagy plays a role
in innate immune defense against infections, and
polymorphisms of genes that regulate autophagy are linked to
risk for some autoimmune diseases.
Avidity The overall strength of interaction between two molecules,
such as an antibody and antigen. Avidity depends on both the
aﬃnity and the valency of interactions. Therefore, the avidity of a
pentameric IgM antibody, with 10 antigen-binding sites, for a
multivalent antigen may be greater than the avidity of a dimeric
IgG molecule for the same antigen. Avidity can also be used to
describe the strength of cell-cell interactions, which are mediated
by many binding interactions between cell surface molecules.
B
B lymphocyte The only cell type capable of producing antibody
molecules and therefore the mediator of humoral immune
responses. B lymphocytes, or B cells, develop in the bone
marrow, and mature B cells are found mainly in lymphoid
follicles in secondary lymphoid tissues, in bone marrow, and in
low numbers in the circulation.
B-1 lymphocytes A subset of B lymphocytes that develop earlier
during ontogeny than do follicular B cells, express a limited
repertoire of V genes with liĴle junctional diversity, and secrete
IgM antibodies in response to T-independent antigens. B-1 cells
are located mainly in mucosal tissues.
Bare lymphocyte syndrome An immunodeﬁciency disease
characterized by a lack of class II MHC molecule expression that
leads to defects in antigen presentation and cell-mediated
immunity. The disease is caused by mutations in genes encoding
factors that regulate class II MHC gene transcription.
Basophil A type of bone marrow–derived circulating granulocyte
with structural and functional similarities to mast cells that has
granules containing many of the same inﬂammatory mediators
as mast cells and expresses a high-aﬃnity Fc receptor for IgE.
Basophils that are recruited into tissue sites where antigen is
present may contribute to immediate hypersensitivity reactions.
BCL-6 A transcriptional repressor that is required for germinal
center B cell development and for TĢ cell development.
BCL-2 family proteins A family of partially homologous
cytoplasmic and mitochondrial membrane proteins that regulate
apoptosis by inﬂuencing mitochondrial outer membrane
permeability. Members of this family can be pro-apoptotic (e.g.,
BAX, BAD, and BAK) or anti-apoptotic (e.g., BCL-2 and BCL-XL).
B cell receptor (BCR) The cell surface antigen receptor on B
lymphocytes, which is a membrane bound Ig molecule.
B cell receptor complex (BCR complex) A multiprotein complex
expressed on the surface of B lymphocytes that recognizes
antigen and transduces activating signals into the cell. The BCR
complex includes membrane Ig, which is responsible for binding
antigen, and Igα and Igβ proteins, which initiate signaling
events.
BLIMP1 A transcriptional repressor that is required for plasma cell
generation.
Bispeciﬁc T cell engagers (BiTEs) Recombinant antibody-derived
molecules consisting of two fused Ig single-chain variable
fragments (scFvs), one speciﬁc for the CD3 molecule on T cells
and the other for a tumor antigen. They bring together T cells
with tumor cells, and activate the T cell to kill the tumor cell.
Bone marrow The tissue within the central cavity of bone that is the
site of generation of all circulating blood cells in adults,
including immature lymphocytes, and the site of B cell
maturation.
Bone marrow transplantation  See Hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation.
Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK) A TEC family tyrosine kinase that is
essential for B cell maturation. Mutations in the gene encoding
BTK cause X-linked agammaglobulinemia, a disease
characterized by failure of B cells to mature beyond the pre-B cell
stage.
BurkiĴ’s lymphoma A malignant B cell tumor that is diagnosed by
histologic features but almost always carries a reciprocal
chromosomal translocation involving Ig gene loci and the MYC
gene on chromosome 8. Many cases of BurkiĴ’s lymphoma in
Africa are associated with Epstein-Barr virus infection.
C
C (constant region) gene segments The DNA sequences in the Ig
and TCR gene loci that encode the nonvariable portions of Ig
heavy and light chains and TCR α, β, γ, and δ chains.
C1 A plasma complement system protein composed of several
polypeptide chains that initiates the classical pathway of
complement activation by aĴaching to the Fc portions of IgG or
IgM antibody that has bound antigen.
C1 inhibitor (C1 INH) A plasma protease inhibitor that blocks
esterase functions of the C1r and C1s components of
complement C1, which initiate the classical pathway of
complement activation. C1 INH also blocks proteases in
ﬁbrinolytic, coagulation, and kinin pathways. C1 INH is a serine
protease inhibitor (serpin), which mimics the structure of the
substrates of the proteases it inhibits. A genetic deﬁciency in C1
INH causes hereditary angioedema, a disease characterized
mainly by deregulated bradykinin activity.
C2 A classical complement pathway protein that is proteolytically
cleaved by activated C1 to generate C2a, which forms part of the
classical pathway C3 convertase.
C3 The central and most abundant complement system protein; it
is involved in the classical, alternative and lectin complement
pathways. C3 is proteolytically cleaved during complement
activation to generate a C3b fragment, which covalently aĴaches
to cell or microbial surfaces where it acts as an opsonin; and a
C3a fragment, sometimes called an anaphylatoxin, that has
various proinﬂammatory activities.
C3 convertase A multiprotein enzyme complex generated by the
early steps of classical, alternative, and lectin pathways of
complement activation. C3 convertase cleaves C3, which gives
rise to two proteolytic products, C3a and C3b.
C4 A classical complement pathway protein that is proteolytically
cleaved by activated C1 to generate C4b, which forms part of the
classical pathway C3 convertase, and a C4a fragment, sometimes
called an anaphylatoxin, which has various proinﬂammatory
activities.
C5 A protein that is cleaved by C5 convertases in all complement
pathways, generating a C5b fragment, which initiates formation
of the membrane aĴack complex, and a C5a fragment, sometimes
called an anaphylatoxin, which has various proinﬂammatory
activities.
C5 convertase A multiprotein enzyme complex generated by C3b
binding to C3 convertase. C5 convertase cleaves C5 and initiates
the late steps of complement activation leading to formation of
the membrane aĴack complex and lysis of cells.
Calcineurin A cytoplasmic serine/threonine phosphatase that
dephosphorylates the transcription factor NFAT, thereby
allowing NFAT to enter the nucleus. Calcineurin is activated by
calcium signals generated through TCR signaling in response to
antigen recognition, and the immunosuppressive drugs
cyclosporine and tacrolimus work by blocking calcineurin
activity.
Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA, CD66) A highly glycosylated
membrane protein; increased expression of CEA in many
carcinomas of the colon, pancreas, stomach, and breast results in
a rise in blood levels. The level of blood CEA is used to monitor
the persistence or recurrence of metastatic carcinoma after
treatment.
Caspases Intracellular proteases with cysteines in their active sites
that cleave substrates at the C-terminal sides of aspartic acid
residues. Most are components of enzymatic cascades that cause
apoptotic death of cells, but caspase-1, which is part of the
inﬂammasome, drives inﬂammation by processing inactive
precursor forms of the cytokines IL-1 and IL-18 into their active
forms.
Cathelicidins Peptides produced by neutrophils and various barrier
epithelia that serve various functions in innate immunity,
including direct toxicity to microorganisms, activation of
leukocytes, and neutralization of lipopolysaccharide. Along with
defensins, cathelicidins are often called antimicrobial peptides
(AMPs).
Cathepsins Thiol and aspartyl proteases with broad substrate
speciﬁcities, which are abundant in the endosomes in APCs and
play an important role in generating peptide fragments that bind
to class II MHC molecules from exogenous protein antigens.
CD molecules Cell surface molecules expressed on various cell
types in the immune system that are designated by the “cluster
of diﬀerentiation” or CD number. See Appendix I for a list of CD
molecules.
Cell-mediated immunity (CMI) The form of adaptive immunity
that is mediated by T lymphocytes and serves as the defense
mechanism against various types of microbes that are taken up
by phagocytes or infect nonphagocytic cells. Cell-mediated
immune responses include CD4+ T cell–mediated activation of
phagocytes and CD8+ CTL–mediated killing of infected cells.
Central tolerance A form of self-tolerance induced in primary
(generative or central) lymphoid organs as a consequence of
immature self-reactive lymphocytes recognizing self antigens
and subsequently leading to their death (clonal deletion), change
in speciﬁcity (receptor editing in B cells), or diﬀerentiation into
regulatory T cells. Central tolerance prevents the emergence of
lymphocytes with high-aﬃnity receptors for the self antigens that
are expressed in the bone marrow or thymus.
Centroblasts Rapidly proliferating B cells in the dark zone of
germinal centers of secondary lymphoid tissues, which give rise
to thousands of progeny, express activation-induced deaminase
(AID), and undergo somatic mutation of their V genes.
Centroblasts become the centrocytes of the light zone of
germinal centers.
Centrocytes B cells in the light zone of germinal centers of
secondary lymphoid organs, which are the progeny of
proliferating centroblasts of the dark zone. Centrocytes that
express high-aﬃnity Ig are selected to survive and undergo
isotype switching and further diﬀerentiation into long-lived
plasma cells and memory B cells.
Checkpoint blockade A form of cancer immunotherapy in which
blocking antibodies speciﬁc for T cell inhibitory molecules,
including PD-1, PD-L1, and CTLA-4, are administered to cancer
patients to boost antitumor T cell responses, also called immune
checkpoint blockade. This approach has been successful in
eﬀectively treating several kinds of widely metastatic cancers that
are unresponsive to other therapies.
Chédiak-Higashi syndrome A rare autosomal recessive
immunodeﬁciency disease caused by a defect in the cytoplasmic
granules of various cell types that aﬀects the lysosomes of
neutrophils and macrophages as well as the granules of CTLs
and NK cells. Patients show reduced resistance to infection with
pyogenic bacteria.
Chemokine receptors Cell surface receptors for chemokines that
transduce signals stimulating the migration of leukocytes. There
are at least 19 diﬀerent mammalian chemokine receptors, each of
which binds a diﬀerent set of chemokines; all are members of the
seven-transmembrane α-helical, G protein–coupled receptor
family.
Chemokines A large family of structurally homologous low-
molecular-weight cytokines that stimulate leukocyte chemotaxis,
regulate the migration of leukocytes from the blood to tissues by
activating leukocyte integrins, and maintain the spatial
organization of diﬀerent subsets of lymphocytes and APCs
within lymphoid organs.
Chemotaxis Movement of a cell directed by a chemical
concentration gradient. Leukocyte chemotaxis within various
tissues is often directed by gradients of low-molecular-weight
cytokines called chemokines, by the lipid sphingosine 1-
phosphate, or by the bacterial peptide N-formylmethionyl-leucyl-
phenylalanine.
Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) Genetically engineered receptors
with tumor antigen–speciﬁc binding sites encoded by
recombinant Ig variable genes and cytoplasmic tails containing
signaling domains of both the TCR and costimulatory receptors.
When T cells are engineered to express chimeric antigen
receptors, these cells can recognize and kill cells that the
extracellular domain recognizes. Adoptive transfer of CAR-
expressing T cells has been used successfully for the treatment of
some types of hematologic cancers.
Chromosomal translocation A chromosomal abnormality in which
a segment of one chromosome is transferred to another. Many
malignant diseases of lymphocytes are associated with
chromosomal translocations involving an Ig or TCR locus and a
chromosomal segment containing a cellular oncogene.
Chronic granulomatous disease A rare inherited immunodeﬁciency
disease caused by mutations in genes encoding components of
the phagocyte oxidase enzyme complex that is needed for
microbial killing by polymorphonuclear leukocytes and
macrophages. The disease is characterized by recurrent
intracellular bacterial and fungal infections, often accompanied
by chronic cell-mediated immune responses and the formation of
granulomas.
Chronic rejection A form of allograft rejection characterized by
ﬁbrosis with loss of normal organ structures occurring during a
prolonged period. In many cases, the major pathologic event in
chronic rejection is graft arterial occlusion caused by
proliferation of intimal smooth muscle cells, which is called graft
arteriosclerosis.
Citrullinated proteins Proteins in which arginine residues have
been post-translationally converted to citrulline. Auto-antibodies
speciﬁc for citrullinated proteins are found in patients with
rheumatoid arthritis.
c-KIT ligand (stem cell factor) A protein required for
hematopoiesis, early steps in T cell development in the thymus,
and mast cell development. c-KIT ligand is produced in
membrane-bound and soluble forms by stromal cells in the bone
marrow and thymus, and it binds to the c-KIT tyrosine kinase
membrane receptor on pluripotent stem cells.
Class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecule One of
two forms of polymorphic heterodimeric membrane proteins
that bind and display peptide fragments of protein antigens on
the surface of APCs for recognition by T lymphocytes. Class I
MHC molecules usually display peptides derived from proteins
in the cytosol of the cell, for recognition by CD8+ T cells.
Class II–associated invariant chain peptide (CLIP) A peptide
remnant of the invariant chain that sits in the class II MHC
peptide-binding cleft and is removed by action of the HLA-DM
molecule before the cleft becomes accessible to peptides
produced by lysosomal proteolysis of extracellular protein
antigens.
Class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecule One of
two major classes of polymorphic heterodimeric membrane
proteins that bind and display peptide fragments of protein
antigens on the surface of APCs for recognition by T
lymphocytes. Class II MHC molecules usually display peptides
derived from extracellular proteins that are internalized into
phagocytic or endocytic vesicles, for recognition by CD4+ T cells.
Classical macrophage activation Macrophage activation by IFN-γ,
Th1 cells, and TLR ligands, leading to a proinﬂammatory and
microbicidal phenotype. Classically activated macrophages are
also called M1 macrophages.
Classical pathway of complement activation The complement
pathway that is an eﬀector arm of the humoral immunity,
generating inﬂammatory mediators, opsonins for phagocytosis of
antigens, and lytic complexes that destroy cells. The classical
pathway is initiated by binding of antigen-antibody complexes to
the C1 molecule, leading to proteolytic cleavage of C4 and C2
proteins to generate the classical pathway C3 convertase. The
classical pathway, as well as the alternative and lectin pathways,
terminate with formation of the membrane aĴack complex.
Clonal anergy A state of antigen unresponsiveness of a clone of T
lymphocytes experimentally induced by recognition of antigen in
the absence of additional costimulatory signals required for
functional activation. Clonal anergy is considered a model for
one mechanism of tolerance to self antigens and may be
applicable to B lymphocytes as well.
Clonal deletion A mechanism of lymphocyte tolerance in which an
immature T cell in the thymus or an immature B cell in the bone
marrow undergoes apoptotic death as a consequence of
recognizing a self antigen.
Clonal expansion The approximately 1000- to 100,000-fold increase
in number of lymphocytes speciﬁc for an antigen that results
from antigen stimulation and proliferation of T and B cells.
Clonal expansion occurs in lymphoid tissues and is required to
generate enough antigen-speciﬁc eﬀector T lymphocytes and
plasma cells from rare naive precursors to eradicate infections.
Clonal ignorance A form of lymphocyte unresponsiveness in which
self antigens are ignored by the immune system even though
lymphocytes speciﬁc for those antigens remain viable and
functional.
Clonal selection hypothesis A fundamental tenet of the immune
system (no longer a hypothesis) stating that every individual
possesses numerous clonally derived lymphocytes, each clone
having arisen from a single precursor, expresses one antigen
receptor, and is capable of recognizing and responding to a
distinct antigenic determinant. When an antigen enters, it selects
a speciﬁc preexisting clone and activates it.
Clone A group of cells, all derived from a single common
precursor, that maintain many of the genotypic and phenotypic
features shared by the cell of origin. In adaptive immunity, all
members of a clone of lymphocytes share the same clonally
unique recombined Ig or TCR genes, although the rearranged Ig
V genes of diﬀerent cells within a clone of B cells may vary in
sequence due to somatic hypermutation that occurs after VDJ
recombination.
Coinhibition The inhibition of T cell activation mediated by
molecules on APCs or other cells that bind to receptors on T
cells, causing blockade of TCR and costimulatory signals in the T
cell. Examples include PD-L1 on APCs or tumor cells binding to
PD-1 on T cells, which generates inhibitory signals that block
TCR and costimulatory signals in the T cell, or CTLA-4 on a T cell
binding to B7-1 and B7-2 on an APC, preventing costimulation by
B7-1 and B7-2 binding to CD28 on the T cell. Blockade of
coinhibitory molecules is widely used as a therapeutic strategy to
enhance antitumor immunity (checkpoint blockade).
Collectins A family of proteins, including mannose-binding lectin,
that is characterized by a collagen-like domain and a lectin (i.e.,
carbohydrate-binding) domain. Collectins play a role in the
innate immune system by acting as microbial paĴern recognition
receptors, and they may activate the complement system by
binding to C1q.
Colony-stimulating factors (CSFs) Cytokines that promote the
expansion and diﬀerentiation of bone marrow progenitor cells.
CSFs are essential for the maturation of red blood cells,
granulocytes, monocytes, and lymphocytes. Examples of CSFs
include granulocyte-monocyte colony-stimulating factor (GM-
CSF), granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), and IL-3.
Combinatorial diversity The diversity of Ig and TCR speciﬁcities
generated by the use of many diﬀerent combinations of diﬀerent
variable, diversity, and joining segments during somatic
recombination of DNA in the Ig and TCR loci in developing B
and T cells. Combinatorial diversity is one mechanism that works
together with junctional diversity for the generation of large
numbers of diﬀerent antigen receptor genes from a limited
number of gene segments.
Common variable immunodeﬁciency disease (CVID) One of a
group of heterogeneous disorders characterized by reduced
circulating antibody, impaired antibody responses to infection
and vaccines, increased incidence of infections, typically with
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae and Streptococcus pneumoniae, various
autoimmune manifestations, and a high incidence of
lymphomas. Most cases are sporadic, but up to 25% of patients
have a family history, some of which are a result of monogenic
mutations.
Complement A system of plasma and cell surface proteins that
interact with one another and with other molecules of the
immune system to generate important eﬀectors of innate and
adaptive immune responses. The classical, alternative, and lectin
pathways of the complement system are activated by antigen-
antibody complexes, microbial surfaces, and plasma lectins
binding to microbes, respectively, and consist of a cascade of
proteolytic enzymes that generate inﬂammatory mediators and
opsonins. All three pathways lead to the formation of a common
terminal cell lytic complex that is inserted in cell membranes.
Complement receptor type 1 (CR1, or CD35) A receptor for the C3b
and C4b fragments of complement. Phagocytes use CR1 to
mediate internalization of C3b- or C4b-coated particles. CR1 on
erythrocytes serves in the clearance of immune complexes from
the circulation. CR1 is also a regulator of complement activation.
Complement receptor type 2 (CR2, or CD21) A receptor expressed
on B cells and follicular dendritic cells that binds proteolytic
fragments of the C3 complement protein, including C3d, C3dg,
and iC3b. CR2 functions to stimulate humoral immune
responses by enhancing B cell activation by antigen and by
promoting the trapping of antigen-antibody complexes in
germinal centers. CR2 is also a receptor for Epstein-Barr virus.
Complement receptor type 3 (CR3, or CD11bCD18) An integrin
expressed mainly on neutrophils and macrophages, which binds
to a peptide fragment of C3 called iC3b, which is deposited on
microbes as a result of complement pathway activation. CR3
mediates the phagocytosis of iC3b coated microbes.
Complementarity-determining regions (CDRs)  Short segments of
Ig and TCR proteins that contain most of the sequence
diﬀerences between diﬀerent antibodies or TCRs and make
contact with antigen; also called hypervariable regions. Three
CDRs are present in the variable domain of each antigen receptor
polypeptide chain, and six CDRs are present in an intact Ig or
TCR molecule. These hypervariable segments assume loop
structures that together form a surface complementary to the
three-dimensional structure of the bound antigen.
Congenic mouse strains Inbred mouse strains that are identical to
one another at every genetic locus except the one for which they
are selected to diﬀer; such strains are created by repetitive back-
crossbreeding and selection for a particular trait. Congenic
strains that diﬀer from one another only at a particular MHC
allele have been useful in deﬁning the function of MHC
molecules.
Congenital immunodeﬁciency  See Primary immunodeﬁcency.
Constant (C) region The portion of Ig or TCR polypeptide chains
that is not involved in antigen binding and is not highly variable
between clones of B or T cells.
Contact sensitivity A reaction to certain chemical agents leading to
T cell–mediated delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions on skin
contact. Substances that elicit contact sensitivity, including nickel
ions, urushiols in poison ivy, and many therapeutic drugs, bind
to and modify self proteins on the surfaces of APCs, which are
then recognized by CD4+ or CD8+ T cells.
Coreceptor A lymphocyte surface receptor that binds to an antigen
at the same time that membrane Ig or TCR binds the antigen and
delivers signals required for optimal lymphocyte activation. CD4
and CD8 are T cell coreceptors that bind nonpolymorphic parts
of an MHC molecule concurrently with the TCR binding to
polymorphic MHC residues and the displayed peptide. CR2 is a
coreceptor on B cells that binds to complement-coated antigens
at the same time that membrane Ig binds an epitope of the
antigen.
Costimulator A molecule expressed on the surface of APCs in
response to innate immune stimuli, which provides a stimulus
(the “second signal”), in addition to antigen, required for the
activation of naive T cells. The best deﬁned costimulators are the
B7 molecules (CD80 and CD86) on APCs that bind to the CD28
receptor on T cells. Sometimes the receptor (CD28) is called a
costimulator.
COVID-19 A disease caused by the highly infectious coronavirus
SARS-CoV-2, characterized mainly by respiratory system
symptoms, often with pneumonia, but also aﬀecting various
other organ systems. An exuberant inﬂammatory response to the
virus causes irreversible and often lethal lung injury in a
minority of patients. The COVID-19 pandemic of 2020-2021 has
led to the infection of millions of people worldwide, and over 2
million people have died of the disease.
CpG nucleotides Unmethylated cytidine-guanine sequences found
mainly in microbial DNA that stimulate innate immune
responses. CpG oligonucleotides are recognized by TLR9, and
they are used as adjuvants.
C-reactive protein (CRP) A member of the pentraxin family of
plasma proteins involved in innate immune responses to
bacterial infections. CRP binds to the capsule of pneumococcal
bacteria. CRP also binds to C1q and may thereby activate
complement or act as an opsonin by interacting with phagocyte
C1q receptors. CRP is an acute-phase protein, and increased
plasma concentration of CRP is a clinically used marker of
inﬂammation.
Cross-matching A screening test performed to minimize the
chance of adverse transfusion reactions or graft rejection, in
which a patient in need of a blood transfusion or organ allograft
is tested for the presence of preformed antibodies against donor
cell surface antigens (usually blood group antigens or MHC
antigens). The test involves mixing the recipient serum with
leukocytes or red blood cells from potential donors and
analyzing for agglutination or complement-dependent lysis of
the cells.
Cross-presentation A mechanism by which a dendritic cell (DC)
activates (or primes) a naive CD8+ CTL speciﬁc for the antigens of
a third cell (e.g., a virus-infected or tumor cell). Cross-
presentation occurs, for example, when protein antigens from an
infected cell are ingested by a DC and the microbial antigens are
processed and presented in association with class I MHC
molecules, unlike the general rule for phagocytosed antigens,
which are presented in association with class II MHC molecules.
The DC also provides costimulation for the T cells. Also called
cross-priming.
CTLA-4 An Ig superfamily protein expressed on the surface of
activated eﬀector T cells and Treg that binds B7-1 and B7-2 with
high aﬃnity and plays an essential role in inhibiting T cell
responses. CTLA-4 is essential for Treg function and T cell
tolerance to self antigens.
CTLA-4-Ig A recombinant fusion protein composed of the
extracellular B7-binding portion of CTLA-4 linked to an IgG Fc
region. CTLA-4 Ig a competitive inhibitor of B7 binding to CD28
and thereby blocks T cell costimulation. It is used as a drug to
treat transplant rejection and autoimmune diseases. The IgG Fc
enhances the duration the drug persists in the circulation. Note
that CTLA-4-Ig is not anti-CTLA-4 antibody.
C-type lectin A member of a large family of calcium-dependent
carbohydrate-binding proteins, many of which play important
roles in innate and adaptive immunity. For example, soluble C-
type lectins bind to microbial carbohydrate structures and
mediate phagocytosis or complement activation (e.g., mannose-
binding lectin, dectins, collectins, ﬁcolins).
Cutaneous immune system The components of the innate and
adaptive immune system found in the skin that function together
in a specialized way to detect and respond to pathogens on or in
the skin and to maintain homeostasis with commensal microbes.
Components of the cutaneous immune system include
keratinocytes, Langerhans cells, dermal dendritic cells,
intraepithelial lymphocytes, and dermal lymphocytes.
Cyclic GMP-AMP synthase A cytosolic DNA sensor of the innate
immune system that generates cyclic GMP-AMP as a second
messenger and uses the STING adaptor to induce type I IFN
synthesis.
Cyclosporine A calcineurin inhibitor widely used as an
immunosuppressive drug to prevent allograft rejection by
blocking T cell activation. Cyclosporine (also called cyclosporin
A) binds to a cytosolic protein called cyclophilin, and
cyclosporine-cyclophilin complexes bind to and inhibit
calcineurin, thereby inhibiting activation and nuclear
translocation of the transcription factor NFAT.
Cytokine release syndrome A life-threatening systemic
inﬂammatory condition, sometime referred to as cytokine storm,
due to secretion of massive amounts of inﬂammatory cytokines
(including IFN-γ, TNF, and IL-6) by immune cells. Cytokine
release syndrome has been associated with gram negative
septicemia, CAR-T cell therapy of cancers, and infections with
SARS CoV-2.
Cytokines Proteins that are produced and secreted by many
diﬀerent cell types, and mediate inﬂammatory and immune
reactions. Cytokines are principal mediators of communication
between cells of the immune system (see Appendix II).
Cytosolic DNA sensors (CDSs) Molecules that detect microbial
double-stranded DNA in the cytosol and activate signaling
pathways that initiate antimicrobial responses, including type I
IFN production and autophagy.
Cytotoxic (or cytolytic) T lymphocyte (CTL) A type of T
lymphocyte whose major eﬀector function is to recognize and kill
host cells infected with viruses or other intracellular microbes as
well as tumor cells. CTLs usually express CD8 and recognize
microbial peptides displayed by class I MHC molecules. CTL
killing of infected cells involves delivery of the contents of
cytoplasmic granules into the cytosol of infected cells, leading to
apoptotic death.
D
Damage-associated molecular paĴerns (DAMPs) Endogenous
molecules that are produced by or released from damaged and
dying cells that bind to paĴern recognition receptors and
stimulate innate immune responses. Examples include high-
mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) protein, extracellular ATP, and
uric acid crystals.
Death receptors Plasma membrane receptors expressed on various
cell types that, on ligand binding, transduce signals that lead to
recruitment of the FAS-associated protein with death domain
(FADD) adaptor protein, which activates caspase-8, leading to
apoptotic cell death. All death receptors, including FAS, TRAIL,
and TNFR, belong to the TNF receptor superfamily.
Dectins PaĴern recognition receptors expressed on dendritic cells
that recognize fungal cell wall carbohydrates and induce
signaling events that promote inﬂammation and enhance
adaptive immune responses.
Defensins Cysteine-rich peptides produced by epithelial barrier
cells in the skin, gut, lung, and other tissues and in neutrophil
granules that act as broad-spectrum antibiotics to kill a wide
variety of bacteria and fungi. The synthesis of defensins is
increased in response to stimulation of innate immune system
receptors such as Toll-like receptors and inﬂammatory cytokines
such as IL-1 and TNF. Cathelicidins and defensins are two types
of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs).
Delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) An immune reaction in
which T cell–dependent macrophage activation and inﬂammation
cause tissue injury. A DTH reaction to the subcutaneous
injection of antigen is often used as an assay for cell-mediated
immunity (e.g., the puriﬁed protein derivative skin test for
immunity to Mycobacterium tuberculosis).
Dendritic cells Bone marrow–derived cells found in epithelial
barriers, the stroma of most organs, and lymphoid tissues that
are morphologically characterized by thin membranous
projections. Many subsets of dendritic cells exist with diverse
functions. Classical (conventional) dendritic cells (cDCs)
function as innate sentinel cells and become APCs for naive T
lymphocytes on activation, and they are important for initiation
of adaptive immune responses to protein antigen. Plasmacytoid
dendritic cells (pDCs) produce abundant type I IFNs in response
to exposure to viruses. Monocyte-derived dendritic cells (MoDCs)
are derived from blood monocytes during inﬂammatory
reactions.
Desensitization A method of treating immediate hypersensitivity
disorders (allergies) that involves repetitive administration of
low doses of an antigen to which individuals are allergic. This
process often prevents severe allergic reactions on subsequent
environmental exposure to the antigen, but the mechanisms are
not well understood.
Determinant The speciﬁc portion of a macromolecular antigen to
which an antibody or TCR binds. In the case of a protein antigen
recognized by a T cell, the determinant is the peptide portion
that is displayed by an MHC molecule for recognition by the
TCR. Synonymous with epitope.
Diacylglycerol (DAG) A signaling molecule generated by
phospholipase C (PLCγ)-mediated hydrolysis of the plasma
membrane phospholipid phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate
(PIP2) during antigen activation of lymphocytes, as well as
activation of various other immune cells. The main function of
DAG is to activate an enzyme called protein kinase C that
participates in the generation of active transcription factors.
DiGeorge syndrome A selective T cell deﬁciency caused by a
congenital malformation that results in defective development of
the thymus, parathyroid glands, and other structures that arise
from the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches.
Direct antigen presentation (or direct allorecognition) Presentation
of cell surface allogeneic MHC molecules by graft APCs to a graft
recipient’s T cells that leads to activation of the alloreactive T
cells. In direct recognition of an allogeneic MHC molecule, a TCR
that was selected to recognize a self MHC molecule plus foreign
peptide cross-reacts with the intact allogeneic MHC molecule
plus a random peptide. Direct presentation is partly responsible
for strong T cell responses to allografts.
Diversity The existence of a large number of lymphocytes with
diﬀerent antigenic speciﬁcities in any individual. Diversity is a
fundamental property of the adaptive immune system and is the
result of variability in the structures of the antigen-binding sites
of lymphocyte receptors for antigens (antibodies and TCRs).
Diversity (D) segments Short coding sequences between the
variable (V) and constant (C) gene segments in the Ig heavy
chain and TCR β and γ loci that together with J segments are
somatically recombined with V segments during lymphocyte
development. The resulting recombined VDJ DNA codes for the
carboxy-terminal ends of antigen receptor V regions, including
the third hypervariable (CDR) regions. Random use of D
segments contributes to the diversity of the antigen receptor
repertoire.
DNA vaccine A vaccine composed of a bacterial plasmid containing
a complementary DNA encoding a protein antigen. DNA
vaccines presumably work because professional APCs are
transfected in vivo by the plasmid and express immunogenic
peptides that elicit speciﬁc responses. Furthermore, the plasmid
DNA contains CpG nucleotides that act as potent adjuvants.
Double-negative thymocyte A subset of developing T cells in the
thymus (thymocytes) that express neither CD4 nor CD8. Most
double-negative thymocytes are at an early developmental stage
and do not express antigen receptors. They will later express both
CD4 and CD8 during the intermediate double-positive stage
before further maturation to single-positive T cells expressing
only CD4 or CD8.
Double-positive thymocyte A subset of developing T cells in the
thymus (thymocytes) that express both CD4 and CD8 and are at
an intermediate developmental stage. Double-positive
thymocytes also express TCRs and are subject to selection
processes, and they mature to single-positive T cells expressing
only CD4 or CD8.
E
Ectoparasites Parasites that live on the surface of an animal, such as
ticks and mites. Both the innate and adaptive immune systems
may play a role in protection against ectoparasites, often by
destroying the larval stages of these organisms.
Eﬀector cells The cells that perform eﬀector functions during an
immune response, such as secreting cytokines (e.g., helper T
cells), killing microbes (e.g., macrophages), killing microbe-
infected host cells (e.g., CTLs), or secreting antibodies (e.g.,
plasma cells).
Eﬀector phase The phase of an immune response in which a
foreign antigen is destroyed or inactivated. For example, in a
humoral immune response, the eﬀector phase may be
characterized by antibody-dependent complement activation and
phagocytosis of antibody- and complement-opsonized bacteria.
Endosome An intracellular membrane-bound vesicle into which
extracellular proteins are internalized during antigen processing.
Endosomes are formed by invagination of the plasma membrane,
and they may mature into late endosomes and lysosomes, which
have progressively lower pH and more hydrolytic enzymes. The
proteolytic enzymes in endosomes degrade internalized proteins
into peptides that bind to class II MHC molecules, and the
endosomes containing these peptides fuse with Golgi-derived
vesicles containing class II MHC molecules. (Endosomes are
found in all cells and participate in internalization events that are
not linked to antigen presentation.)
Endotoxin A component of the cell wall of gram-negative bacteria,
also called lipopolysaccharide (LPS), that is released from dying
bacteria and stimulates innate immune inﬂammatory responses
by binding to TLR4 on many diﬀerent cell types, including
phagocytes, endothelial cells, dendritic cells, and barrier
epithelial cells. Endotoxin contains both lipid components and
carbohydrate (polysaccharide) moieties.
Enhancer A regulatory nucleotide sequence in a gene that is located
either upstream or downstream of the promoter, binds
transcription factors, and increases the activity of the promoter.
In cells of the immune system, enhancers are responsible for
integrating cell surface signals that lead to induced transcription
of genes encoding many of the eﬀector proteins of an immune
response, such as cytokines.
Envelope glycoprotein (Env) A membrane glycoprotein encoded by
a retrovirus that is expressed on the plasma membrane of
infected cells and on the host cell–derived membrane coat of
viral particles. Env proteins are often required for viral
infectivity. The Env proteins of HIV include gp41 and gp120,
which bind to CD4 and chemokine receptors, respectively, on
human T cells and mediate fusion of the viral and T cell
membranes.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) A method of
quantifying an antigen immobilized on a solid surface by use of a
speciﬁc antibody with a covalently coupled enzyme. The amount
of antibody that binds the antigen is proportional to the amount
of antigen present and is determined by spectrophotometrically
measuring the conversion of a clear substrate to a colored
product by the coupled enzyme (see Appendix III).
Eosinophil A bone marrow–derived granulocyte that is abundant in
the inﬂammatory inﬁltrates of immediate hypersensitivity late-
phase reactions and contributes to many of the pathologic
processes in allergic diseases. They are recognizable by their
bright red cytosolic granules in standard Wright-stained blood
smears and hematoxylin and eosin–stained tissue sections.
Eosinophils are important in defense against extracellular
parasites, including helminths.
Epitope The speciﬁc portion of a macromolecular antigen to which
an antibody or TCR binds. In the case of a protein antigen
recognized by a T cell, an epitope is the peptide portion that
binds to an MHC molecule for recognition by the TCR.
Synonymous with determinant.
Epitope spreading In autoimmunity, the development of immune
responses to multiple epitopes as an autoimmune disease
originally targeting one epitope progresses, likely caused by
further breakdown in tolerance and release of additional tissue
antigens due to the inﬂammatory process stimulated by the
initial response.
Exhaustion  See T cell exhaustion.
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) A double-stranded DNA virus of the
herpesvirus family that is the etiologic agent of infectious
mononucleosis and is associated with some B cell malignant
tumors and nasopharyngeal carcinoma. EBV infects B
lymphocytes and some epithelial cells by speciﬁcally binding to
complement receptor 2 (CR2, CD21).
Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) An animal
model of multiple sclerosis, an autoimmune demyelinating
disease of the central nervous system. EAE is induced in rodents
by immunization with components of the myelin sheath (e.g.,
myelin basic protein) of nerves, mixed with an adjuvant. The
disease is mediated in large part by cytokine-secreting CD4+ T
cells speciﬁc for the myelin sheath proteins.
F
Fab (fragment, antigen-binding) A part of an antibody, ﬁrst
produced by proteolysis of IgG, that includes one complete light
chain paired with one heavy chain fragment containing the
variable domain and only the ﬁrst constant domain. Fab
fragments, which can be generated from all antibodies, retain the
ability to bind an antigen but cannot interact with IgG Fc
receptors on cells or with complement. Therefore, Fab
preparations are used in research and therapeutic applications
when antigen binding is desired without activation of eﬀector
functions. (The Fab′ fragment retains the hinge region of the
heavy chain.)
F(ab′)2  A part of an Ig molecule (ﬁrst produced by proteolysis of
IgG) that includes two complete light chains but only the
variable domain, ﬁrst constant domain, and hinge region of the
two heavy chains. F(ab′)2 fragments retain the entire bivalent
antigen-binding region of an intact Ig molecule but cannot bind
complement or Fc receptors. They are used in research and
therapeutic applications when antigen binding is desired without
antibody eﬀector functions.
FAS (CD95) A death receptor of the TNF receptor family that is
expressed on the surface of T cells and many other cell types and
initiates a signaling cascade leading to apoptotic death of the
cell. The death pathway is initiated when FAS ligand expressed
on activated T cells binds to FAS on the same or other cells. FAS-
mediated killing of lymphocytes plays a role in the maintenance
of self-tolerance. Mutations in the FAS gene cause systemic
autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome [ALPS]). (See also
Death receptor).
FAS ligand (CD95 ligand) A membrane protein that is a member of
the TNF family of proteins expressed on activated T cells. FAS
ligand binds to the death receptor FAS, thereby stimulating a
signaling pathway leading to apoptotic cell death of the FAS-
expressing cell. Mutations in the FAS ligand gene cause systemic
autoimmune disease in mice.
Fc (fragment, crystalline) A region of an antibody molecule that
can be isolated by proteolysis of IgG that contains only the
disulﬁde-linked carboxy-terminal regions of the two heavy
chains. The Fc region of Ig molecules mediates eﬀector functions
by binding to cell surface receptors or the C1q complement
protein. (Fc fragments are so named because they tend to
crystallize out of solution.)
Fc receptor A cell surface receptor speciﬁc for the carboxy-terminal
constant region of an Ig molecule. Fc receptors are typically
multichain protein complexes that include signaling components
and Ig-binding components. Several types of Fc receptors exist,
including those speciﬁc for diﬀerent IgG isotypes, IgE, and IgA.
Fc receptors mediate many of the cell-dependent eﬀector
functions of antibodies, including phagocytosis of antibody-
bound antigens, antigen-induced activation of mast cells, and
targeting and activation of NK cells.
FcεRI A high-aﬃnity receptor for the carboxyl-terminal constant
region of IgE molecules that is expressed on mast cells,
basophils, and eosinophils. FcεRI molecules on mast cells are
usually occupied by IgE, and antigen-induced cross-linking of
these IgE-FcεRI complexes activates the mast cell and initiates
immediate hypersensitivity reactions.
Fcγ receptor (FcγR) A cell surface receptor speciﬁc for the carboxy-
terminal constant region of IgG molecules. There are several
diﬀerent types of Fcγ receptors, including a high-aﬃnity FcγRI
that mediates phagocytosis by macrophages and neutrophils, a
low-aﬃnity FcγRIIB that transduces inhibitory signals in B cells
and myeloid cells, and a low-aﬃnity FcγRIIIA that mediates
targeting and activation of NK cells.
Fibroblastic reticular cell (FRC) Mesenchymally derived cells that
drive formation of secondary lymphoid organs during embryonic
development and contribute in multiple ways to the structure
and functions of these organs.
Ficolins Hexameric innate immune system plasma proteins,
containing collagen-like domains and ﬁbrinogen-like
carbohydrate-recognizing domains, that bind to cell wall
components of gram-positive bacteria, opsonizing them and
activating complement.
First-set rejection Allograft rejection in an individual who has not
previously received a graft or otherwise been exposed to tissue
alloantigens from the same donor. First-set rejection usually
takes approximately 7 to 14 days to develop after graft
transplantation.
Flow cytometry A method of analysis of the phenotype of cell
populations requiring a specialized instrument (ﬂow cytometer)
that can detect ﬂuorescence on individual cells in a suspension
and thereby determine the number of cells expressing the
molecule to which a ﬂuorescent probe binds, as well as the
relative amount of the molecule expressed. Suspensions of cells
are incubated with ﬂuorescently labeled antibodies or other
probes, and the amount of probe bound by each cell in the
population is measured by passing the cells one at a time
through a ﬂuorimeter with a laser-generated incident beam.
(See Appendix III.)
Fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS) An adaptation of the ﬂow
cytometer that is used for the puriﬁcation of cells from a mixed
population according to which and how much ﬂuorescent probe
the cells bind. Cells are ﬁrst stained with ﬂuorescently labeled
probe, such as an antibody speciﬁc for a surface antigen of a cell
population. The cells are then passed one at a time through a
ﬂuorimeter with a laser-generated incident beam and are
deﬂected into diﬀerent collection tubes by electromagnetic ﬁelds
whose strength and direction are varied according to the
measured intensity of the ﬂuorescence signal.
Follicle  See Lymphoid follicle.
Follicular dendritic cells (FDCs) Cells in lymphoid follicles of
secondary lymphoid organs that express complement receptors
and Fc receptors and have long cytoplasmic processes that form a
meshwork. Follicular dendritic cells display antigens on their
surface for B cell recognition and are involved in the activation
and selection of B cells expressing high-aﬃnity membrane Ig
during the process of aﬃnity maturation. They are
nonhematopoietic cells (not of bone marrow origin).
Follicular helper T cell (TĢ cell)  See T follicular helper (TĢ) cells.
N-Formylmethionine An amino acid that initiates all bacterial
proteins but not mammalian proteins (except those synthesized
within mitochondria) and serves as a signal to the innate
immune system of infection. Speciﬁc receptors for N-
formylmethionine–containing peptides are expressed on
neutrophils and mediate activation of the neutrophils.
FOXP3 A forkhead family transcription factor expressed by and
required for the development and function of CD4+ regulatory T
cells. Mutations in the gene ending FOXP3 in mice and humans
result in an absence of CD25+ regulatory T cells and multisystem
autoimmune disease called IPEX.
G
γδ T cell receptor (γδ TCR) A form of TCR that is distinct from the
more common αβ TCR and is expressed on a subset of T cells
found mostly in epithelial barrier tissues. Although the γδ TCR
is structurally similar to the αβ TCR, the forms of antigen
recognized by γδ TCRs are poorly understood; they do not
recognize peptide complexes bound to polymorphic MHC
molecules.
G protein–coupled receptor family A diverse family of receptors
for hormones, lipid inﬂammatory mediators, and chemokines
that use associated trimeric G proteins for intracellular signaling.
G proteins Proteins that bind guanyl nucleotides and catalyze the
replacement of bound guanosine diphosphate (GDP) by
guanosine triphosphate (GTP). G proteins with bound GTP can
activate a variety of cellular enzymes in diﬀerent signaling
cascades. Trimeric GTP-binding proteins are associated with the
cytoplasmic portions of many cell surface receptors, such as
chemokine receptors. Other small soluble G proteins, such as
RAS and RAC, are recruited into signaling pathways by adaptor
proteins.
Gasdermin D A cytosolic protein that is proteolytically cleaved by
caspase-1 and other caspases in macrophages to generate a pore-
forming fragment that inserts into the plasma membrane,
leading to an inﬂammatory form of cell death called pyroptosis.
GATA3 A transcription factor that plays an essential role in the
diﬀerentiation of Th2 cells from naive T cells and the
diﬀerentiation of ILC2s.
Generative lymphoid organ An organ in which lymphocytes
develop from immature precursors. The bone marrow and
thymus are the major generative lymphoid organs in which B
cells and T cells develop, respectively. Generative lymphoid
organs are also called primary or central lymphoid organs.
Germinal centers Specialized structures in lymphoid organs
generated during T-dependent humoral immune responses,
where extensive B cell proliferation, somatic mutation, aﬃnity
maturation, memory B cell generation, and induction of long-
lived plasma cells take place. Germinal centers appear as lightly
staining regions within a lymphoid follicle in spleen, lymph
node, and mucosal lymphoid tissue.
Germline organization The inherited arrangement of variable,
diversity, joining, and constant region gene segments of the
antigen receptor loci in nonlymphoid cells or in immature
lymphocytes. In developing B or T lymphocytes, the germline
organization is modiﬁed by somatic recombination to form
functional Ig or TCR genes.
Glomerulonephritis Inﬂammation of renal glomeruli, often
initiated by immunopathologic mechanisms such as deposition
of circulating antigen-antibody complexes in the glomerular
basement membrane or binding of antibodies to antigens
expressed in the glomerulus. The antibodies can activate
complement and phagocytes, and the resulting inﬂammatory
response can lead to renal failure.
Graft A tissue or organ that is removed from one site and placed in
another site, usually in a diﬀerent individual.
Graft arteriosclerosis Occlusion of graft arteries caused by
proliferation of intimal smooth muscle cells. This process is
occurs gradually over years after transplantation and is largely
responsible for chronic rejection and failure of vascularized
organ grafts. The mechanism is likely to be a chronic immune
response to vessel wall alloantigens. Graft arteriosclerosis is also
called accelerated arteriosclerosis.
Graft rejection A speciﬁc immune response to an organ or tissue
graft that leads to inﬂammation, damage, and possibly graft
failure.
Graft-versus-host disease A disease occurring in bone marrow
transplant recipients that is caused by the reaction of mature T
cells in the marrow graft with alloantigens on host cells. The
disease most often aﬀects the skin, liver, and intestines.
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) A cytokine made
by activated T cells, macrophages, and endothelial cells at sites of
infection that acts on progenitors in the bone marrow to increase
the production of and mobilize neutrophils to replace those
consumed in inﬂammatory reactions.
Granulocyte-monocyte colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) A
cytokine made by activated T cells, macrophages, endothelial
cells, and stromal ﬁbroblasts that acts on bone marrow
progenitors to increase the production of neutrophils and
monocytes. GM-CSF is also a macrophage-activating factor and
promotes the maturation of dendritic cells.
Granuloma A nodule of inﬂammatory tissue composed of clusters
of activated macrophages and T lymphocytes, usually with
associated ﬁbrosis. Granulomatous inﬂammation is a form of
chronic delayed-type hypersensitivity, often in response to
persistent microbes, such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis and some
fungi, or in response to particulate antigens that are not readily
phagocytosed.
Granulysin A lipid-binding cationic peptide found in granules of
CTLs and NK cells, which can damage cholesterol-poor
membranes, typical of bacteria but not mammalian cells, and
thereby can kill intracellular microbes.
Granzyme B A serine protease enzyme found in the granules of
CTLs and NK cells that is released by exocytosis, enters target
cells, and proteolytically cleaves and activates caspases, which in
turn induce target cell apoptosis.
Gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) Collections of
lymphocytes and APCs within the mucosa of the gastrointestinal
tract, where adaptive immune responses to intestinal microbial
ﬂora and ingested antigens are initiated (see also Mucosa-
associated lymphoid tissues).
H
H-2 molecule A major MHC molecule in the mouse. The mouse
MHC was originally called the H-2 locus.
Haplotype The set of MHC alleles inherited from one parent and
therefore on one chromosome.
Hapten A small chemical that can bind to an antibody but must be
aĴached to a macromolecule (carrier) to stimulate an adaptive
immune response speciﬁc for that chemical. For example,
immunization with dinitrophenol (DNP) alone will not stimulate
an anti-DNP antibody response, but immunization with a
protein with covalently aĴached DNP hapten will.
Heavy-chain isotype (class) switching The process by which a B
lymphocyte changes the isotype, or class, of the antibodies that it
produces, from IgM to IgG, IgE, or IgA, without changing the
antigen speciﬁcity of the antibody. Heavy-chain isotype switching
is stimulated by cytokines and CD40 ligand expressed by T
follicular helper cells and involves activation-induced cytidine
deaminase (AID)–dependent recombination of B cell VDJ
segments with downstream heavy-chain gene segments.
Helminth A parasitic worm. Helminthic infections often elicit Th2-
dependent immune responses characterized by eosinophil-rich
inﬂammatory inﬁltrates and IgE production.
Helper T (Th) cells The class of T lymphocytes whose main
functions are to activate macrophages and to promote
inﬂammation in cell-mediated immune responses and to
promote B cell antibody production in humoral immune
responses. These functions are mediated by secreted cytokines
and by T cell CD40 ligand binding to macrophage or B cell CD40.
Helper T cells express the CD4 molecule and recognize peptide
antigens displayed by class II MHC molecules.
Hematopoiesis The development of mature blood cells, including
erythrocytes, leukocytes, and platelets, from pluripotent stem
cells in the bone marrow and fetal liver. Hematopoiesis is
regulated by several diﬀerent cytokine growth factors produced
by bone marrow stromal cells, T cells, and other cell types.
Hematopoietic stem cell An undiﬀerentiated stem cell in the fetal
yolk sac or liver or in adult bone marrow that asymmetrically
divides to give rise to additional stem cells and a cell that
diﬀerentiates into one of multiple diﬀerent lineages. A
hematopoietic stem cell in the bone marrow will give rise to cells
of the lymphoid, myeloid, and erythrocytic lineage.
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation The transplantation of
hematopoietic stem cells taken from the blood or bone marrow;
it is performed clinically to treat hematopoietic or lymphopoietic
disorders and malignant diseases and is also used in various
immunologic experiments in animals.
High endothelial venules (HEVs) Specialized venules that are the
sites of lymphocyte migration from the blood into the stroma of
secondary lymphoid tissues. HEVs are lined by plump
endothelial cells that protrude into the vessel lumen and express
unique adhesion molecules involved in binding naive and central
memory B and T cells.
Hinge region A region of Ig heavy chains between the ﬁrst two
constant domains that can assume multiple conformations,
thereby imparting ﬂexibility in the orientation of the two
antigen-binding sites. Because of the hinge region, an antibody
molecule can simultaneously bind two epitopes that are
anywhere within a range of distances from one another.
Histamine A vasoactive amine stored in the granules of mast cells
that is one of the important mediators of immediate
hypersensitivity. Histamine binds to speciﬁc receptors in various
tissues and causes increased vascular permeability and
contraction of bronchial and intestinal smooth muscle.
HLA  See Human leukocyte antigens.
HLA-DM A peptide exchange molecule that plays a critical role in
the class II MHC pathway of antigen presentation. HLA-DM is
found in the specialized endosomal compartment where
antigens are processed and facilitates removal of the invariant
chain–derived CLIP peptide and the binding of other peptides to
class II MHC molecules. HLA-DM is encoded by a gene in the
MHC and is structurally similar to class II MHC molecules, but it
is not polymorphic.
Homeostasis In the adaptive immune system, the maintenance of a
constant number and diverse repertoire of lymphocytes, despite
the emergence of new lymphocytes and tremendous expansion of
individual clones that may occur during responses to
immunogenic antigens. Homeostasis is achieved by several
regulated pathways of lymphocyte death and inactivation.
Homing receptor Adhesion molecules expressed on the surface of
lymphocytes that are responsible for the diﬀerent pathways of
lymphocyte recirculation and tissue homing. Homing receptors
bind to ligands (addressins) expressed on endothelial cells in
particular vascular beds.
Human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) The etiologic agent of
AIDS. HIV is a retrovirus that infects a variety of cell types,
including CD4-expressing helper T cells, macrophages, and
dendritic cells, and causes chronic progressive destruction of the
immune system.
Human leukocyte antigens (HLA) MHC molecules expressed on
the surface of human cells. Human MHC molecules include three
types of class I MHC molecules (HLA-A, -B and -C) and three
types of class II MHC molecules (HLA-DP, -DQ, and -DR). (See
also Major histocompatibility complex [MHC] molecule).
Humanized monoclonal antibody A monoclonal antibody encoded
by a recombinant hybrid gene and composed of the antigen-
binding sites from a murine monoclonal antibody and the
constant region of a human antibody. Humanized antibodies are
less likely than mouse monoclonal antibodies to induce an anti-
antibody response in humans; they are used clinically in the
treatment of inﬂammatory diseases, tumors, and transplant
rejection. In current drug development, fully human
recombinant monoclonal antibodies have largely replaced
humanized mouse antibodies.
Humoral immunity The type of adaptive immune response
mediated by antibodies produced by B lymphocytes. Humoral
immunity is the principal adaptive immune defense mechanism
against extracellular microbes and their toxins.
Hybridoma A cell line derived by fusion, or somatic cell
hybridization, between a normal lymphocyte and an
immortalized lymphocyte tumor line. B cell hybridomas created
by fusion of normal B cells of deﬁned antigen speciﬁcity with a
myeloma cell line are used to produce monoclonal antibodies. T
cell hybridomas created by fusion of a normal T cell of deﬁned
speciﬁcity with a T cell tumor line are used in research.
Hyperacute rejection A form of allograft or xenograft rejection that
begins within minutes to hours after transplantation and is
characterized by thrombotic occlusion of the graft vessels.
Hyperacute rejection is mediated by preexisting antibodies in the
host circulation that bind to donor endothelial alloantigens, such
as blood group antigens or MHC molecules, and activate the
complement system.
Hypersensitivity diseases Disorders caused by immune responses.
Hypersensitivity diseases include autoimmune diseases, in which
immune responses are directed against self antigens, and
diseases that result from uncontrolled or excessive responses
against foreign antigens, such as microbes and allergens. The
tissue damage that occurs in hypersensitivity diseases is caused
by the same eﬀector mechanisms used by the immune system to
protect against microbes.
Hypervariable region Short segments of approximately 10 amino
acid residues within the variable regions of antibody or TCR
proteins that form loop structures that contact antigen. Three
hypervariable loops are present in each antibody heavy chain and
light chain and in each TCR α and β chain. Most of the variability
among diﬀerent antibodies or TCRs is located within these loops
(also called complementarity determining region [CDR]).
I
Idiotype The unique molecular structure of the antigen binding site
of the antibodies or TCRs made by a single clone of B or T cells.
The idiotype is determined by the sequence of amino acids in the
hypervariable regions of antibody or TCR polypeptide chains.
Igα and Igβ Proteins that are required for surface expression and
signaling functions of membrane Ig on B cells. Igα and Igβ pairs
are disulﬁde linked to one another, and noncovalently associated
with the cytoplasmic tail of membrane Ig, to form the BCR
complex. The cytoplasmic domains of Igα and Igβ contain ITAMs
that are involved in early signaling events during antigen-
induced B cell activation.
IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1RA) A natural inhibitor of IL-1
produced by mononuclear phagocytes that is structurally
homologous to IL-1 and binds to the same receptors but does not
induce signaling. IL-1RA is used as a drug to treat
autoinﬂammatory syndromes caused by dysregulated IL-1
production.
Immature B lymphocyte A membrane IgM+, IgD − B cell, recently
derived from marrow precursors, that does not proliferate or
diﬀerentiate in response to antigens but rather may undergo
apoptotic death or become functionally unresponsive. This
property is important for the negative selection of B cells that are
speciﬁc for self antigens present in the bone marrow.
Immediate hypersensitivity The type of immune reaction
responsible for allergic diseases, which is dependent on antigen-
mediated activation of IgE-coated tissue mast cells. The mast
cells release mediators that cause increased vascular
permeability, vasodilation, bronchial and visceral smooth muscle
contraction, and local inﬂammation.
Immune complex A multimolecular complex of antibody molecules
with bound antigen. Because each antibody molecule has a
minimum of two antigen-binding sites and many antigens are
multivalent, immune complexes can vary greatly in size. Immune
complexes activate eﬀector mechanisms of humoral immunity,
such as the classical complement pathway and Fc receptor–
mediated phagocyte activation. Deposition of circulating
immune complexes in blood vessel walls or renal glomeruli can
lead to inﬂammation and disease.
Immune complex disease Any inﬂammatory disease caused by the
deposition of antigen-antibody complexes in blood vessel walls,
resulting in local complement activation and inﬂammation.
Immune complexes may form because of overproduction of
antibodies against microbial antigens or as a result of
autoantibody production in the seĴing of an autoimmune
disease such as systemic lupus erythematosus. Immune complex
deposition in the capillary basement membranes of renal
glomeruli can cause glomerulonephritis and impair renal
function. Systemic deposition of immune complexes in arterial
walls can cause vasculitis, with thrombosis and ischemic damage
to various organs.
Immune deviation The conversion of a T cell response associated
with one set of cytokines, such as Th1 cytokines that stimulate
inﬂammatory functions of macrophages, to a response associated
with other cytokines, such as Th2 cytokines that activate
eosinophils and antiinﬂammatory functions of macrophages.
Immune inﬂammation Inﬂammation that is a result of an adaptive
immune response to antigen. The cellular inﬁltrate at the
inﬂammatory site may include cells of the innate immune
system, such as neutrophils and macrophages, that are recruited
by the actions of T cell cytokines.
Immune response A collective and coordinated response to the
introduction of foreign substances in an individual mediated by
the cells and molecules of the immune system.
Immune response (Ir) genes Originally deﬁned as genes in inbred
strains of rodents that were inherited in a dominant Mendelian
manner and that controlled the ability of the animals to make
antibodies against simple synthetic polypeptides. Ir genes are
the polymorphic genes that encode class II MHC molecules,
which display peptides to T lymphocytes and are therefore
required for T cell activation and helper T cell–dependent B cell
(antibody) responses to protein antigens.
Immune surveillance The concept that a physiologic function of the
immune system is to recognize and destroy clones of
transformed cells before they grow into tumors and to kill
tumors after they are formed. The term immune surveillance is
sometimes used in a general sense to describe the function of T
lymphocytes to detect and destroy any cell, not necessarily a
tumor cell, that is expressing foreign (e.g., microbial) antigens.
Immune synapse The tight juxtaposition of membranes of a T cell
and an APC, including the collection of membrane proteins that
become organized at the point of juxtaposition, such as the TCR
complex, CD4 or CD8, costimulatory receptors, and integrins on
the T cell, which bind to peptide-MHC complexes, costimulators,
and integrin ligands on the APC. The immune synapse is
required for bidirectional functional responses between the T cell
and APC, and enhances speciﬁc delivery of secreted products
from the T cell to the APC, such as granule contents from a CTL
to its target cell.
Immune system The molecules, cells, tissues, and organs that
collectively function to provide immunity, or protection, against
foreign organisms.
Immunity  Protection against disease, usually infectious disease,
mediated by the cells and tissues that are collectively called the
immune system. In a broader sense, immunity refers to the
ability to respond to foreign substances, including microbes and
noninfectious molecules.
Immunoblot An analytical technique in which antibodies are used
to detect the presence of an antigen bound to (i.e., bloĴed on) a
solid matrix such as ﬁlter paper (also known as a Western blot).
Immunodeﬁciency  See Acquired immunodeﬁciency and Primary
immunodeﬁciency.
Immunodominant epitope The epitope of a protein antigen that
elicits most of the T cell response in an individual immunized
with the native protein. Immunodominant epitopes correspond
to the peptides of the protein that are proteolytically generated
within APCs, bind most avidly to MHC molecules, and are most
likely to stimulate T cells.
Immunoﬂuorescence A technique in which a molecule is detected
by use of an antibody labeled with a ﬂuorescent probe. For
example, in immunoﬂuorescence microscopy, cells that express a
particular surface antigen can be stained with a ﬂuorescein-
conjugated antibody speciﬁc for the antigen and then visualized
with a ﬂuorescent microscope.
Immunogen An antigen that induces an immune response. Not all
antigens are immunogens. For example, low-molecular-weight
compounds (haptens) can bind to antibodies (and are therefore
antigens) but will not stimulate an immune response unless they
are linked to macromolecules (carriers).
Immunoglobulin (Ig) Synonymous with antibody (see Antibody).
Immunoglobulin domain A three-dimensional globular structural
motif found in many proteins in the immune system, including
Igs, TCRs, and MHC molecules. Ig domains are approximately
110 amino acid residues in length, include an internal disulﬁde
bond, and contain two layers of β-pleated sheets, each layer
composed of three to ﬁve strands of antiparallel polypeptide
chain. Ig domains are classiﬁed as V-like or C-like on the basis of
closest homology to either the Ig V or C domains.
Immunoglobulin heavy chain One of two types of polypeptide
chains in an antibody molecule. The basic structural unit of an
antibody includes two identical disulﬁde-linked heavy chains and
two identical light chains. Each heavy chain is composed of a
variable (V) Ig domain and three or four constant (C) Ig domains.
The diﬀerent antibody isotypes, including IgM, IgD, IgG, IgA,
and IgE, are distinguished by structural diﬀerences in their
heavy chain constant regions. The heavy chain constant regions
also mediate eﬀector functions, such as complement activation or
engagement of phagocytes.
Immunoglobulin light chain One of two types of polypeptide
chains in an antibody molecule. The basic structural unit of an
antibody includes two identical light chains, each disulﬁde
linked to one of two identical heavy chains. Each light chain is
composed of one variable (V) Ig domain and one constant (C) Ig
domain. There are two light chain isotypes, called κ and λ.
Approximately 60% of human antibodies have κ light chains, and
40% have λ light chains.
Immunoglobulin superfamily A large family of proteins that
contain a globular structural motif called an Ig domain, or Ig
fold, originally described in antibodies. Many proteins of
importance in the immune system, including antibodies, TCRs,
MHC molecules, CD4, and CD8, are members of this
superfamily.
Immunohistochemistry A technique to detect the presence of an
antigen in histologic tissue sections by use of an enzyme-coupled
antibody that is speciﬁc for the antigen. The enzyme converts a
colorless substrate to a colored insoluble substance that
precipitates at the site where the antibody and thus the antigen
are localized. The position of the colored precipitate, and
therefore the antigen, in the tissue section is observed by
conventional light microscopy. Immunohistochemistry is a
routine technique in diagnostic pathology and research.
Immunologic tolerance  See Tolerance.
Immunologically privileged site A site in the body that is
inaccessible to or suppresses immune responses. The anterior
chamber of the eye, the testes, and the brain are examples of
immunologically privileged sites.
Immunoperoxidase technique A common immunohistochemical
technique in which a horseradish peroxidase–coupled antibody is
used to identify the presence of an antigen in a tissue section.
The peroxidase enzyme converts a colorless substrate to an
insoluble brown product that is observable by light microscopy.
Immunoprecipitation A technique for the isolation of a molecule
from a solution by binding it to an antibody and then rendering
the antigen-antibody complex insoluble, either by precipitation
with a second antibody or by coupling the ﬁrst antibody to an
insoluble particle or bead.
Immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM) A
conserved protein motif composed of two copies of the sequence
tyrosine-x-x-leucine (where x is an unspeciﬁed amino acid) found
in the cytoplasmic tails of various membrane proteins in the
immune system that are involved in signal transduction. ITAMs
are present in the ζ and CD3 proteins of the TCR complex, in Igα
and Igβ proteins in the BCR complex, and in several Fc receptors.
When these receptors bind their ligands, the tyrosine residues of
the ITAMs become phosphorylated and form docking sites for
other molecules involved in propagating cell-activating signal
transduction pathways.
Immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibition motif (ITIM) A six-
amino-acid (isoleucine-x-tyrosine-x-x-leucine) motif found in the
cytoplasmic tails of various inhibitory receptors in the immune
system, including FcγRIIB on B cells and killer cell Ig-like
receptors (KIRs) on NK cells. When these receptors bind their
ligands, the ITIMs become phosphorylated on their tyrosine
residues and form a docking site for tyrosine phosphatases,
which in turn function to inhibit other signal transduction
pathways.
Immunoreceptor tyrosine-based switch motif (ITSM) A six-amino-
acid (tyrosine-x-tyrosine-x-x-valine/isoleucine) motif found in the
cytoplasmic tails of some receptors that can sometimes function
in an inhibitory way by binding tyrosine phosphatases, as with
the ITSM in the cytosolic tail of PD-1 and in other receptors (e.g.,
in the SLAM family), and can switch from tyrosine phosphatase
to tyrosine kinase binding, thereby mediating a change from an
inhibitory to an activating function.
Immunosuppression Inhibition of one or more components of the
adaptive or innate immune system as a result of an underlying
disease or intentionally induced by drugs for the purpose of
preventing or treating graft rejection or autoimmune disease. A
commonly used immunosuppressive drug is cyclosporine, which
blocks T cell cytokine production.
Immunotherapy The treatment of a disease with therapeutic agents
that promote or inhibit immune responses. For example, cancer
immunotherapy involves promotion of active immune responses
to tumor antigens or administration of antitumor antibodies or T
cells to establish passive immunity.
Immunotoxins Reagents that may be used in the treatment of
cancer and consist of covalent conjugates of a potent cellular
toxin derived from plants or bacteria, with antibodies speciﬁc for
antigens expressed on the surface of tumor cells. Such reagents
can speciﬁcally target and kill tumor cells without damaging
normal cells and are now used to treat several tumors.
Inbred mouse strain A strain of mice created by repetitive mating
of siblings that is characterized by homozygosity at every genetic
locus. Every mouse of an inbred strain shares an identical set of
inherited genes and is said to be syngeneic to every other mouse
of the same strain.
Indirect antigen presentation (or indirect allorecognition) In
transplantation immunology, a pathway of presentation of donor
(allogeneic) MHC molecules by recipient APCs that involves the
same mechanisms used to present microbial proteins. The
allogeneic MHC proteins are processed by recipient APCs, and
peptides derived from the allogeneic MHC molecules are
presented, in association with recipient (self) MHC molecules, to
host T cells. In contrast to indirect antigen presentation, direct
antigen presentation involves recipient T cell recognition of
unprocessed allogeneic MHC molecules on the surface of graft
cells.
Inﬂammasome One of a variety of multiprotein complexes that
assemble in the cytosol of macrophages, dendritic cells, and
other cell types, which proteolytically generate the active form of
the inﬂammatory cytokines IL-1β and IL-18 from inactive
precursors. The formation of inﬂammasomes is stimulated by a
variety of microbial products and cell damage–associated
molecules and involves assembly of multiple copies of an innate
recognition protein with adaptor proteins and procaspase-1
molecules, the laĴer undergoing proteolysis on inﬂammasome
assembly to generate active caspase-1.
Inﬂammation A reaction of vascularized tissue to infection or cell
injury that involves extravascular accumulation of plasma
proteins and leukocytes. Acute inﬂammation is a common result
of innate immune responses, and local adaptive immune
responses can also promote inﬂammation. Although
inﬂammation serves a protective function in controlling
infections and promoting tissue repair, it can also cause tissue
damage and disease.
Inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD) A group of disorders, including
ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease, characterized by chronic
inﬂammation in the gastrointestinal tract. The cause of IBD is
not known, but some evidence indicates that it is caused by
inadequate regulation of T cell and innate immune responses,
probably against intestinal commensal bacteria.
Innate immunity Protection against infection that relies on
mechanisms that exist before infection, are capable of a rapid
response to microbes, and react in essentially the same way to
repeated infections. The innate immune system includes
epithelial barriers, phagocytic cells (neutrophils, macrophages),
NK cells, the complement system, and cytokines, largely made by
dendritic cells and mononuclear phagocytes, that regulate and
coordinate many activities of the cells of innate immunity.
Innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) Tissue-resident cells that produce
cytokines similar to those made by helper T cells but lack
antigen-speciﬁc TCRs. They arise from the common lymphoid
progenitor in the bone marrow, have a lymphocyte morphology,
and may perform eﬀector functions similar to those of T cells.
NK cells are one type of ILC with similar functions to CTLs.
Three subsets of helper innate lymphoid cells, called ILC1, ILC2,
and ILC3, produce cytokines and express diﬀerent transcription
factors analogous to the Th1, Th2, and Th17 subsets of CD4+
eﬀector T lymphocyte.
Integrins Heterodimeric cell surface proteins whose major
functions are to mediate the adhesion of cells to other cells or to
extracellular matrix. Integrins are important for T cell
interactions with APCs and for migration of leukocytes from
blood into tissues. Signals induced by chemokines binding to
chemokine receptors increase the aﬃnity of integrins for their
ligands. Two examples of integrins important in the immune
system are very late antigen 4 (VLA-4), and leukocyte function-
associated antigen 1 (LFA-1).
Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) A family of transcription
factors that are important in expression of inﬂammatory and
antiviral genes. For example, IRF3 is activated by TLR signals and
stimulates production of type I IFNs, which are cytokines that
protect cells from viral infection.
Interferons (IFNs) Cytokines originally named for their ability to
interfere with viral infections but that have other important
immunomodulatory functions. Type I IFNs include IFN-α and
IFN-β, whose main function is to prevent viral replication in
cells. IFN-γ, a type II IFN, activates macrophages and various
other cell types (see Appendix II).
Interleukins (ILs) Any of a large number of cytokines named with a
numerical suﬃx roughly sequentially in order of discovery or
molecular characterization (e.g., IL-1, IL-2). Some cytokines were
originally named for their biologic activities and do not have an
IL designation (see Appendix II).
Intracellular bacterium A bacterium that survives and may
replicate within cells, usually in endosomes of phagocytes. The
principal defense against intracellular bacteria, such as
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, is T cell–mediated immunity.
Intraepithelial lymphocytes T lymphocytes present in the
epidermis of the skin and in mucosal epithelia that typically
express a limited diversity of antigen receptors. Some of these
lymphocytes, called invariant natural killer T (NKT) cells, may
recognize microbial products, such as glycolipids, associated
with nonpolymorphic class I MHC-like molecules. Others, called
γδ T cells, recognize various nonpeptide antigens, not presented
by MHC molecules. Intraepithelial T lymphocytes may be
considered eﬀector cells of innate immunity and function in host
defense by secreting cytokines and activating phagocytes and by
killing infected cells.
Invariant chain (Ii) A nonpolymorphic protein that binds to newly
synthesized class II MHC molecules in the endoplasmic
reticulum. The invariant chain prevents loading of the class II
MHC peptide-binding cleft with peptides present in the
endoplasmic reticulum, promotes folding and assembly of class
II molecules, and directs them to the endosomal compartment,
where loading of peptides derived from internalized proteins
takes place.
Isotype One of ﬁve types of antibodies, determined by which of ﬁve
diﬀerent forms of heavy chain is present. Antibody isotypes (also
called classes) include IgM, IgD, IgG, IgA, and IgE, and each
isotype performs a diﬀerent set of eﬀector functions. Additional
structural variations characterize four distinct subtypes of IgG
and two of IgA.
J
J (joining) chain A small polypeptide that is disulﬁde linked to the
tail pieces of multimeric IgM and IgA antibodies and contributes
to the transepithelial transport of these Igs.
JAK-STAT signaling pathway A signaling pathway initiated by
cytokine binding to type I and type II cytokine receptors, which
sequentially involves activation of receptor-associated Janus
kinase (JAK) tyrosine kinases, JAK-mediated tyrosine
phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic tails of cytokine receptors,
docking of signal transducers and activators of transcription
(STATs) to the phosphorylated receptor chains, JAK-mediated
tyrosine phosphorylation of the associated STATs, dimerization
and nuclear translocation of the STATs, and STAT binding to
regulatory regions of target genes causing transcriptional
activation of those genes.
Janus kinases (JAKs) A family of four related tyrosine kinases that
associate with the cytoplasmic tails of several diﬀerent cytokine
receptors, including the receptors for IL-2, IL-3, IL-4, IL-7, IFN-γ,
IL-12, and others. In response to cytokine binding and receptor
dimerization, JAKs phosphorylate the cytokine receptors to
permit the binding of STATs, and then the JAKs phosphorylate
and thereby activate the STATs. Diﬀerent JAKs associate with
diﬀerent cytokine receptors.
Joining (J) segments Short coding sequences between the variable
(V) and constant (C) gene segments in all Ig and TCR loci, which
together with D segments are somatically recombined with V
segments during lymphocyte development. The resulting
recombined VDJ DNA codes for the carboxyl-terminal ends of
the antigen receptor V regions, including the third hypervariable
(CDR) regions. Random use of diﬀerent J segments contributes
to the diversity of the antigen receptor repertoire.
Junctional diversity The diversity in antibody and TCR repertoires
that results from the addition or removal of nucleotide sequences
at junctions between V, D, and J gene segments.
K
Kaposi sarcoma A malignant tumor of vascular cells that was
frequent in patients with AIDS prior to the use of eﬀective
antiretroviral therapy. Kaposi sarcoma is caused by infection
with the Kaposi sarcoma–associated herpesvirus (human
herpesvirus 8).
Killer cell Ig-like receptors (KIRs) Ig superfamily receptors
expressed by NK cells that recognize diﬀerent alleles of HLA-A,
HLA-B, and HLA-C molecules. Some KIRs have signaling
components with ITIMs in their cytoplasmic tails, and these
deliver inhibitory signals to inactivate the NK cells. Some
members of the KIR family have short cytoplasmic tails without
ITIMs but associate with other ITAM-containing polypeptides
and function as activating receptors.
Knockout mouse A mouse with a targeted disruption of one or
more genes that is created by homologous recombination or
CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing techniques. Knockout mice lacking
functional genes encoding cytokines, cell surface receptors,
signaling molecules, and transcription factors have provided
extensive information about the roles of these molecules in the
immune system.
L
Lamina propria A layer of loose connective tissue underlying
epithelium in mucosal tissues such as the intestines and airways,
where dendritic cells, mast cells, lymphocytes, and macrophages
mediate immune responses to invading pathogens.
Langerhans cells Dendritic cells derived from embryonic
macrophages and located as a meshwork in the epidermal layer
of the skin whose major function is to capture microbes and
antigens that enter through the skin and transport the antigens
to draining lymph nodes. During their migration to the lymph
nodes, Langerhans cells diﬀerentiate into mature dendritic cells,
which can eﬃciently present antigen to naive T cells.
Large granular lymphocyte Another name for an NK cell based on
the morphologic appearance of this cell type in the blood.
Late-phase reaction A component of the immediate
hypersensitivity reaction that ensues 2 to 4 hours after mast cell
degranulation and that is characterized by an inﬂammatory
inﬁltrate of eosinophils, basophils, neutrophils, and
lymphocytes. Repeated bouts of this late-phase inﬂammatory
reaction can cause tissue damage.
LCK A SRC-family nonreceptor tyrosine kinase that non-covalently
associates with the cytoplasmic tails of CD4 and CD8 molecules
in T cells and is involved in the early signaling events of antigen-
induced T cell activation. LCK mediates tyrosine phosphorylation
of the cytoplasmic tails of CD3 and ζ proteins of the TCR
complex.
Lectin pathway of complement activation A pathway of
complement activation triggered by the binding of microbial
polysaccharides to the circulating protein mannose binding
lectin (MBL). MBL is structurally similar to C1q and activates the
C1r-C1s enzyme complex (like C1q) or activates another serine
esterase, called mannose-binding protein–associated serine
esterase (MASP). The remaining steps of the lectin pathway,
beginning with cleavage of C4, are the same as the classical
pathway. This pathway can also be initiated by other collectins
and ﬁcolins beyond MBL.
Leishmania  An obligate intracellular protozoan parasite (usually
referring to Leishmania donovani) that infects macrophages and
can cause a chronic inﬂammatory disease involving many tissues.
Leishmania infection in mice has served as a model system for
study of the eﬀector functions of several cytokines and the helper
T cell subsets that produce them.
Lethal hit A term used to describe the events that result in
irreversible damage to a target cell when a CTL binds to it. The
lethal hit includes CTL granule exocytosis and perforin-
dependent delivery of apoptosis-inducing granule enzymes
(granzymes) into the target cell cytoplasm.
Leukemia A malignant disease of bone marrow precursors of blood
cells in which large numbers of leukemic cells usually occupy the
bone marrow and often circulate in the blood stream.
Lymphocytic leukemias are derived from B or T cell precursors,
myelogenous leukemias are derived from granulocyte or
monocyte precursors, and erythroid leukemias are derived from
red blood cell precursors.
Leukocyte adhesion deﬁciency (LAD) One of a rare group of
immunodeﬁciency diseases with infectious complications that is
caused by defective expression or function of the leukocyte
adhesion molecules required for tissue recruitment of
phagocytes and lymphocytes. LAD-1 is due to mutations in the
gene encoding the CD18 protein, which is part of β2 integrins.
LAD-2 is caused by mutations in a gene that encodes a fucose
transporter involved in the synthesis of ligands for selectins.
LAD-3 is due to mutations of genes required for chemokine-
induced activation of integrins.
Leukotrienes A class of arachidonic acid–derived lipid
inﬂammatory mediators produced by the lipoxygenase pathway
in many cell types. Mast cells make abundant leukotriene C4
(LTC4) and its degradation products LTD4 and LTE4, which bind
to speciﬁc receptors on smooth muscle cells and cause prolonged
bronchoconstriction. Leukotrienes contribute to the pathologic
processes of bronchial asthma.
Lipopolysaccharide  See endotoxin.
Live virus vaccine A vaccine composed of a live but nonpathogenic
(aĴenuated) form of a virus. AĴenuated viruses carry mutations
that interfere with the viral life cycle or pathogenesis. Because
live virus vaccines actually infect the recipient cells, they can
eﬀectively stimulate immune responses that are optimal for
protecting against wild-type viral infection. A commonly used
live virus vaccine is the Sabin oral polio vaccine.
Lymph Interstitial ﬂuid that drains into lymphatic vessels and
enters the blood. Lymph carries soluble antigens and dendritic
cells from most tissues and organs of the body into lymph nodes
for immune surveillance by recruiting lymphocytes and also
carries lymphocytes out of lymph nodes and into the circulation.
Lymph node Small, nodular, encapsulated lymphocyte-rich organs
situated along lymphatic channels throughout the body where
adaptive immune responses to lymph-borne antigens are
initiated. Lymph nodes, which are secondary (or peripheral)
lymphoid organs, have a specialized anatomic architecture that
regulates the interactions of B cells, T cells, dendritic cells, and
antigens to maximize the induction of protective immune
responses. Lymph nodes contain many macrophages and also
perform a ﬁltering function, trapping microorganisms and other
potentially harmful constituents in tissue ﬂuids from draining by
the lymph into the blood.
Lymphatic system A system of vessels throughout the body that
collects tissue ﬂuid called lymph, originally derived in part from
the blood, and returns it, through the thoracic duct, to the
circulation. Lymph nodes are interspersed along these vessels
and trap and retain antigens present in the lymph.
Lymphocyte homing The directed migration of subsets of
circulating lymphocytes into particular tissue sites. Lymphocyte
homing is regulated by the selective expression of endothelial
adhesion molecules and chemokines in diﬀerent tissues. For
example, some lymphocytes preferentially home to the intestinal
mucosa, which is regulated by the chemokine CCL25 and the
endothelial adhesion molecule MAdCAM, both expressed in the
gut, which bind respectively to the CCR9 chemokine receptor
and the α4β7 integrin on gut-homing lymphocytes.
Lymphocyte maturation The process by which pluripotent bone
marrow stem cells develop into mature, antigen receptor–
expressing naive B or T lymphocytes that populate peripheral
lymphoid tissues. This process takes place in the specialized
environments of the bone marrow (for B cells) and the thymus
(for T cells). Synonymous with lymphocyte development.
Lymphocyte migration The movement of lymphocytes from the
circulation into peripheral tissues.
Lymphocyte recirculation The continuous movement of naive
lymphocytes and some memory cells from the blood to
secondary lymphoid organs, and back into the blood.
Lymphocyte repertoire The complete collection of antigen
receptors and therefore antigen speciﬁcities expressed by all the
B and T lymphocyte clones of an individual. The repertories for B
and T cells are each estimated to be at least 107.
Lymphoid follicle A B cell–rich region of a lymph node, spleen, or
mucosal lymphoid tissue that is the site of antigen-induced B cell
proliferation and diﬀerentiation. In T cell–dependent B cell
responses to protein antigens, a germinal center forms within the
follicles.
Lymphoid tissue inducer (LTi) cells A type of hematopoietically
derived innate lymphoid cell that stimulates the development of
lymph nodes and other secondary lymphoid organs, in part
through production of lymphotoxin, heterotrimers made up of
lymphotoxin-α (LTα) and lymphotoxin-β (LTβ). LTis are subtypes
of group 3 innate lymphoid cells (ILC3s).
Lymphokine An old name for a cytokine (soluble protein mediator
of immune responses) produced by lymphocytes.
Lymphokine-activated killer (LAK) cells NK cells with enhanced
cytolytic activity for tumor cells as a result of exposure to high
doses of IL-2. LAK cells generated in vitro have been adoptively
transferred back into patients with cancer to treat their tumors.
Lymphoma A malignant tumor of B or T lymphocytes usually
arising in and spreading between lymphoid tissues but that may
spread to other tissues. Lymphomas often express phenotypic
characteristics of the normal lymphocytes from which they were
derived.
Lysosome A membrane-bound, acidic organelle abundant in
phagocytic cells that contains proteolytic enzymes that degrade
proteins derived both from the extracellular environment and
from within the cell. Lysosomes are involved in the class II MHC
pathway of antigen processing.
M
M cells Specialized gastrointestinal mucosal epithelial cells
overlying Peyer’s patches in the gut that play a role in delivery of
antigens to Peyer’s patches.
M1 macrophages  See Classical macrophage activation.
M2 macrophages  See Alternative macrophage activation.
Macrophage A hematopoietically derived phagocytic cell that plays
important roles in innate and adaptive immune responses.
Macrophages are activated by microbial products such as
endotoxin and by T cell cytokines such as IFN-γ. Activated
macrophages phagocytose and kill microorganisms, secrete
proinﬂammatory cytokines, and present antigens to helper T
cells. Macrophages include cells derived from recently recruited
blood monocytes at sites of inﬂammation and long-lived tissue-
resident cells derived mainly from fetal hematopoietic organs.
Tissue macrophages are given diﬀerent names and may serve
special functions; these include the microglia of the central
nervous system, Kupﬀer cells in the liver, alveolar macrophages
in the lung, and osteoclasts in bone.
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) A large genetic locus (on
human chromosome 6 and mouse chromosome 17) that includes
the highly polymorphic genes encoding the peptide-binding
molecules recognized by T lymphocytes. The MHC locus also
includes genes encoding cytokines, molecules involved in
antigen processing, and complement proteins.
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecule A
heterodimeric membrane protein encoded in the MHC locus that
serves as a peptide display molecule for recognition by T
lymphocytes. Two structurally distinct types of MHC molecules
exist. Class I MHC molecules are present on most nucleated cells,
bind peptides derived from cytosolic proteins that are degraded
in proteasomes, and are recognized by CD8+ T cells. Class II
MHC molecules are restricted largely to dendritic cells,
macrophages, and B lymphocytes; bind peptides derived from
endocytosed proteins that are degraded in lysosomes; and are
recognized by CD4+ T cells.
Mannose-binding lectin (MBL) A plasma protein that binds to
mannose residues on microbial surfaces, thereby initiating the
lectin pathway of complement activation. Macrophages express a
surface receptor for C1q that can also bind MBL and mediate
uptake of the MBL-opsonized organisms.
Mannose receptor A carbohydrate-binding receptor (lectin)
expressed by macrophages that binds mannose and fucose
residues on microbial cell walls and mediates phagocytosis of the
organisms.
Marginal zone A peripheral region of splenic lymphoid follicles
containing macrophages that are particularly eﬃcient at trapping
polysaccharide antigens. Such antigens may persist for
prolonged periods on the surfaces of marginal zone
macrophages, where they are recognized by speciﬁc B cells, or
they may be transported into follicles.
Marginal zone B lymphocytes A subset of B lymphocytes, found in
the marginal zone of the spleen, that respond rapidly to blood-
borne microbial antigens by producing IgM antibodies with
limited diversity.
Mass cytometry A method of simultaneous detection and analysis
of many diﬀerent molecules expressed in mixed cell populations,
requiring a specialized instrument based on the single cell
analysis of a ﬂow cytometer coupled with a time-of-ﬂight mass
spectrometer (CyTOF). This technique uses antibodies labeled
with diﬀerent heavy metal isotopes, rather than ﬂuorochromes
used in ﬂow cytometry.
Mast cell The major eﬀector cell of immediate hypersensitivity
(allergic) reactions. Mast cells are derived from the bone marrow,
reside in most tissues adjacent to blood vessels, express a high-
aﬃnity Fc receptor for IgE, and contain numerous mediator-ﬁlled
granules. Antigen-induced cross-linking of IgE bound to the
mast cell Fcε receptors causes release of their granule contents as
well as new synthesis and secretion of other mediators, leading
to an immediate hypersensitivity reaction.
Mature B cell IgM- and IgD-expressing, functionally competent
naive B cells that represent the ﬁnal stage of B cell maturation in
the bone marrow and that populate secondary lymphoid organs.
Medullary thymic epithelial cells (MTECs) A type of stromal cell in
the medulla of the thymus that plays a critical role in inducing
central T cell tolerance to proteins normally expressed only in
certain tissues, called tissue-restricted antigens (TRAs). MTECS
express many TRAs under the control of the AIRE protein and
present these antigens to developing T cells, resulting in death of
TRA-speciﬁc T cells or development of TRA-speciﬁc regulatory T
cells.
Membrane aĴack complex (MAC) A lytic complex of the terminal
components of the complement cascade, including complement
proteins C5, C6, C7, C8 and multiple copies of C9, which forms in
the membranes of target cells. The MAC causes lethal ionic and
osmotic changes in cells.
Memory The property of the adaptive immune system to respond
more rapidly, with greater magnitude, and more eﬀectively to a
repeated exposure to an antigen compared with the response to
the ﬁrst exposure.
Memory lymphocytes Memory B and T cells are produced by
antigen stimulation of naive lymphocytes and survive in a
functionally quiescent state for many years after the antigen is
eliminated. Memory lymphocytes mediate rapid and enhanced
(i.e., memory or recall) responses to second and subsequent
exposures to antigens.
MHC restriction The characteristic of T lymphocytes that they
recognize a foreign peptide antigen only when it is bound to a
particular allelic form of an MHC molecule.
β2-Microglobulin The light chain of a class I MHC molecule. β2-
Microglobulin is encoded by a nonpolymorphic gene outside the
MHC, is structurally homologous to an Ig domain, and is
invariant among all class I molecules.
Mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase cascade One of several
diﬀerent intracellular signal transduction cascades usually
initiated by ligand binding to a membrane receptor, which are
characterized by successive kinase-mediated phosphorylation
steps leading to the terminal activation by dual phosphorylation
of one of a broad family of MAP kinases. The activated MAP
kinase then phosphorylates substrates such as transcription
factors that result in a functional cellular response. In T
lymphocytes, antigen binding to the TCR initiates a MAP kinase
cascade that involves the RAS protein and the sequential
activation of three kinases, the last one being the MAP kinase
called ERK-1,2.
Mixed leukocyte reaction (MLR) An in vitro reaction of alloreactive
T cells from one individual against MHC antigens on blood cells
from another individual. The MLR involves proliferation of and
cytokine secretion by both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells.
Molecular mimicry A postulated mechanism of autoimmunity
triggered by infection with a microbe containing antigens that
are structurally homologous to and therefore cross-react with self
antigens. Immune responses to the microbe are postulated to
result in reactions against self antigens.
Monoclonal antibody An antibody speciﬁc for one antigen that is
produced by a B cell hybridoma (a cell line derived by the fusion
of a single normal B cell and an immortal B cell tumor line) or by
phage display technology. Monoclonal antibodies are widely
used in research, clinical diagnosis, and therapy.
Monocyte A type of bone marrow–derived circulating blood cell
that is recruited into sites of infection or tissue injury. Once in
the tissue, monocytes diﬀerentiate into macrophages that
function to ﬁght infections and repair injury.
Mononuclear phagocytes Cells with a common bone marrow
lineage whose primary function is phagocytosis. These cells serve
various functions in the recognition and activation phases of
adaptive immune responses and as eﬀector cells in innate and
adaptive immunity. Mononuclear phagocytes circulate in the
blood in an incompletely diﬀerentiated form called monocytes,
and after they seĴle in tissues, they mature into macrophages.
Mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) Either of two related
cytosolic serine/threonine kinases, called mTORC1 and mTORC2.
mTORC1 is involved in regulation of many cell functions,
including growth, cell cycle, metabolism, and apoptosis. mTOR is
activated by AKT and is inhibited by the drug rapamycin.
Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) Collections of
lymphocytes, dendritic cells, and other cell types within the
mucosa of the gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts that are
sites of adaptive immune responses to antigens. Mucosa-
associated lymphoid tissues are unencapsulated but organized
collections of lymphocytes, with T and B cell zones similar to
lymph nodes, below mucosal epithelia, such as Peyer’s patches in
the gut or pharyngeal tonsils.
Mucosa-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells A subset of T cells that
express an invariant αβ TCR speciﬁc for fungal and bacterial
riboﬂavin metabolites presented by a nonpolymorphic class I
MHC–related molecule called MR1. Most MAIT cells are CD8+,
are activated either by microbial riboﬂavin derivatives or by
cytokines, and have inﬂammatory and cytotoxic functions. MAIT
cells account for about 50% of all T cells in the human liver.
Mucosal immune system A part of the immune system that
responds to and protects against microbes that enter the body
through mucosal surfaces, such as the gastrointestinal and
respiratory tracts, but also maintains tolerance to commensal
organisms that live on the outside of the mucosal epithelium.
The mucosal immune system is composed of organized mucosa-
associated lymphoid tissues, such as Peyer’s patches, as well as
diﬀusely distributed cells within the lamina propria.
Multiple myeloma A malignant tumor of plasma cells that often
secretes intact antibodies or parts of antibody molecules. The
monoclonal antibodies produced by multiple myelomas were
critical for early biochemical analyses of antibody structure.
Multivalency  See Polyvalency.
Multiple sclerosis A chronic relapsing or progressive autoimmune
disease of the central nervous system characterized by
inﬂammatory damage to the myelin sheath of neurons, mediated
by autoreactive CD4+ T cells and macrophages, leading to
impairment of sensory and motor functions.
Mycobacterium  A genus of aerobic bacteria, many species of which
can survive within phagocytes and cause disease. The principal
host defense against mycobacteria such as Mycobacterium
tuberculosis is cell-mediated immunity.
Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) A heterogeneous
group of myeloid cells derived from the same precursors that
give rise to neutrophils and monocytes, but have
antiinﬂammatory and immunosuppressive properties. MDSCs
are found in lymphoid tissues, blood, or tumors of cancer-
bearing animals and cancer patients and are thought to suppress
antitumor immune responses.
N
N nucleotides The name given to nucleotides randomly added to
the junctions between V, D, and J gene segments in Ig or TCR
genes during lymphocyte development. The addition of up to 20
of these nucleotides, which is mediated by the enzyme terminal
deoxyribonucleotidyl transferase (TdT), contributes to the
diversity of the antibody and TCR repertoires.
Naive lymphocyte A mature B or T lymphocyte that has not
previously encountered antigen. When naive lymphocytes are
stimulated by antigen, they diﬀerentiate into eﬀector
lymphocytes, such as antibody-secreting B cells, cytokine-
producing helper T cells, and CTLs capable of killing target cells.
Naive lymphocytes have surface markers and recirculation
paĴerns that are distinct from those of previously activated
lymphocytes. (“Naive” also refers to an unimmunized
individual.)
Natural antibodies IgM antibodies produced without overt antigen
exposure, largely by B-1 cells, speciﬁc for bacteria that are
common in the environment and gastrointestinal tract. Normal
individuals have natural antibodies without any evidence of
infection, and these antibodies may serve as a preformed defense
mechanism against microbes that succeed in penetrating
epithelial barriers. Antibodies against ABO blood group
antigens, which are responsible for transfusion reactions, are
natural antibodies.
Natural killer (NK) cells A subset of innate lymphoid cells that
function in innate immune responses to kill microbe-infected
cells by direct lytic mechanisms and by secreting IFN-γ. NK cells
do not express clonally distributed antigen receptors like Ig
receptors or TCRs, and their activation is regulated by a
combination of cell surface stimulatory and inhibitory receptors,
the laĴer recognizing self MHC molecules.
Natural killer T cells (NKT cells) A numerically small subset of
lymphocytes that express TCRs and some surface molecules
characteristic of NK cells. Some NKT cells, called invariant NKT
(iNKT) cells, express αβ T cell antigen receptors with very liĴle
diversity and recognize lipid antigens presented by CD1
molecules. The physiologic functions of NKT cells are not well
deﬁned.
Negative selection The process by which developing lymphocytes
that express self-reactive antigen receptors are eliminated,
thereby contributing to the maintenance of self-tolerance.
Negative selection of developing T lymphocytes (thymocytes) is
best understood and involves high-avidity binding of a
thymocyte to self MHC molecules with bound peptides on
thymic APCs, leading to apoptotic death of the self-reactive
thymocyte.
Neoantigen A molecule that is newly changed, either by chemical
modiﬁcation or, in the case of proteins, by mutation of the
encoding gene, such that the new structure is recognized by
antibodies or T cells. Neoantigens (sometimes called
neoepitopes) are the major inducers of tumor-speciﬁc T cell
responses.
Neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn) An IgG-speciﬁc Fc receptor that
mediates the transport of maternal IgG across the placenta and
the neonatal intestinal epithelium and, in adults, promotes the
long half-life of IgG molecules in the blood by protecting them
from catabolism in phagocytes and endothelial cells.
Neonatal immunity Passive humoral immunity to infections in
mammals in the ﬁrst months of life, before full development of
the immune system. Neonatal immunity is mediated by
maternally produced IgG antibodies transported across the
placenta into the fetal circulation before birth or derived from
ingested milk and transported across the gut epithelium.
Neutrophil (also called polymorphonuclear leukocyte [PMN])  A
phagocytic cell characterized by a segmented lobular nucleus
and cytoplasmic granules ﬁlled with degradative enzymes.
Neutrophils are the most abundant type of circulating white
blood cells and are the most numerous cell type recruited into
tissues as part of acute inﬂammatory responses to microbial
infections.
Nitric oxide A molecule with a broad range of activities that in
macrophages functions as a potent microbicidal agent to kill
ingested organisms.
Nitric oxide synthase A member of a family of enzymes that
synthesize the vasoactive and microbicidal compound nitric
oxide from L-arginine. Macrophages express an inducible form of
this enzyme on activation by various microbial or cytokine
stimuli.
NOD-like receptors (NLRs) A family of cytosolic multidomain
proteins that sense cytoplasmic PAMPs and DAMPs and recruit
other proteins to form signaling complexes that promote
inﬂammation.
Notch-1 A cell surface signaling receptor that is proteolytically
cleaved after ligand binding and whose cleaved intracellular
portion translocates to the nucleus and regulates gene
expression. Notch-1 signaling is required for commitment of
developing T cell precursors to the αβ T cell lineage.
Nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) A family of transcription factors
composed of homodimers or heterodimers of proteins
homologous to the c-REL protein. NF-κB proteins are required
for the inducible transcription of many genes important in both
innate and adaptive immune responses.
Nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) A transcription factor
required for the expression of IL-2, IL-4, TNF, and other cytokine
genes. Four diﬀerent NFATs are each encoded by separate genes;
NFATp and NFATc are found in T cells. Cytoplasmic NFAT is
activated by calcium/calmodulin-dependent, calcineurin-
mediated dephosphorylation that permits NFAT to translocate
into the nucleus and bind to consensus binding sequences in the
regulatory regions of IL-2, IL-4, and other cytokine genes, usually
in association with other transcription factors such as AP-1.
Nude mouse A strain of hairless mice that lacks development of
the thymus, and therefore T lymphocytes, as well as hair follicles,
caused by mutation aﬀecting the transcription factor FOXN1.
Nude mice have been used experimentally to deﬁne the role of T
lymphocytes in immunity and disease.
O
Oncofetal antigen Proteins that are expressed at high levels on
some types of cancer cells and in normal developing fetal (but
not adult) tissues. Antibodies speciﬁc for these proteins are used
in histopathologic identiﬁcation of tumors, and serum levels of
these proteins are assayed to monitor the progression of tumor
growth in patients. Carcinoembryonic acid (CEA) (CD66) and α-
fetoprotein are two oncofetal antigens commonly expressed by
certain carcinomas.
Opsonin A molecule that becomes aĴached to the surface of a
microbe and can be recognized by surface receptors of
neutrophils and macrophages, thereby increasing the eﬃciency
of phagocytosis of the microbe. Opsonins include IgG
antibodies, which are recognized by the Fcγ receptor on
phagocytes, and fragments of the C3 complement protein, which
are recognized by CR1 (CD35) and by the leukocyte integrin
MAC-1.
Opsonization The process of aĴaching opsonins, such as IgG or
complement fragments, to microbial surfaces to target the
microbes for phagocytosis.
Oral tolerance The suppression of systemic humoral and cell-
mediated immune responses to an antigen after the oral
administration of that antigen. It may be the result of anergy of
antigen-speciﬁc T cells or the production of immunosuppressive
cytokines such as transforming growth factor-β. Oral tolerance is
a possible mechanism for prevention of immune responses to
food antigens and to bacteria that normally reside as
commensals in the intestinal lumen.
P
P nucleotides Short inverted repeat nucleotide sequences in the
VDJ junctions of rearranged Ig and TCR genes that are added
after ARTEMIS-mediated RAG-1- and RAG-2-mediated
asymmetric cleavage of hairpin DNA intermediates during
somatic recombination events. P nucleotides contribute to the
junctional diversity of antigen receptors.
Paracrine factor A molecule that acts on cells in proximity to the
cell that produces the factor. Most cytokines act in a paracrine
fashion.
Passive immunity The form of immunity to an antigen that is
established in one individual by transfer of antibodies or
lymphocytes from another individual who is immune to that
antigen. The recipient of such a transfer can become immune to
the antigen without ever having been exposed to or having
responded to the antigen. Transplacental transfer of IgG from
mother to fetus is a physiologic form of passive immunity
essential for health of newborn babies. Examples of therapeutic
passive immunity are the administration of human sera or
plasma containing antibodies speciﬁc for potentially lethal
microbial toxins, snake venom, or microbes in individuals
exposed to those toxins or microbes. Treatments with synthetic
monoclonal antimicrobial antibodies have also been developed.
Pathogen-associated molecular paĴerns (PAMPs) Structures
produced by microorganisms, but not mammalian (host) cells,
that are recognized by and stimulate the innate immune system.
Examples include bacterial lipopolysaccharide and viral double-
stranded RNA.
Pathogenicity The ability of a microorganism to cause disease.
Multiple mechanisms may contribute to pathogenicity, including
production of toxins, stimulation of host inﬂammatory
responses, and perturbation of host cell metabolism.
PaĴern recognition receptors Signaling receptors of the innate
immune system that recognize PAMPs and DAMPs, and thereby
activate innate immune responses. Examples include TLRs and
NOD-like receptors (NLRs).
PD-1 An inhibitory receptor homologous to CD28 that is expressed
on activated T cells and binds to its ligands PD-L1 or PD-L2,
members of the B7 protein family expressed on various cell types.
PD-1 is upregulated on T cells after repeated or prolonged
stimulation, such as in the seĴing of chronic infection or tumors,
and blockade of PD-1 with monoclonal antibodies enhances
antitumor immune responses.
Pentraxins A family of plasma proteins that contain ﬁve identical
globular subunits; includes the acute-phase reactant C-reactive
protein (CRP).
Peptide-binding cleft The portion of an MHC molecule that binds
peptides for display to T cells. The cleft is composed of paired α
helices resting on a ﬂoor made up of an eight-stranded β-pleated
sheet. The polymorphic residues, which are the amino acids that
vary among diﬀerent MHC alleles, are located in and around this
cleft.
Peptide-MHC tetramer A reagent used to identify and enumerate T
cells that speciﬁcally recognize a particular MHC-peptide
complex. The reagent consists of four recombinant, biotinylated
MHC molecules (usually class I) bound to a ﬂuorochrome-
labeled avidin molecule and loaded with a peptide. T cells that
bind the MHC tetramer can be detected by ﬂow cytometry.
Perforin A protein present in the granules of CTLs and NK cells.
When perforin is released from the granules of activated CTLs or
NK cells, it inserts into membrane of the adjacent infected cells
and promotes entry of granzymes into the cytosol, leading to
apoptotic death of the cell.
Periarteriolar lymphoid sheath (PALS) A cuﬀ of lymphocytes
surrounding small arterioles in the spleen, adjacent to lymphoid
follicles. The PALS contains mainly T lymphocytes,
approximately two-thirds of which are CD4+ and one-third CD8+.
In humoral immune responses to protein antigens, B
lymphocytes are activated at the interface between the PALS and
follicles and then migrate into the follicles to form germinal
centers.
Peripheral lymphoid organs and tissues.  See Secondary lymphoid
organs and tissues.
Peripheral tolerance Unresponsiveness to self antigens that are
present in peripheral tissues and not usually in the generative
lymphoid organs. Peripheral tolerance is induced by various
mechanisms, including the recognition of antigens without
adequate levels of the costimulators required for lymphocyte
activation, by persistent and repeated stimulation by self
antigens, or by regulatory T cell-mediated suppression.
Peyer’s patches Organized lymphoid tissue in the lamina propria of
the small intestine in which immune responses to intestinal
pathogens and other ingested antigens may be initiated. Peyer’s
patches are composed mostly of B cells, with smaller numbers of
T lymphocytes and other cells, all arranged in follicles similar to
those found in lymph nodes, often with germinal centers.
Phagocytosis The process by which certain cells of the innate
immune system, including macrophages and neutrophils, engulf
large particles (>0.5 µm in diameter), such as intact microbes.
The cell surrounds the particle with extensions of its plasma
membrane by an energy- and cytoskeleton-dependent process,
resulting in the formation of an intracellular vesicle called a
phagosome containing the ingested particle. Phagosomes fuse
with acidic vesicles of the endolysosomal system that contains
enzymes that generate free-radicals and proteases, which
mediate killing of ingested microbes.
Phagosome A membrane-bound intracellular vesicle that contains
microbes or particulate material ingested from the extracellular
environment. Phagosomes are formed during the process of
phagocytosis. They fuse with endolysosomal vesicles, leading to
degradation of the ingested material.
Phosphatase (protein phosphatase) An enzyme that removes
phosphate groups from the side chains of certain amino acid
residues of proteins. Protein phosphatases in lymphocytes, such
as CD45, calcineurin, SHP1 (SH2 domain-containing protein
phosphatase 1), and SHP2, regulate the activity of various signal
transduction molecules and transcription factors. Some protein
phosphatases may be speciﬁc for phosphotyrosine residues and
others for phosphoserine and phosphothreonine residues.
Phospholipase Cγ (PLCγ) An enzyme that catalyzes hydrolysis of
the plasma membrane phospholipid phosphatidylinositol 4,5-
bisphosphate (PIP2) to generate two signaling molecules,
inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG). PLCγ
becomes activated in lymphocytes after antigen binding to the
antigen receptor.
Phytohemagglutinin (PHA) A carbohydrate-binding protein, or
lectin, produced by plants that cross-links human T cell surface
molecules, including the TCR, thereby inducing polyclonal
activation and agglutination of T cells. PHA was used in
experimental immunology to study T cell activation. In clinical
medicine, PHA is used to assess whether a patient’s T cells are
functional or to induce T cell mitosis for the purpose of
generating karyotypic data.
Plasmablast Circulating antibody-secreting cells that are precursors
of the plasma cells that reside in the bone marrow and other
tissues.
Plasma cell A terminally diﬀerentiated antibody-secreting B
lymphocyte with a characteristic histologic appearance, including
an oval shape, eccentric nucleus with peripheral chromatin
distribution, and perinuclear halo. Plasma cells are found in bone
marrow, mucosal tissues, and many sites of chronic
inﬂammation.
Platelet-activating factor (PAF) A lipid mediator derived from
membrane phospholipids in several cell types, including mast
cells and endothelial cells. PAF can cause bronchoconstriction
and vascular dilation and leak.
Polyclonal activators Agents that are capable of activating many
clones of lymphocytes, regardless of their antigen speciﬁcities.
Examples of polyclonal activators include anti-IgM antibodies for
B cells and anti-CD3 antibodies, bacterial superantigens, and
PHA for T cells.
Poly-Ig receptor An Fc receptor expressed by mucosal epithelial
cells that mediates the transport of IgA and IgM secreted by
plasma cells in the intestinal lamina propria through intestinal
epithelial cells into the lumen.
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) A rapid method of copying and
amplifying speciﬁc DNA sequences up to about 1 kb in length
that is widely used as a preparative and analytical technique in
all branches of molecular biology. The method relies on the use
of short oligonucleotide primers complementary to the
sequences at the ends of the DNA to be ampliﬁed and involves
repetitive cycles of melting, annealing, and synthesis of DNA.
Polymorphism The existence of two or more alternative forms, or
variants, of a gene that are present at stable frequencies in a
population. Each common variant of a polymorphic gene is called
an allele, and one individual may carry two diﬀerent alleles of a
gene, each inherited from a diﬀerent parent. The MHC genes,
some of which have thousands of alleles, are the most
polymorphic genes in the mammalian genome.
Polyvalency The presence of multiple identical epitopes on a single
antigen molecule, cell surface, or particle. Polyvalent antigens,
such as bacterial capsular polysaccharides, are often capable of
activating B lymphocytes independent of helper T cells. Used
synonymously with multivalency.
Positive selection The process by which developing T cells in the
thymus (thymocytes) whose TCRs bind to self MHC molecules
are rescued from programmed cell death, whereas thymocytes
whose receptors do not recognize self MHC molecules die by
default. Positive selection ensures that mature T cells are self
MHC restricted and that CD8+ T cells are speciﬁc for complexes
of peptides with class I MHC molecules and CD4+ T cells for
complexes of peptides with class II MHC molecules.
Pre-B cell A developing B cell present only in hematopoietic tissues
that is at a maturational stage characterized by expression of
cytoplasmic Ig µ heavy chains and surrogate light chains but not
Ig light chains. Pre-BCRs composed of µ chains and surrogate
light chains deliver signals that stimulate further maturation of
the pre-B cell into an immature B cell.
Pre-B cell receptor A receptor expressed on developing B
lymphocytes at the pre-B cell stage that is composed of Ig µ
heavy chains and invariant surrogate light chains. The pre-BCR
associates with the Igα and Igβ signal transduction proteins to
form the pre-BCR complex. Pre-BCRs are required for stimulating
the proliferation and continued maturation of the developing B
cell, serving as a checkpoint that ensures productive µ heavy
chain VDJ rearrangement. It is not known whether the pre-BCR
binds a speciﬁc ligand.
Pre-T cell A developing T lymphocyte in the thymus at a
maturational stage characterized by expression of the TCR β
chain but not the α chain or CD4 or CD8. In pre-T cells, the TCR
β chain is found on the cell surface as part of the pre-TCR.
Pre-T cell receptor A receptor expressed on the surface of pre-T
cells that is composed of the TCR β chain and an invariant pre-Tα
protein. This receptor associates with CD3 and ζ molecules to
form the pre-TCR complex. The function of this complex is
similar to that of the pre-BCR in B cell development, namely, the
delivery of signals that stimulate further proliferation, antigen
receptor gene rearrangements, and other maturational events.
The pre-TCR serves as a checkpoint that ensures productive β
chain VDJ rearrangement. It is not known whether the pre-TCR
binds a speciﬁc ligand.
Pre-Tα An invariant transmembrane protein with a single
extracellular Ig-like domain that associates with the TCR β chain
in pre-T cells to form the pre-TCR.
Primary immune response An adaptive immune response that
occurs after the ﬁrst exposure of an individual to a foreign
antigen. Primary responses are characterized by relatively slow
kinetics and small magnitude compared with secondary
(memory) responses after a second or subsequent exposure.
Primary immunodeﬁciency disease (PID) A genetic defect in which
an inherited deﬁciency in some aspect of the innate or adaptive
immune system leads to an increased susceptibility to infections.
Congenital immunodeﬁciency is frequently manifested early in
infancy and childhood but is sometimes clinically detected later
in life. Synonymous with congenital immunodeﬁciency disease.
Pro-B cell A developing B cell in the bone marrow that is the
earliest cell commiĴed to the B lymphocyte lineage. Pro-B cells
do not produce Ig, but they can be distinguished from other
immature cells by the expression of B lineage–restricted surface
molecules such as CD19 and CD10.
Pro-T cell A developing T cell in the thymic cortex that is a recent
arrival from the bone marrow and does not express TCRs, CD3, ζ
chains, or CD4 or CD8 molecules. Pro-T cells are also called
double-negative thymocytes.
Professional antigen-presenting cells (professional APCs) A term
sometimes used to refer to APCs that activate T lymphocytes;
includes mainly dendritic cells (DCs), but also mononuclear
phagocytes and B lymphocytes, all of which are capable of
expressing class II MHC molecules and costimulators. The most
important professional APCs for initiating primary T cell
responses are DCs.
Programmed cell death  See Apoptosis.
Promoter A DNA sequence immediately 5′ to the transcription
start site of a gene where the proteins that initiate transcription
bind. The term promoter is often used to mean the entire 5′
regulatory region of a gene, excluding enhancers, that are
additional sequences that bind transcription factors and interact
with the basal transcription complex to increase the rate of
transcriptional initiation. Other enhancers may be located at a
signiﬁcant distance from the promoter, either 5′ of the gene, in
introns, or 3′ of the gene.
Prostaglandins A class of lipid inﬂammatory mediators that are
derived from arachidonic acid in many cell types through the
cyclooxygenase pathway and that have vasodilator,
bronchoconstrictor, and chemotactic activities. Prostaglandins
made by mast cells are important mediators of allergic reactions.
Many commonly used antiinﬂammatory drugs are
cyclooxygenase inhibitors, which block the synthesis of
prostaglandins.
Proteasome A large multiprotein enzyme complex with a broad
range of proteolytic activity that is found in the cytosol of most
cells, important for degrading misfolded cytosolic and nuclear
proteins. Proteins are targeted for proteasomal degradation by
covalent linkage of ubiquitin molecules. A specialized form of
the proteasome formed in APCs, called the immunoproteasome,
degrades cytosolic proteins into peptides that are transported
into the endoplasmic reticulum and bind to newly synthesized
class I MHC molecules.
Protein kinase C (PKC) Any of several isoforms of an enzyme that
mediates the phosphorylation of serine and threonine residues
in many diﬀerent protein substrates and thereby serves to
propagate various signal transduction pathways leading to
transcription factor activation. In T and B lymphocytes, PKC is
activated by DAG, which is generated in response to antigen
receptor ligation.
Protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) Enzymes that mediate the
phosphorylation of tyrosine residues in proteins and thereby
promote phosphotyrosine-dependent protein-protein
interactions. PTKs are involved in numerous signal transduction
pathways in cells of the immune system.
Protozoa Single-celled eukaryotic organisms, many of which are
human parasites and cause diseases. Examples of pathogenic
protozoa include Entamoeba histolytica, which causes amebic
dysentery; Plasmodium, which causes malaria; and Leishmania
donovani which causes leishmaniasis. Protozoa stimulate both
innate and adaptive immune responses. It has proved diﬃcult to
develop eﬀective vaccines against many of these organisms.
Provirus A DNA copy of the genome of a retrovirus that is
integrated into the host cell genome and from which viral genes
are transcribed and the viral genome is reproduced. HIV
proviruses can remain inactive for long periods and thereby
represent a latent form of HIV infection that is not accessible to
immune defense.
Puriﬁed antigen (subunit) vaccine A vaccine composed of puriﬁed
antigens or portions (subunits) of antigens. Examples of this type
of vaccine include diphtheria and tetanus toxoids, pneumococcus
and Haemophilus inﬂuenzae polysaccharide vaccines, and puriﬁed
polypeptide vaccines against hepatitis B and inﬂuenza virus.
Puriﬁed antigen vaccines may stimulate antibody and helper T
cell responses, but they typically do not generate CTL responses.
Pyogenic bacteria Bacteria, such as gram-positive staphylococci and
streptococci, that induce inﬂammatory responses rich in
polymorphonuclear leukocytes (giving rise to pus). Antibody
responses to these bacteria greatly enhance the eﬃcacy of innate
immune eﬀector mechanisms to clear infections.
Pyroptosis  A form of programmed cell death of macrophages and
dendritic cells induced by canonical inﬂammasome activation of
caspase-1 (and also noncanonical inﬂammasome pathways that
use human caspase-4 or caspase-5), characterized by cell
swelling, loss of plasma membrane integrity, and release of
inﬂammatory mediators, such as IL-1β. In pyroptosis, the
activated caspases proteolytically generate a fragment of the
protein gasdermin D, which polymerizes to form pores in the
plasma membrane. Pyroptosis results in the death of certain
microbes that gain access to the cytosol, enhances inﬂammatory
clearance of bacteria, but also contributes to septic shock.
R
Radioimmunoassay A highly sensitive and speciﬁc immunologic
method of quantifying the concentration of an antigen in a
solution that relies on a radioactively labeled antibody speciﬁc
for the antigen. Usually, two antibodies speciﬁc for the antigen
are used. The ﬁrst antibody is unlabeled but aĴached to a solid
support, where it binds and immobilizes the antigen whose
concentration is being determined. The amount of the second,
labeled antibody that binds to the immobilized antigen, as
determined by radioactive decay detectors, is proportional to the
concentration of antigen in the test solution.
Radioimmunoassays have largely been replaced by non-
radioactive solid-phase immunoassays, such as enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays (ELISAs; see Appendix III).
Rapamycin An immunosuppressive drug (also called sirolimus)
used clinically to prevent allograft rejection. Rapamycin inhibits
the activation of a protein called mechanistic target of rapamycin
(mTOR), which is a key signaling molecule in a variety of
metabolic and cell growth pathways, including the pathway
required for IL-2–mediated T cell proliferation.
RAS A member of a family of 21-kD guanine nucleotide-binding
proteins with intrinsic GTPase activity that are involved in many
diﬀerent signal transduction pathways in diverse cell types.
Mutated RAS genes are associated with neoplastic
transformation. In T cell activation, RAS is activated by GDP-GTP
exchange factors that are recruited to tyrosine phosphorylated
adaptors. GTP⋅RAS then initiates the MAP kinase cascade, which
leads to expression of the FOS gene and assembly of the AP-1
transcription factor.
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) Highly reactive metabolites of
oxygen, including superoxide anion, hydroxyl radical, and
hydrogen peroxide, that are produced by activated phagocytes.
Reactive oxygen species are used by the phagocytes to form
oxyhalides that damage ingested bacteria. They also may be
released from cells and promote inﬂammatory responses or
cause tissue damage.
Reagin IgE antibody that mediates an immediate hypersensitivity
reaction.
Receptor editing A process by which some immature B cells that
recognize self antigens in the bone marrow may be induced to
change their Ig speciﬁcities. Receptor editing involves
reactivation of the RAG genes, additional light chain VJ
recombinations, and new Ig light chain production, which allows
the cell to express a diﬀerent Ig receptor that is not self-reactive.
Recombination-activating genes 1 and 2 (RAG1 and RAG2) The
genes encoding RAG-1 and RAG-2 proteins, which make up the
V(D)J recombinase and are expressed in developing B and T
cells. RAG proteins bind to recombination signal sequences and
are critical for DNA recombination events that form functional Ig
and TCR genes. Therefore, RAG proteins are required for
expression of antigen receptors and for the maturation of B and T
lymphocytes.
Recombination signal sequences Speciﬁc DNA sequences found
adjacent to the V, D, and J segments in antigen receptor loci that
are recognized by the RAG-1/RAG-2 complex during V(D)J
recombination. The recognition sequences consist of a highly
conserved stretch of 7 nucleotides, called the heptamer, located
adjacent to the V, D, or J coding sequence, followed by a spacer
of exactly 12 or 23 nonconserved nucleotides and a highly
conserved stretch of 9 nucleotides, called the nonamer.
Red pulp An anatomic and functional compartment of the spleen
composed of vascular sinusoids, scaĴered among which are large
numbers of erythrocytes, macrophages, dendritic cells, sparse
lymphocytes, and plasma cells. Red pulp macrophages clear the
blood of microbes, other foreign particles, and damaged red
blood cells.
Regulatory T cells A population of T cells that inhibits the
activation of other T cells and is necessary to maintain peripheral
tolerance to self antigens. Most regulatory T cells are CD4+ and
express the α chain of the IL-2 receptor (CD25), CTLA-4, and the
transcription factor FOXP3.
Rejection An adaptive immune response against a tissue or organ
graft, usually an allograft. Graft rejection may be mediated by
antibodies and/or T cells, and there are diﬀerent pathologically
deﬁned types of rejection, including hyperacute, acute, and
chronic.
Respiratory burst The process by which reactive oxygen species
such as superoxide anion, hydroxyl radical, and hydrogen
peroxide are produced in neutrophils and macrophages. The
respiratory burst is mediated by the enzyme phagocyte oxidase
and is usually triggered by inﬂammatory mediators, such as the
cytokines IFN-γ and TNF, or by bacterial products, such as
lipopolysaccharide.
Reverse transcriptase An enzyme encoded by retroviruses, such as
HIV, that synthesizes a DNA copy of the viral genome from the
RNA genomic template. Puriﬁed reverse transcriptase is used
widely in molecular biology research for purposes of cloning
complementary DNAs encoding a gene of interest from
messenger RNA. Reverse transcriptase inhibitors are used as
drugs to treat HIV-1 infection.
Rh blood group antigens A system of protein alloantigens
expressed on red blood cell membranes that are the cause of
transfusion reactions and hemolytic disease of the fetus and
newborn. The most clinically important Rh antigen is designated
RhD.
Rheumatoid arthritis An autoimmune disease characterized
primarily by inﬂammatory damage to joints and sometimes
inﬂammation of blood vessels, lungs, and other tissues. CD4+ T
cells, activated B lymphocytes, and plasma cells are found in the
inﬂamed joint lining (synovium), and numerous
proinﬂammatory cytokines, including IL-1, IL-6, and TNF, are
present in the synovial (joint) ﬂuid.
RIG-like receptors (RLRs) Cytosolic receptors of the innate
immune system that recognize viral RNA and induce production
of type I IFNs. The two best characterized RLRs are RIG-I
(retinoic acid–inducible gene I) and MDA5 (melanoma
diﬀerentiation–associated gene 5).
RNA vaccine A vaccine comprised of messenger RNA encoding
one or more microbial antigens, usually packaged within lipid
nanoparticles. RNA vaccines speciﬁc for SARS-CoV-2 spike
proteins were the ﬁrst vaccines to be widely used during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
RORγT (retinoid-related orphan receptor γ T) A transcription
factor expressed in and required for diﬀerentiation of Th17 cells
and type 3 innate lymphoid cells, encoded by the RORC gene.
S
SARS-CoV-2   See COVID-19.
Scavenger receptors  A family of cell surface receptors expressed
on macrophages, originally deﬁned as receptors that mediate
endocytosis of oxidized or acetylated low-density lipoprotein
particles but that also bind and mediate the phagocytosis of a
variety of microbes.
SCID mouse A mouse strain in which B and T cells are absent
because of an early block in maturation from bone marrow
precursors. SCID mice carry a mutation in a component of the
enzyme DNA-dependent protein kinase, which is required for
double-stranded DNA break repair. Deﬁciency of this enzyme
results in abnormal joining of Ig and TCR gene segments during
recombination and therefore failure to express antigen receptors.
Secondary immune response An adaptive immune response that
occurs on second exposure to an antigen. A secondary response
is characterized by more rapid kinetics and greater magnitude
relative to the primary immune response, which occurs on ﬁrst
exposure.
Secondary immunodeﬁciency  See Acquired immunodeﬁciency.
Secondary lymphoid organs and tissues Organized collections of
lymphocytes and accessory cells, including the spleen, lymph
nodes, and mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues, in which
adaptive immune responses are initiated; also called peripheral
lymphoid organs and tissues.
Second-set rejection Allograft rejection in an individual who has
previously been sensitized to the donor’s tissue alloantigens by
having received another graft or transfusion from that donor. In
contrast to ﬁrst-set rejection, which occurs in an individual who
has not previously been sensitized to the donor alloantigens,
second-set rejection is rapid and occurs in 3 to 7 days as a result
of immunologic memory.
Secretory component The proteolytically cleaved portion of the
extracellular domain of the poly-Ig receptor that remains bound
to an IgA molecule in mucosal secretions.
Selectin  Any one of three separate but closely related
carbohydrate-binding proteins that mediate low-aﬃnity adhesion
of leukocytes to postcapillary venule endothelial cells, leading to
rolling of the leukocytes on endothelial surfaces of the venules.
Each of the selectin molecules is a single-chain transmembrane
glycoprotein with a similar modular structure, including an
extracellular calcium-dependent lectin domain. The selectins
include L-selectin (CD62L), expressed on leukocytes; P-selectin
(CD62P), expressed on platelets and activated endothelium; and
E-selectin (CD62E), expressed on activated endothelium.
Selective immunoglobulin deﬁciency Immunodeﬁciencies
characterized by a lack of only one or a few Ig classes or
subclasses. IgA deﬁciency is the most common selective Ig
deﬁciency, followed by IgG3 and IgG2 deﬁciencies. Patients with
these disorders may be at increased risk for bacterial infections,
but many are normal.
Self MHC restriction The limitation (or restriction) of T cells to
recognize antigens displayed by MHC molecules that the T cell
encountered during maturation in the thymus (and thus sees as
self MHC).
Self-tolerance Unresponsiveness of the adaptive immune system to
self antigens, largely as a result of inactivation or death of self-
reactive lymphocytes induced by exposure to these antigens or
suppression by regulatory T cells. Self-tolerance is a cardinal
feature of the normal immune system, and failure of self-
tolerance leads to autoimmune diseases.
Septic shock A severe complication of bacterial or fungal infections
that spread to the blood stream (sepsis) and is characterized by
hypotension and shock, disseminated intravascular coagulation,
and metabolic disturbances. In bacterial infections, the
syndrome is due to the eﬀects of bacterial cell wall components,
such as lipopolysaccharide or peptidoglycan, that bind to TLRs
on various cell types and induce expression of large amounts of
inﬂammatory cytokines, including TNF, IL-6, and IL-12.
Seroconversion The production of detectable antibodies in the
serum speciﬁc for a microorganism during the course of an
infection or in response to immunization.
Serology The study of blood (serum) antibodies and their reactions
with antigens. The term serology is often used to refer to the
diagnosis of infectious diseases by detection of microbe-speciﬁc
antibodies in the serum.
Serotype An antigenically distinct subset of a species of an
infectious organism that is distinguished from other subsets by
serologic (i.e., serum antibody binding) tests. Humoral immune
responses to one serotype of microbes (e.g., inﬂuenza virus) may
not be protective against another serotype.
Serum The cell-free ﬂuid that remains when blood or plasma forms
a clot. Blood antibodies are found in the serum fraction.
Serum amyloid A (SAA) An acute-phase protein whose serum
concentration rises signiﬁcantly in the seĴing of infection and
inﬂammation, mainly because of IL-1– and TNF-induced
synthesis by the liver. SAA activates leukocyte chemotaxis,
phagocytosis, and adhesion to endothelial cells.
Serum sickness A disease caused by the injection of large doses of
a protein antigen into the blood and characterized by the
deposition of antigen-antibody (immune) complexes in blood
vessel walls, especially in the kidneys and joints. Immune
complex deposition leads to complement ﬁxation and leukocyte
recruitment and subsequently to glomerulonephritis and
arthritis. Serum sickness was originally described as a disorder
that occurred in patients receiving injections of horse serum
containing antitoxin antibodies to prevent diphtheria.
Severe combined immunodeﬁciency (SCID) Immunodeﬁciency
diseases in which both B and T lymphocytes do not develop or do
not function properly, and therefore both humoral immunity and
cell-mediated immunity are impaired. Children with SCID
usually have infections during the ﬁrst year of life and succumb
to these infections unless the immunodeﬁciency is treated. SCID
has several diﬀerent genetic causes.
Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) A member
of a family of seven mammalian proteins that function as
transcription factors in response to binding of cytokines to type I
and type II cytokine receptors. STATs are present as inactive
monomers in the cytosol of cells and are recruited to the
cytoplasmic tails of cross-linked cytokine receptors, where they
are tyrosine phosphorylated by JAKs. The phosphorylated STAT
proteins dimerize and move to the nucleus, where they bind to
speciﬁc sequences in the promoter regions of various genes and
stimulate their transcription. Diﬀerent STATs are activated by
diﬀerent cytokines.
Single-chain variable fragment (single chain Fv) A genetically
engineered single polypeptide that includes a both Ig heavy
chain and light chain V domains that fold to form an antibody
binding site of known speciﬁcity, used as a research reagent or as
part of an anti-tumor drug, such as bispeciﬁc T cell activators
(BiTEs) and chimeric antigen receptors (CARs).
Single-positive thymocyte A maturing T cell precursor in the
thymus that expresses CD4 or CD8 molecules but not both.
Single-positive thymocytes are found mainly in the medulla and
have matured from the double-positive stage, during which
thymocytes express both CD4 and CD8 molecules.
Smallpox A disease caused by variola virus. Smallpox was the ﬁrst
infectious disease shown to be preventable by vaccination and
the ﬁrst disease to be completely eradicated by a worldwide
vaccination program.
Somatic hypermutation High-frequency point mutations in Ig
heavy and light chains that occur in germinal center B cells in
response to signals from TĢ cells. Mutations that result in
increased aﬃnity of antibodies for antigen impart a selective
survival advantage to the B cells producing those antibodies and
lead to aﬃnity maturation of a humoral immune response.
Somatic recombination The process of DNA recombination by
which the functional genes encoding the variable regions of
antigen receptors are formed during lymphocyte development. A
relatively limited set of inherited, or germline, DNA sequences
that are initially separated from one another are brought
together by enzymatic deletion of intervening sequences and re-
ligation. This process occurs only in developing B or T
lymphocytes and is mediated by RAG-1 and RAG-2 proteins. This
process is also called V(D)J recombination.
Speciﬁcity A cardinal feature of the adaptive immune system,
namely, that immune responses are directed toward and able to
distinguish between distinct antigens and small parts of
macromolecular antigens. This ﬁne speciﬁcity is aĴributed to
lymphocyte antigen receptors that may bind to one molecule but
not to another, even closely related, molecule.
Spleen A secondary lymphoid organ in the left upper quadrant of
the abdomen. The spleen is the major site of adaptive immune
responses to blood-borne antigens. The red pulp of the spleen is
composed of blood-ﬁlled vascular sinusoids lined by active
phagocytes that ingest opsonized antigens and damaged red
blood cells. The white pulp of the spleen contains lymphocytes
and lymphoid follicles where B cells are activated.
SRC-family kinases A family of protein tyrosine kinases,
homologous to the SRC tyrosine kinase, which in immune cells,
initiate signaling downstream of immune receptors by
phosphorylating tyrosine residues on ITAM motifs. LCK is a
prominent SRC-family kinase in T cells and LYN in B cells.
SRC homology 2 (SH2) domain A three-dimensional domain
structure of approximately 100 amino acid residues present in
many signaling proteins that permits speciﬁc noncovalent
interactions with other proteins by binding to phosphotyrosines.
Each SH2 domain has a unique binding speciﬁcity that is
determined by the amino acid residues adjacent to the
phosphotyrosine on the target protein. Several proteins involved
in early signaling events in T and B lymphocytes interact with
one another through SH2 domains.
SRC homology 3 (SH3) domain A three-dimensional domain
structure of approximately 60 amino acid residues present in
many signaling proteins that mediates protein-protein binding.
SH3 domains bind to proline residues and function cooperatively
with the SH2 domains of the same protein. For instance, SOS, the
guanine nucleotide exchange factor for Ras, contains both SH2
and SH3 domains, and both are involved in SOS binding to the
adaptor protein GRB2.
Stem cell An undiﬀerentiated cell that divides continuously and
gives rise to additional stem cells and to cells of multiple
diﬀerent lineages. For example, all blood cells arise from a
common hematopoietic stem cell.
STING (Stimulator of IFN Genes) An adaptor protein located in
the endoplasmic reticulum membrane, which is used by several
cytoplasmic DNA sensor molecules to transduce signals that
activate the IRF3 transcription factor, leading to type I IFN gene
expression.
Superantigens Microbial proteins that bind to and activate all of the
T cells in an individual that express a particular set or family of
Vβ TCR genes. Superantigens are presented to T cells by binding
to nonpolymorphic regions of class II MHC molecules on APCs,
and they interact with conserved regions of TCR Vβ domains.
Several staphylococcal enterotoxins are superantigens. Their
importance lies in their ability to activate many T cells, which
results in large amounts of cytokine production and a clinical
syndrome that is similar to septic shock.
Suppressor T cells T cells that block the activation and function of
other T lymphocytes. These cells were described in the 1970s, but
because it has been diﬃcult to clearly deﬁne suppressor T cells
or their mode of action, the term is no longer used.
Surrogate light chains Two nonvariable proteins that associate with
Ig µ heavy chains in pre-B cells to form the pre-BCR. The two
surrogate light chain proteins include the V pre-B protein, which
is homologous to a light-chain V domain, and λ5, which is
covalently aĴached to the µ heavy chain by a disulﬁde bond.
Switch recombination The molecular mechanism underlying Ig
isotype switching in which a rearranged VDJ gene segment in an
antibody-producing B cell recombines with a downstream C gene
and the intervening C genes are deleted. DNA recombination
events in switch recombination are triggered by CD40 and
cytokines and involve nucleotide sequences called switch regions
located in the introns at the 5′ end of each CH locus.
SYK A cytoplasmic protein tyrosine kinase, similar to ZAP70 in T
cells, that is critical for early signaling steps in antigen-induced B
cell activation. SYK binds to phosphorylated tyrosines in the
cytoplasmic tails of the Igα and Igβ chains of the BCR complex
and in turn phosphorylates adaptor proteins that recruit other
components of the signaling cascade.
Syngeneic  Genetically identical. All animals of an inbred strain
and monozygotic twins are syngeneic.
Syngeneic graft A graft from a donor who is genetically identical to
the recipient. Syngeneic grafts are not rejected.
Synthetic vaccine Vaccines composed of recombinant DNA-derived
antigens. Synthetic vaccines for hepatitis B virus and herpes
simplex virus are now in use.
Systemic inﬂammatory response syndrome (SIRS) The systemic
changes observed in patients who have disseminated bacterial
infections and other conditions that induce widespread
inﬂammation, such as burns. In its mild form, SIRS consists of
neutrophilia, fever, and a rise in acute-phase reactants in the
plasma. These changes are stimulated by bacterial products such
as lipopolysaccharide and are mediated by cytokines of the
innate immune system. In severe cases, SIRS may include
disseminated intravascular coagulation, acute respiratory
distress syndrome, and shock.
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) A chronic systemic
autoimmune disease that aﬀects predominantly women and is
characterized by rashes, arthritis, glomerulonephritis, hemolytic
anemia, thrombocytopenia, and central nervous system
involvement. Many diﬀerent autoantibodies are found in patients
with SLE, particularly anti-DNA antibodies. Many of the
manifestations of SLE are due to the formation of immune
complexes composed of autoantibodies and their speciﬁc
antigens, with deposition of these complexes in small blood
vessels in various tissues. The underlying mechanism for the
breakdown of self-tolerance in SLE is not understood.
T
T cell exhaustion A dysfunctional state of T cells, especially CD8+
CTLs, that is induced by persistent antigen stimulation in the
seĴing of chronic viral infection or cancer and is characterized by
decreased proliferation, reduced cytokine production, and poor
cytotoxic activity, leading to an inability to clear infections or
tumors. Exhaustion results from a block in T cell diﬀerentiation
caused in part by increased expression of inhibitory molecules
such as PD-1.
T cell receptor (TCR) The clonally distributed antigen receptor on
CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes that recognizes complexes of
foreign peptides bound to self MHC molecules on the surface of
APCs. The most common form of TCR is composed of a
heterodimer of two disulﬁde-linked transmembrane polypeptide
chains, designated α and β, each containing one N-terminal Ig-
like variable (V) domain, one Ig-like constant (C) domain, a
hydrophobic transmembrane region, and a short cytoplasmic
region. Another less common type of TCR, composed of γ and δ
chains, is found on a small subset of T cells and recognizes
diﬀerent forms of antigen.
T cell receptor (TCR) transgenic mouse A mouse in a genetically
engineered strain that expresses transgene-encoded functional
TCR α and β genes encoding a TCR of a single deﬁned speciﬁcity.
Because of allelic exclusion of endogenous TCR genes, most or all
of the T cells in a TCR transgenic mouse have the same antigen
speciﬁcity, which is a useful property for various research
purposes.
T follicular helper (TĢ) cells A subset of CD4+ helper T cells
present within lymphoid follicles that are critical in providing
signals to B cells in the germinal center reaction that stimulate
somatic hypermutation, isotype switching, and the generation of
memory B cells and long-lived plasma cells. TĢ cells express
CXCR5, ICOS, IL-21, and BCL-6.
T lymphocyte The key component of cell-mediated immune
responses in the adaptive immune system. T lymphocytes
mature in the thymus, circulate in the blood, populate secondary
lymphoid tissues, and are recruited to peripheral sites of antigen
exposure. They express antigen receptors (TCRs) that recognize
peptide fragments of foreign proteins bound to self MHC
molecules. Functional subsets of T lymphocytes include CD4+
helper T cells and CD8+ CTLs.
Tacrolimus An immunosuppressive drug (also known as FK506)
used to prevent allograft rejection that functions by blocking T
cell cytokine gene transcription, similar to cyclosporine.
Tacrolimus binds to a cytosolic protein called FK506-binding
protein, and the resulting complex binds to calcineurin, thereby
inhibiting activation and nuclear translocation of the
transcription factor NFAT.
T-BET A T-box family transcription factor that promotes the
diﬀerentiation of Th1 cells from naive T cells.
T-dependent antigen An antigen that requires both B cells and
helper T cells to stimulate an antibody response. T-dependent
antigens are protein antigens that contain some epitopes
recognized by T cells and other epitopes recognized by B cells.
Helper T cells produce cytokines and cell surface molecules that
stimulate B cell growth and diﬀerentiation into antibody-
secreting cells. Humoral immune responses to T-dependent
antigens are characterized by isotype switching, aﬃnity
maturation, long-lived plasma cells, and memory.
Tertiary lymphoid organ A collection of lymphocytes and APCs
cells organized into B cell follicles and T cell zones that develop
in sites of chronic immune-mediated inﬂammation, such as the
joint synovium of rheumatoid arthritis patients.
Th1 cells A subset of CD4+ helper T cells that secrete a particular
set of cytokines, including IFN-γ, and whose principal function is
to stimulate phagocyte-mediated defense against infections,
especially with intracellular microbes.
Th2 cells A subset of CD4+ helper T cells that secrete a particular
set of cytokines, including IL-4, IL-5, and IL-3, and whose
principal function is to stimulate IgE and eosinophil/mast cell–
mediated immune reactions.
Th17 cells A subset of CD4+ helper T cells that secrete a particular
set of cytokines, including IL-17 and IL-22, that are protective
against bacterial and fungal infections and also mediate
inﬂammatory reactions in autoimmune and other inﬂammatory
diseases.
Thymic epithelial cells Epithelial cells abundant in the cortical and
medullary stroma of the thymus that play a critical role in T cell
development. In the process of positive selection, maturing T
cells that weakly recognize self peptides bound to MHC
molecules on the surface of thymic epithelial cells are rescued
from programmed cell death.
Thymocyte A precursor of a mature T lymphocyte present in the
thymus.
Thymus A bilobed organ situated in the anterior mediastinum that
is the site of maturation of T lymphocytes from bone marrow–
derived precursors. The thymus is divided into an outer cortex
and an inner medulla and contains stromal thymic epithelial
cells, macrophages, dendritic cells, and numerous T cell
precursors (thymocytes) at various stages of maturation.
T-independent antigen Nonprotein antigens, such as
polysaccharides and lipids, which can stimulate antibody
responses without a requirement for antigen-speciﬁc helper T
lymphocytes. T-independent antigens usually contain multiple
identical epitopes that can cross-link membrane Ig on B cells and
thereby activate the cells. Humoral immune responses to T-
independent antigens show relatively liĴle heavy chain isotype
switching or aﬃnity maturation, two processes that require
signals from helper T cells.
Tissue typing The determination of the particular MHC alleles
expressed by an individual for the purpose of matching allograft
donors and recipients. Tissue typing, also called HLA typing, is
usually done by molecular (PCR-based) sequencing of HLA
alleles or by serologic methods (lysis of an individual’s cells by
panels of anti-HLA antibodies).
TNF receptor-associated factors (TRAFs) A family of adaptor
molecules that interact with the cytoplasmic domains of various
receptors in the TNF receptor family, including TNF-RII,
lymphotoxin (LT)-β receptor, and CD40. Each of these receptors
contains a cytoplasmic motif that binds diﬀerent TRAFs, which
in turn engage other signaling molecules, leading to activation of
the transcription factors AP1 and NF-κB.
Tolerance Unresponsiveness of the adaptive immune system to
antigens, as a result of inactivation or death of antigen-speciﬁc
lymphocytes, induced by exposure to the antigens. Tolerance to
self antigens is a normal feature of the adaptive immune system,
but tolerance to foreign antigens may be induced under certain
conditions of antigen exposure.
Tolerogen An antigen that induces immunologic tolerance, in
contrast to an immunogen, which induces an immune response.
Many antigens can be either tolerogens or immunogens,
depending on how they are administered. Tolerogenic forms of
antigens include large doses of proteins administered without
adjuvants and orally administered antigens.
Toll-like receptors A family of paĴern recognition receptors of the
innate immune system that are expressed by many cell types and
recognize microbial structures, such as ﬂagellin,
lipopolysaccharide, peptidoglycan, double-stranded RNA, and
CpG DNA. TLRs transduce signals that lead to the expression of
inﬂammatory and antiviral genes. There are 10 human TLRs, 7 of
which are expressed on the plasma membrane of cells and 3 are
located in endosomal membranes.
Tonsils Partially encapsulated secondary lymphoid tissues located
beneath barrier epithelium in the nasopharynx and oropharynx,
including adenoids (pharyngeal tonsils), palatine tonsils, and
lingual tonsils. Tonsils are sites of initiation of adaptive immune
responses to microbes in the upper respiratory and alimentary
tracts.
Toxic shock syndrome An acute illness characterized by shock,
skin exfoliation, conjunctivitis, and diarrhea that is associated
with tampon use and caused by a Staphylococcus aureus
superantigen, which is a polyclonal activator of all T cells
expressing TCRs using a particular subgroup of Vβ genes.
Transfusion Transplantation of circulating blood cells, platelets, or
plasma from one individual to another. Transfusions are
performed to treat blood loss from hemorrhage or to treat a
deﬁciency in one or more blood cell types resulting from
inadequate production or excess destruction.
Transfusion reactions An immunologic reaction against transfused
blood products, usually mediated by preformed antibodies in the
recipient that bind to donor blood cell antigens, such as ABO
blood group antigens or histocompatibility antigens. Transfusion
reactions can lead to intravascular lysis of red blood cells and, in
severe cases, kidney damage, fever, shock, and disseminated
intravascular coagulation.
Transgenic mouse A mouse that expresses an exogenous gene that
has been introduced into the genome by injection of a speciﬁc
DNA sequence into the pro-nuclei of fertilized mouse eggs.
Transgenes insert randomly at chromosomal break points and
are subsequently inherited as simple Mendelian traits. By the
design of transgenes with tissue-speciﬁc regulatory sequences,
mice can be produced that express a particular gene only in
certain tissues. Transgenic mice are used extensively in
immunology research to study the functions of various cytokines,
cell surface molecules, and intracellular signaling molecules.
Transplantation The process of transferring cells, tissues, or organs
(i.e., grafts) from one individual to another or from one site to
another in the same individual. Transplantation is used to treat a
variety of diseases in which there is a functional disorder of a
tissue or organ. The major barrier to successful transplantation
between individuals is immunologic reaction (rejection) to the
transplanted graft.
Transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP) An ATP-
dependent peptide transporter that mediates the active transport
of peptides from the cytosol to the site of assembly of class I
MHC molecules inside the endoplasmic reticulum. TAP is a
heterodimeric molecule composed of TAP-1 and TAP-2
polypeptides, both encoded by genes in the MHC. Because
peptides are required for stable assembly of class I MHC
molecules, TAP-deﬁcient animals express few cell surface class I
MHC molecules, which results in diminished development and
activation of CD8+ T cells.
Tuft cell A specialized intestinal epithelial cell type that is involved
in enhancing mucus secretion in response to helminth infection.
Tuft cells are activated by helminths to secrete IL-25, which
stimulates ILC2s to secrete IL-13, which in turn promotes
formation of mucus-secreting goblet cells.
Tumor immunity Protection against the development or
progression of tumors by the immune system. Although immune
responses to naturally occurring tumors can frequently be
demonstrated, tumors often escape these responses. New
therapies that target T cell inhibitory molecules, such as PD-1,
are proving eﬀective in enhancing eﬀective T cell–mediated
antitumor immunity.
Tumor-inﬁltrating lymphocytes (TILs) Lymphocytes isolated from
the inﬂammatory inﬁltrates present in and around surgical
resection samples of solid tumors that are enriched with tumor-
speciﬁc CTLs and NK cells. In an experimental mode of cancer
treatment, TILs are grown in vitro in the presence of high doses
of IL-2 and are then adoptively transferred back into patients
with the tumor.
Tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily (TNFRSF) A large
family of structurally homologous transmembrane proteins that
bind TNFSF proteins and generate signals that regulate
proliferation, diﬀerentiation, apoptosis, and inﬂammatory gene
expression (see Appendix II).
Tumor necrosis factor superfamily (TNFSF) A large family of
structurally homologous transmembrane proteins that regulate
diverse functions in responding cells, including proliferation,
diﬀerentiation, apoptosis, and inﬂammatory gene expression.
TNFSF members typically form homotrimers, either within the
plasma membrane or after proteolytic release from the
membrane, and bind to homotrimeric TNF receptor superfamily
(TNFRSF) molecules, which then initiate a variety of signaling
pathways (see Appendix II).
Tumor-speciﬁc antigen An antigen whose expression is restricted
to a particular tumor and is not expressed by normal cells.
Tumor-speciﬁc antigens may serve as target antigens for
antitumor immune responses.
Two-signal hypothesis A now-proved hypothesis that states that
the activation of lymphocytes requires two distinct signals, the
ﬁrst being antigen and the second either microbial products or
components of innate immune responses to microbes. The
requirement for antigen (so-called signal 1) ensures that the
ensuing immune response is speciﬁc. The requirement for
additional stimuli triggered by microbes or innate immune
reactions (signal 2) ensures that immune responses are induced
when they are needed, that is, against microbes and other
noxious substances and not against harmless substances,
including self antigens. Signal 2 is referred to as costimulation
and is often mediated by membrane molecules on professional
APCs, such as B7 proteins.
Type 1 diabetes A disease characterized by a lack of insulin that
leads to various metabolic and vascular abnormalities. The
insulin deﬁciency results from autoimmune destruction of the
insulin-producing β cells of the islets of Langerhans in the
pancreas, usually during childhood. CD4+ and CD8+ T cells,
antibodies, and cytokines have been implicated in the islet cell
damage. Also called insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.
Type 1 immune response An immune response dominated by
ILC1s and Th1 cells and the IFN-γ they produce.
Type 2 immune response An immune response typical of allergic
diseases, dominated by ILC2s and Th2 cells and the cytokines
they produce, including IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13. Type 2 responses
may begin with epithelial injury and secretion of the cytokines
TSLP, IL-25, and IL-33.
Type 3 immune response An immune response dominated by
ILC3s and Th17 cells and the cytokines they produce, including
IL-17 and IL-22.
U
Ubiquitination Covalent linkage of one or several copies of a small
polypeptide called ubiquitin to a protein. Ubiquitination
frequently serves to target proteins for proteolytic degradation
mainly in proteasomes, a critical step in the class I MHC pathway
of antigen processing and presentation.
Uracil N-glycosylase (UNG) An enzyme that removes uracil
residues from DNA, leaving an abasic site. UNG is a key
participant in isotype switching, and homozygous UNG
mutations result in a hyper-IgM syndrome.
Urticaria Localized transient itchy swelling and redness of the skin
caused by leakage of ﬂuid and plasma proteins from small
vessels into the upper dermis during an immediate
hypersensitivity reaction.
V
V gene segments A DNA sequence that encodes most of the
variable domain of an Ig heavy chain or light chain or a TCR α, β,
γ, or δ chain. Each antigen receptor locus contains many diﬀerent
V gene segments, any one of which may recombine with
downstream D or J segments during lymphocyte maturation to
form functional antigen receptor V genes.
V(D)J recombinase The complex of RAG1 and RAG2 proteins that
catalyzes lymphocyte antigen receptor gene recombination.
Vaccine A preparation of microbial antigen, often combined with
adjuvants, that is administered to individuals to induce
protective immunity against microbial infections. The antigen
may be in the form of live but avirulent microorganisms, killed
microorganisms, puriﬁed macromolecular components of a
microorganism, or a plasmid that contains a complementary
DNA encoding a microbial antigen.
Variable region The extracellular, N-terminal region of an Ig heavy
or light chain or a TCR α, β, γ, or δ chain that contains variable
amino acid sequences that diﬀer between every clone of
lymphocytes and that are responsible for the speciﬁcity for
antigen. The antigen-binding variable sequences are localized to
extended loop structures or hypervariable segments.
Vasoactive amines Low-molecular-weight nonlipid compounds,
such as histamine, that all have an amine group, are stored in
and released from the cytoplasmic granules of mast cells and
mediate many of the biologic eﬀects of immediate
hypersensitivity (allergic) reactions. (Also called biogenic
amines.)
Virus An obligate intracellular microorganism or infectious
particle that consists of a simple nucleic acid genome packaged
in a protein capsid, sometimes surrounded by a membrane
envelope. Many pathogenic animal viruses cause a wide range of
diseases. Humoral immune responses to viruses can be eﬀective
in blocking infection of cells, and NK cells and CTLs are
necessary to kill cells already infected.
W
Western blot An immunologic technique to determine the presence
of a protein in a biologic sample. The method involves separation
of proteins in the sample by electrophoresis, transfer of the
protein array from the electrophoresis gel to a support
membrane by capillary action (bloĴing) and detection of the
protein by binding of an enzymatically or radioactively labeled
antibody speciﬁc for that protein.
Wheal-and-ﬂare reaction Local swelling and redness in the skin at a
site of an immediate hypersensitivity reaction. The wheal reﬂects
increased vascular permeability, and the ﬂare results from
increased local blood ﬂow, both changes resulting from
mediators such as histamine released from activated dermal
mast cells.
White pulp The part of the spleen that is composed predominantly
of lymphocytes, arranged in periarteriolar lymphoid sheaths and
follicles; and other leukocytes, mainly macrophages and DCs.
The remainder of the spleen contains sinusoids lined with
phagocytic cells and ﬁlled with blood, called the red pulp.
WiskoĴ-Aldrich syndrome An X-linked disease characterized by
eczema, thrombocytopenia (reduced blood platelets), and
immunodeﬁciency manifested as susceptibility to bacterial
infections. The defective gene encodes a cytosolic protein
involved in signaling cascades and regulation of the actin
cytoskeleton.
X
XBP-1 A transcription factor that is required for the unfolded
protein response and for the development of plasma cells.
Xenoantigen An antigen on a graft from another species.
Xenograft (xenogeneic graft) An organ or tissue graft derived from
a species diﬀerent from the recipient. Transplantation of
xenogeneic grafts (e.g., from a pig) to humans is not yet feasible
because of problems related to immunologic rejection.
Xenoreactive Describing a T cell or antibody that recognizes and
responds to an antigen on a graft from another species (a
xenoantigen). The T cell may recognize an intact xenogeneic
MHC molecule or a peptide derived from a xenogeneic protein
bound to a self MHC molecule.
X-linked agammaglobulinemia An immunodeﬁciency disease, also
called Bruton’s agammaglobulinemia, characterized by a block in
early B cell maturation and an absence of serum Ig. Patients
suﬀer from pyogenic bacterial infections. The disease is caused
by mutations or deletions in the gene encoding BTK, an enzyme
involved in signal transduction in developing B cells.
X-linked hyper-IgM syndrome A rare immunodeﬁciency disease
caused by mutations in the CD40 ligand gene and characterized
by failure of B cell heavy chain isotype switching and defective
cell-mediated immunity. Patients suﬀer from pyogenic bacterial
and intracellular infections.
Z
ζ Chain A transmembrane protein expressed in T cells as part of
the TCR complex that contains ITAMs in its cytoplasmic tail and
binds the ZAP70 protein tyrosine kinase during T cell activation.
Zeta-associated protein of 70 kD (ZAP70) A cytoplasmic protein
tyrosine kinase, similar to SYK in B cells, that is critical for early
signaling steps in antigen-induced T cell activation. ZAP70 binds
to phosphorylated tyrosines in the cytoplasmic tails of the ζ
chain and CD3 chains of the TCR complex and in turn
phosphorylates adaptor proteins that recruit other components
of the signaling cascade.
Appendix I
Principal Features of Selected CD
Molecules
The following list includes selected CD molecules that are referred
to in the text. Many cytokines and cytokine receptors have been
assigned CD numbers, but we refer to these by the more
descriptive cytokine designation, and these are listed in Appendix
II. A complete and up-to-date listing of CD molecules may be
found at hĴp://www.hcdm.org.
ADCC, Antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity; APRIL, a proliferation-inducing ligand;
BAFF, B cell–activating factor belonging to the TNF family; CTL, cytotoxic T lymphocyte; DCs,
dendritic cells; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; FDCs, follicular dendritic cells; GITR,
glucocorticoid-induced TNFR-related; gp, glycoprotein; GPI, glycophosphatidylinositol; HLA,
human leukocyte antigen; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; ICAM, intercellular adhesion
molecule; Ig, immunoglobulin; IL, interleukin; iNK, invariant natural killer; ITAM,
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif; ITIM, immunoreceptor tyrosine-based
inhibition motif; LFA, lymphocyte function-associated antigen; LPS, lipopolysaccharide;
MAdCAM, mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule; MHC, major histocompatibility
complex; NK cells, natural killer cells; NKT, NK T cells; PAMPs, pathogen-associated
molecular patterns; PD-1, programmed cell death protein-1; PSGL-1, P-selectin glycoprotein
ligand 1; SLAM, signaling lymphocytic activation molecule; TACI, transmembrane activator
and CAML interactor; TCR, T cell receptor; Tfh, T follicular helper; TLR, Toll-like receptor; TNF,
tumor necrosis factor; TNFR, TNF receptor; Treg, regulatory T cell; VCAM, vascular cell
adhesion molecule; VLA, very late activation.
The lowercase letters affixed to some CD numbers refer to CD molecules that are encoded by
multiple genes or that belong to families of structurally related proteins.
Appendix II
Cytokines
APRIL, A proliferation-inducing ligand; BAFF, B cell–activating factor belonging to the TNF
family; BCMA, B cell maturation protein; CSF, colony-stimulating factor; DC, dendritic cell;
IFN, interferon; IgE, immunoglobulin E; ILC, innate lymphoid cell; MHC, major
histocompatibility complex; NK cell, natural killer cell; NKT cell, natural killer T cell; OSMR,
oncostatin M receptor; RANK, receptor activator for nuclear factor κB ligand; RANKL, RANK
ligand; TACI, transmembrane activator and calcium modulator and cyclophilin ligand
interactor; Tfh, T follicular helper cell; Th, helper T cell; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; TNFSF,
TNF superfamily; TNFRSF, TNF receptor superfamily.
a  Most cytokine receptors are dimers or trimers composed of different polypeptide chains,
some of which are shared between receptors for different cytokines. The set of polypeptides
that compose a functional receptor (cytokine binding plus signaling) for each cytokine is listed.
The functions of each subunit polypeptide are not listed.
b  All TNF superfamily (TNFSF) members are expressed as cell surface transmembrane
proteins, but only those that are active as proteolytically released soluble cytokines are listed in
the table. Other TNFSF members that function predominantly in the membrane-bound form
and are not, strictly speaking, cytokines are not listed in the table. These membrane-bound
proteins and the TNFRSF receptors they bind to include OX40L (CD252, TNFSF4):OX40
(CD134, TNFRSF4):CD40L (CD154, TNFSF5); CD40 (TNFRSF5); FASL (CD178,
TNFSF6):FAS (CD95, TNFRSF6); CD70 (TNFSF7):CD27 (TNFRSF27); CD153
(TNFSF8):CD30 (TNFRSF8); TRAIL (CD253, TNFSF10):TRAIL-R (TNFRSF10A-D); RANKL
(TNFSF11):RANK (TNFRSF11); TWEAK (CD257, TNFSF12):TWEAKR (CD266, TNFRSF12);
LIGHT (CD258, TNFSF14):HVEM (TNFRSF14); GITRL (TNFSF18):GITR (CD357TNFRSF18);
4-IBBL:4-IBB (CD137).
Appendix III
Laboratory Techniques
Commonly Used in Immunology
LABORATORY METHODS USING ANTIBODIES, 555
Quantitation of Antigen by Immunoassays, 555
Identiﬁcation and Puriﬁcation of Proteins, 557
Labeling and Detection of Antigens in Cells and Tissues,
558
Measurement of Antigen-Antibody Interactions, 562
TRANSGENIC MICE AND GENE TARGETING, 562
METHODS FOR STUDYING T LYMPHOCYTE RESPONSES,
566
Polyclonal Activation of T Cells, 566
Antigen-Induced Activation of Polyclonal T Cell
Populations, 566
Antigen-Induced Activation of T Cell Populations With a
Single Antigen Speciﬁcity, 566
Methods to Enumerate and Study Functional Responses
of T Cells, 567
T Cell Receptor Repertoire Analyses, 568
METHODS FOR STUDYING B LYMPHOCYTE RESPONSES,
568
Activation of Polyclonal B Cell Populations, 568
Antigen-Induced Activation of B Cell Populations With a
Single Antigen Speciﬁcity, 568
Assays to Measure B Cell Proliferation and Antibody
Production, 568
B Cell Receptor Repertoire Analyses, 569
CLINICAL DIAGNOSTIC APPLICATIONS OF
IMMUNOLOGIC ASSAYS, 569
Flow Cytometry to Determine Numbers of Subsets of
Circulating Immune Cells, 569
Assays for Innate Immunity, 569
Assays for Humoral Immunity, 569
Assays for Cellular Immunity, 570
Immunologic techniques are used widely both in research
laboratories and clinical seĴings, and many of these are based on
the use of antibodies. In addition, many of the techniques of
modern molecular biology have provided invaluable information
about the immune system and are also now being used to analyze
features of immunologic diseases for diagnostic purposes. We have
mentioned these techniques often throughout the book. In this
Appendix, we will describe the principles underlying some of the
most commonly used laboratory methods in immunology. In
addition, we will summarize how B and T lymphocyte responses are
studied in the laboratory. Details of how to carry out various assays
may be found in laboratory manuals and research papers.
Laboratory Methods Using Antibodies
The exquisite speciﬁcity of antibodies for particular antigens makes
them valuable reagents for detecting, purifying, and quantitating
antigens. Because antibodies can be produced against virtually any
type of macromolecule and small chemical, antibody-based
techniques may be used to study virtually any type of molecule in
solution or in cells. The methods for producing monoclonal
antibodies (see Chapter 5) have greatly increased our ability to
generate antibodies of almost any desired speciﬁcity. Historically,
many of the uses of antibody depended on the ability of antibody
and speciﬁc antigen to form large immune complexes, either in
solution or in gels, that could be detected by various optical
methods. These methods were of great importance in early studies
but have now been replaced almost entirely by simpler methods
based on immobilized antibodies or antigens.
Quantitation of Antigen by Immunoassays
Immunologic methods of quantifying antigen concentration
provide high sensitivity and speciﬁcity and have become standard
techniques for both research and clinical applications. All modern
immunochemical methods of quantitation are based on having a
pure antigen or antibody whose quantity can be measured by an
indicator molecule (or a label). When the antigen or antibody is
labeled with a radioisotope, as ﬁrst introduced by Rosalyn Yalow
and colleagues, it may be quantiﬁed by instruments that detect
radioactive decay events; the assay is called a radioimmunoassay
(RIA). More commonly now, the antigen or antibody is covalently
coupled to an enzyme and is quantiﬁed by determining with a
spectrophotometer the rate at which the enzyme converts a clear
substrate to a colored product; the assay is called an enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Several variations of RIA and
ELISA exist, but the most commonly used version is the sandwich
assay (Fig. A.1). The sandwich assay uses two diﬀerent antibodies
reactive with diﬀerent epitopes on the antigen whose concentration
needs to be determined. A ﬁxed quantity of one antibody is
aĴached to a series of replicate solid supports, such as plastic
microtiter wells. Test solutions containing antigen at an unknown
concentration or a series of standard solutions with known
concentrations of antigen are added to the wells and allowed to
bind. Unbound antigen is removed by washing, and the second
antibody, which is enzyme linked, radiolabeled, or photochemically
labeled, is allowed to bind. The antigen serves as a bridge, so the
more antigen in the test or standard solutions, the more enzyme-
linked or radiolabeled second antibody will bind. The results from
the standard solutions are used to construct a binding curve for the
second antibody as a function of antigen concentration, from which
the quantities of antigen in the test solutions may be inferred.
When this test is performed with two monoclonal antibodies, it is
essential that these antibodies see nonoverlapping determinants on
the antigen; otherwise, the second antibody cannot bind. The
sandwich ELISA approach has been adapted to many point-of-care
and home tests, in which the enzyme generation of a colored
product is readily determined by portable spectrophotometers. In
most home tests, such as pregnancy tests, lateral ﬂow technology is
employed. The sample, such as a drop of urine, is added at one end
of a matrix and diﬀuses linearly, ﬁrst encountering pre-bound
antibody speciﬁc for the analyte and labeled with a colored bead or
chemical. Then complexes of the labeled antibody and bound
analyte diﬀuse further until they are immobilized by a second
analyte-speciﬁc antibody, forming a colored line indicating a
positive test. A variation of this technology is a competitive test in
which the analyte in the sample competes with pre-added analyte,
and the absence of a colored line indicates a positive result.
FIG. A.1  Sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay or radioimmunoassay.A fixed amount of
one immobilized antibody is used to capture an
antigen. The binding of a second, labeled antibody
that recognizes a nonoverlapping determinant on
the antigen will increase as the concentration of
antigen increases and thus allow quantification of
the antigen.
FIG. A.2  Isolation of an antigen by
immunoprecipitation or affinity chromatography. A,
A particular antigen can be purified from a mixture
of antigens in serum or other solutions by adding
antibodies specific to the antigen that are bound
to insoluble beads. Unbound antigens are then
washed away, and the desired antigen is
recovered by changing the pH or ionic strength of
the solution so that the affinity of antibody-antigen
binding is lowered. Immunoprecipitation can be
used as a means of purification, as a means of
quantification, or as a means of identification of an
antigen. Antigens purified by immunoprecipitation
are often analyzed by sodium dodecyl sulfate–
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. B, Affinity
chromatography is based on the same principle
as immunoprecipitation, except that the antibody
is fixed to an insoluble matrix or beads, usually in
a column. The method is often used to isolate
soluble antigens (shown) or antibodies specific for
an immobilized antigen.
In an important clinical variant of immunobinding assays,
samples from patients may be tested for the presence of antibodies
that are speciﬁc for a microbial antigen (e.g., antibodies reactive
with proteins from human immunodeﬁciency virus [HIV] or
hepatitis B virus) as indicators of infection. In this case, a saturating
quantity of antigen is added to replicate wells containing plate-
bound antibody, or the antigen is aĴached directly to the plate, and
serial dilutions of the patient’s serum are then allowed to bind. The
amount of the patient’s antibody bound to the immobilized antigen
is 
determined 
by 
use 
of 
an 
enzyme-linked 
anti-human
immunoglobulin (Ig) antibody.
Identification and Purification of Proteins
Antibodies can be used to identify and characterize proteins and to
purify speciﬁc proteins from mixtures. Two commonly used
methods to identify and purify proteins are immunoprecipitation
and immuno-aﬃnity chromatography. Western bloĴing is a widely
used technique to determine the presence and size of a protein in a
biologic sample.
Immunoprecipitation and Immuno-Affinity
Chromatography
Immunoprecipitation is a technique in which an antibody speciﬁc
for one protein antigen in a mixture of proteins is used to identify
this speciﬁc antigen (Fig. A.2A). The antibody is typically added to
a protein mixture (usually a detergent lysate of speciﬁc cells), and
staphylococcal protein A or protein G covalently aĴached to
agarose beads is added to the mixture. The Fab portions of the
antibody bind to the target protein, and the Fc portion of the
antibody is captured by the protein A or protein G on the beads.
Unwanted proteins that do not bind to the antibody are then
removed by washing the beads (by repeated detergent addition and
centrifugation). Alternatively, superparamagnetic beads coated
with protein A or G can be used instead of agarose beads, and after
being added to a protein mixture, the beads can be isolated by
powerful magnets. The speciﬁc protein that is recognized by and
bound to the antibody may be eluted from the agarose or magnetic
beads and dissociated from the antibody by use of a harsh
denaturant (such as sodium dodecyl sulfate), and the proteins are
separated 
by 
sodium 
dodecyl 
sulfate–polyacrylamide 
gel
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Proteins may be detected after
electrophoresis by staining the polyacrylamide gel with a protein
stain or by Western blot analysis (described later). If the original
mixture contained radioactively labeled proteins, speciﬁc proteins
immunoprecipitated by the antibody may be revealed by
autoﬂuorography or autoradiography, with protein bands being
captured on x-ray ﬁlm placed on the dried SDS–polyacrylamide gel
containing separated proteins.
Immuno-aﬃnity 
chromatography, 
a 
variant 
of 
aﬃnity
chromatography, is a puriﬁcation method that relies on antibodies
aĴached to an insoluble support to purify antigens from a solution
(Fig. A.2B). Antibodies speciﬁc for the desired antigen are typically
covalently aĴached to a solid support, such as agarose beads, and
packed into a column. A complex mixture of antigens is passed
through the beads to allow the antigen that is recognized by the
antibody to bind. Unbound molecules are washed away, and the
bound antigen is eluted by changing the pH or by exposure to high
salt or other chaotropic conditions that break antigen-antibody
interactions. A similar method may be used to purify antibodies
from culture supernatants or natural ﬂuids, such as serum, by ﬁrst
aĴaching the antigen to beads and passing the supernatants or
serum through. The identity of the puriﬁed protein can be
conclusively determined by using mass spectrometry. This
approach has been used to identify speciﬁc antigens with certainty.
In 
addition, 
immunoprecipitation 
combined 
with 
mass
spectrometry can accurately identify all the proteins that are in a
complex with the protein being identiﬁed by a speciﬁc antibody.
Western Blotting
Western bloĴing (Fig. A.3) is used to identify and determine the
relative quantity and molecular weight of a protein within a mixture
of proteins or other molecules. The mixture is ﬁrst subjected to
analytical separation, typically by SDS-PAGE, so that the ﬁnal
positions of diﬀerent proteins in the gel are a function of their
molecular size. The array of separated proteins is then transferred
from the separating polyacrylamide gel to a support membrane by
electrophoresis such that the membrane acquires a replica of the
array of separated macromolecules present in the gel. SDS is
displaced from the protein during the transfer process, and native
antigenic determinants are often regained as the protein refolds.
The position of the protein antigen on the membrane can then be
detected by binding of an unlabeled antibody speciﬁc for that
protein (the primary antibody) followed by a labeled second
antibody that binds to the primary antibody. This approach
provides information about antigen size and relative quantity
(which, with use of quantitative scanning, can be accurate and
reproducible). In general, second antibody probes are labeled with
enzymes that generate chemiluminescent signals and leave images
on photographic ﬁlm. Near-infrared ﬂuorophores also can be used
to label antibodies, and light produced by the excitation of the
ﬂuorophore provides more accurate antigen quantitation compared
with enzyme-linked second antibodies. The sensitivity and
speciﬁcity of this technique can be increased by starting with
immunoprecipitated proteins instead of crude protein mixtures.
This sequential procedure is especially useful for detecting protein-
protein interactions. For example, the physical association of two
diﬀerent proteins in the membrane of a lymphocyte can be
established by immunoprecipitating a membrane extract by use of
an antibody speciﬁc for one of the proteins and probing a Western
blot of the immunoprecipitate using an antibody speciﬁc for the
second protein that may have been co-immunoprecipitated along
with the ﬁrst protein.
The technique of transferring proteins from a gel to a membrane
is called Western bloĴing as a biochemist’s joke. Southern is the
last name of the scientist who ﬁrst bloĴed DNA from a separating
gel to a membrane by capillary transfer, a technique since called
Southern bloĴing. By analogy, Northern bloĴing was the term
applied to the technique of transferring RNA from a gel to a
membrane, and Western bloĴing is the term used to describe the
transfer of proteins to a membrane.
Labeling and Detection of Antigens in Cells
and Tissues
Antibodies speciﬁc for antigens expressed on or in particular cell
types are commonly used to identify these cells in tissues or cell
suspensions and to separate these cells from mixed populations. In
these methods, the antibody can be radiolabeled, enzyme linked,
or, most commonly, ﬂuorescently labeled, and a detection system is
used that can identify the bound antibody. Antibodies aĴached to
magnetic beads can be used to physically isolate cells expressing
speciﬁc antigens.
Flow Cytometry
The lineage, maturation stage, or activation status of a cell often can
be determined by analyzing the expression of diﬀerent cell surface
or intracellular molecules. This is commonly done by staining cells
with ﬂuorescently labeled probes that are speciﬁc for those
molecules and measuring the quantity of ﬂuorescence emiĴed by
the cells (Fig. A.4). The ﬂow cytometer is a specialized instrument
that can detect ﬂuorescence on individual cells in a suspension and
thereby determine the number of cells expressing the molecule to
which a ﬂuorescent probe binds as well as the level of expression of
the molecule in each cell. Suspensions of cells are incubated with
ﬂuorescently labeled probes, and the amount of probe bound by
each cell in the population is measured by passing the cells one at a
time through a ﬂuorimeter with a laser-generated incident beam.
The relative amounts of a particular molecule on diﬀerent cell
populations can be compared by staining each population with the
same probe and determining the amount of ﬂuorescence emiĴed.
In preparation for ﬂow cytometric analysis, cell suspensions are
stained with the ﬂuorescent probes of choice. Most often, these
probes are ﬂuorochrome-labeled antibodies speciﬁc for a cell
surface molecule. Alternatively, cytoplasmic molecules can be
stained by temporarily permeabilizing cells and permiĴing the
labeled antibodies to enter through the plasma membrane. In
addition to antibodies, various ﬂuorescent indicators of cytoplasmic
ion concentrations and reduction-oxidation potential can be
detected by ﬂow cytometry. Cell cycle studies can be performed by
ﬂow cytometric analysis of cells stained with ﬂuorescent DNA-
binding probes, such as propidium iodide. Apoptotic cells can be
identiﬁed with ﬂuorescent probes, such as annexin V, that bind to
abnormally exposed phospholipids on the surface of the dying
cells. Modern ﬂow cytometers routinely detect up to 30 diﬀerent-
colored ﬂuorescent labels, each aĴached to a diﬀerent antibody or
other probe. This technique permits simultaneous analysis of the
expression of many diﬀerent combinations of molecules by a cell.
In addition to detecting ﬂuorescent signals, ﬂow cytometers also
measure the forward and side light-scaĴering properties of cells,
which reﬂect cell size and internal complexity, respectively. This
information is often used to distinguish diﬀerent cell types. For
example, compared with lymphocytes, neutrophils cause greater
side scaĴer because of their cytoplasmic granules, and monocytes
cause greater forward scaĴer because of their size. The light scaĴer
and ﬂuorescence data generated by the ﬂow cytometer are analyzed
by dedicated software to deﬁne subsets of cells expressing diﬀerent
combinations of molecules and to quantify the relative amounts of
each molecule present in or on each cell.
FIG. A.3  Characterization of antigens by Western
blotting.Protein antigens, separated by sodium
dodecyl sulfate (SDS)–polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis and transferred to a membrane,
can be detected by an antibody that is in turn
revealed by a second antibody that may be
conjugated to an enzyme such as horseradish
peroxidase or to a fluorophore.
FIG. A.4  Principle of flow cytometry and
fluorescence-activated cell sorting.The incident
laser beam is of a designated wavelength, and
the light that emerges from the sample is
analyzed for forward and side scatter as well as
fluorescent light of two or more wavelengths that
depend on the fluorochrome labels attached to the
antibodies. The separation depicted here is based
on two antigenic markers (two-color sorting).
Modern instruments can routinely analyze and
separate cell populations on the basis of three or
more different-colored probes.
A newly developed antibody-based technology called mass
cytometry combines the single-cell ﬂow technology of ﬂow
cytometers with mass spectrometry. The commercially available
device used for this purpose is called CyTOF, with “TOF”
indicating that it is a time-of-ﬂight type of mass cytometer.
Antibodies speciﬁc for molecules of interest are labeled with any
one of a large number of heavy metals, using a diﬀerent isotope for
each antibody speciﬁcity. These antibodies are incubated with the
cell population being studied, and the cells are analyzed by a
CyTOF instrument that performs mass spectrometry on individual
cells. Unlike ﬂuorescence labels, many diﬀerent heavy metal
isotopes can be resolved by mass spectrometry without overlap,
allowing for the simultaneous detection of as many as 100 diﬀerent
molecules in a single cell suspension. The data generated by CyTOF
instruments requires bioinformatic software analysis to deﬁne and
quantify subsets of the analyzed cells expressing diﬀerent
combinations of the molecules detected by the labeled antibodies.
Cytokine Bead Assays
In these assays, the concentration of many diﬀerent cytokines (and
other proteins) in a single small volume of solution can be
determined simultaneously. Microscopic-sized beads of diﬀerent
sizes are labeled with diﬀerent amounts of a ﬂuorochrome, such as
allophycocyanin (APC), and the beads are pre-coated with a
cytokine-speciﬁc antibody. The beads with each anti-cytokine
speciﬁcity can be distinguished from one another based on size and
ﬂuorescence intensity. These beads are mixed with the test solution
that contains multiple cytokines, such as serum or supernatants of
lymphocyte cultures. Each cytokine will bind only to beads of one
particular size and ﬂuorescence intensity. Biotinylated detection
antibodies speciﬁc for each cytokine are added to form antibody-
antigen 
sandwiches, 
and 
phycoerythrin 
(PE)-conjugated
streptavidin is added to detect these sandwiches. The beads are
simultaneously analyzed by a two-laser ﬂow-based detection
instrument. One laser identiﬁes the bead and determines the
cytokine being detected. The other laser measures the intensity of
the PE-ﬂuorescence signal, which is directly related to the amount
of cytokine bound. Standard solutions with known concentrations
of the cytokines are used to develop standard curves from which
the quantity of cytokine in the test sample can be determined.
Purification of Cells
A ﬂuorescent-activated cell sorter (FACS) is an adaptation of the
ﬂow cytometer that allows one to separate cell populations
according to which and how much ﬂuorescent probe they bind.
This technique is accomplished by diﬀerentially deﬂecting the cells
with electromagnetic ﬁelds whose strength and direction are varied
according to the measured intensity of the ﬂuorescent signal (see
Fig. A.4). The cells may be labeled with ﬂuorescently tagged
antibodies ex vivo, or, in the case of experimental animal studies,
labeling may be accomplished in vivo by expression of transgenes
that encode ﬂuorescent proteins, such as green ﬂuorescent protein.
(Transgenic technology is described later in this Appendix.)
Another commonly used technique to purify cells with a
particular phenotype relies on antibodies that are aĴached to
magnetic beads. These “immunomagnetic reagents” will bind to
certain cells, depending on the speciﬁcity of the antibody used, and
the bound cells can then be pulled out of suspension by a strong
magnet.
Immunofluorescence and Immunohistochemistry
Antibodies can be used to identify the anatomic distribution of an
antigen within a tissue or within compartments of a cell. To do so,
the tissue or cell is incubated with an antibody that is labeled with
a ﬂuorochrome or enzyme, and the position of the label,
determined with a suitable microscope, is used to infer the position
of the antigen. In the earliest version of this method, called
immunoﬂuorescence, the antibody was labeled with a ﬂuorescent
dye and allowed to bind to a monolayer of cells or to a frozen
section of a tissue. The stained cells or tissues were examined with
a ﬂuorescence microscope to locate the antibody. Sensitivity has
also increased dramatically with the use of enzymatic ampliﬁcation
methods 
for 
the 
detection 
of 
ﬂuorescent 
labels.
Immunoﬂuorescence 
microscopes 
are 
now 
also 
used 
in
combination 
with 
automated 
slide 
scanning 
devices 
and
multispectral imaging devices that can deconvolute signals from
ﬂuorophores of very similar wavelengths, allowing a very large
number of ﬂuorescent probes to be used in the multicolor staining
of tissues. It is now possible to visualize and quantitate for
instance, every known T cell subset as well as diﬀerent B cells and
macrophages in a single slide form a ﬁxed tissue using antigen
restoration approaches, multicolor immunoﬂuorescence with signal
ampliﬁcation, slide scanning devices, and multispectral imagers.
Although sensitive, the ﬂuorescence microscope not an ideal tool to
identify the detailed structures of the cell or tissue because of a low
signal-to-noise ratio. More granular analysis of intracellular
structures can be ascertained by confocal microscopy, which uses
optical sectioning technology to ﬁlter out unfocused ﬂuorescent
light, and live imaging of tissues is possible using multiphoton
microscopy, which prevents out-of-focus light from forming.
Another classical approach to the analysis of antigens in tissues
involves the use of antibodies coupled to enzymes that convert
colorless substrates to colored insoluble substances that precipitate
at 
the 
position 
of 
the 
enzyme, 
but 
this 
approach 
to
immunohistochemical analyses allows limited number of protein
antigens to be visualized at one time. A conventional light
microscope may then be used to localize the antibody in a stained
cell or tissue. The most common variant of this method uses the
enzyme horseradish peroxidase, and the method is commonly
referred 
to 
as 
the 
immunoperoxidase 
technique. 
Another
commonly used enzyme is alkaline phosphatase. Diﬀerent
antibodies coupled to diﬀerent enzymes may be used in
conjunction to produce simultaneous two-color localizations of
diﬀerent antigens. In other variations, antibody can be coupled to
an electron-dense probe such as colloidal gold, and the location of
antibody can be determined subcellularly by means of an electron
microscope, a technique called immunoelectron microscopy.
Diﬀerent-sized gold particles have been used for simultaneous
localization of diﬀerent antigens at the ultrastructural level.
In all immunomicroscopic methods, signals may be enhanced by
use of sandwich techniques. For example, instead of aĴaching
horseradish peroxidase to a speciﬁc mouse antibody directed
against the antigen of interest, it can be aĴached to a second anti-
antibody (e.g., rabbit anti-mouse Ig antibody) that is used to bind
to the ﬁrst, unlabeled antibody. When the label is aĴached directly
to the speciﬁc, primary antibody, the method is referred to as
direct; when the label is aĴached to a secondary or even tertiary
antibody, the method is indirect. In some cases, molecules other
than antibody can be used in indirect methods. For example,
staphylococcal protein A, which binds to IgG, or avidin, which
binds to primary antibodies labeled with biotin, can be coupled to
ﬂuorochromes or enzymes.
A new version of these methods uses isotope-labeled antibodies
and is called multiplexed ion beam imaging (MIBI). This method
can simultaneously detect up to 40 antigens and thus deﬁne the
spatial distribution of many diﬀerent cell types and molecules in a
tissue.
Measurement of Antigen-Antibody
Interactions
In many situations, it is important to know the aﬃnity of an
antibody for an antigen, that is, the strength of binding of a single
antibody to an antigen. Aﬃnity is measured by and expressed as
the equilibrium dissociation constant (K d). The lower the K d, the
higher the aﬃnity. The eﬀectiveness of antibodies in protecting
against infection, or usefulness of a monoclonal antibody as an
experimental or therapeutic reagent, depend on aﬃnity. Antibody
aﬃnities for small antigens (e.g., haptens) were previously
measured by a method called equilibrium dialysis involving two
ﬂuid-ﬁlled 
compartments 
separated 
by 
a 
semi-permeable
membrane that allows passage of the antigen but not antibody. A
known quantity of antigen is placed in one compartment, and of a
known antibody is placed in the other compartment. After some
time, equilibrium is achieved, and the concentration of the
unbound antigen is equal in both compartments, but there is an
additional amount of antigen in the antibody compartment, which
cannot diﬀuse through the membrane out of the compartment
because it is bound to the antibody. The amount of this additional
antigen depends on the original free antigen concentration, the
antibody concentration, and on the dissociation constant (K d) of
the binding interaction. The K d can be calculated by measurement
of antigen and antibody concentrations, using spectroscopy, or by
other means involving labels on the antibody and antigen.
A newer and now more commonly used way to determine K d is
by measurement of the rates of antigen-antibody complex
formation and dissociation on a solid surface using special optical
techniques, such as surface plasma resonance (SPR) or polarization-
modulated oblique-incidence reﬂectivity diﬀerence (OI-DR). In
these techniques, antigen or antibody is immobilized on a solid
thin metal surface (in SPR) or glass surface (in OI-DR) and ligand
(antibody or antigen) is passed over the surface. A focused
monochromatic laser beam is shone on the surface at a speciﬁc
angle and the reﬂected light is analyzed. The changes in the surface
that occur due to antigen-antibody complex formation and
dissociation cause characteristic changes (distinct for each method)
in the reﬂected light. These changes are used to determine rates of
immune complex formation and dissociation, which depend, in
part, on the concentrations of antibody and antigen and on the
aﬃnity of the interaction. The on-rate constant (K on) and the oﬀ-
rate constant (K oﬀ) can be calculated by determining the actual
rates of association or dissociation, respectively using the optical
techniques. The ratio of K oﬀ/K on is equal to the dissociation
constant K d.
Transgenic Mice and Gene Targeting
Three important and related methods for studying the functions of
speciﬁc gene products in vivo are the creation of conventional
transgenic mice that ectopically express a particular gene in a
deﬁned tissue; the creation of gene “knockout” mice, in which a
targeted disruption is used to ablate the function of a particular
gene; and the generation of “knockin” mice, in which an existing
gene in the germline is replaced with a modiﬁed version of the
same gene. A knockin approach could either replace a normal
version of a gene with a mutant version or, in principle, “correct”
an existing mutant gene with a “normal” version. These techniques
involving genetically engineered mice have been widely used to
analyze many biologic phenomena, including many aspects innate
and adaptive immune responses.
For the creation of conventional transgenic mice, foreign DNA
sequences, called transgenes, are introduced into the pronuclei of
fertilized mouse eggs, and the eggs are implanted into the oviducts
of pseudopregnant females. Usually, if a few hundred copies of a
gene are injected into pro-nuclei, about 25% of the mice that are
born are transgenic. One to 50 copies of the transgene insert in
tandem into a random site of breakage in a chromosome and are
subsequently inherited as a simple Mendelian trait. Because
integration usually occurs before DNA replication, most (∼75%) of
the transgenic pups carry the transgene in all of their cells,
including germ cells. In most cases, integration of the foreign DNA
does not disrupt endogenous gene function. Also, each founder
mouse carrying the transgene is a heterozygote, from which
homozygous lines can be bred.
The great value of transgenic technology is that it can be used to
express genes in particular tissues by aĴaching coding sequences of
the gene to regulatory sequences that normally drive the expression
of genes selectively in that tissue. For instance, lymphoid
promoters and enhancers can be used to overexpress genes, such as
rearranged antigen receptor genes, in lymphocytes, and the insulin
promoter can be used to express genes in the β cells of pancreatic
islets. Transgenes also can be expressed under the control of
promoter elements that respond to drugs or hormones, such as
tetracycline or estrogens. In these cases, transcription of the
transgene can be controlled at will by administration of the
inducing agent. A disadvantage of some transgenic approaches is
that often the transgene product is not expressed with the same
kinetics or at the same level as the endogenous protein, so
experimental results may be diﬃcult to interpret.
A powerful method for developing animal models of single-gene
disorders, and the deﬁnitive way to establish the obligatory
function of a gene product in vivo, is the creation of knockout mice
by targeted mutation or disruption of the gene. This technique has
mostly relied on the phenomenon of homologous recombination. If
an exogenous gene is inserted into a cell, for instance, by
electroporation, it can integrate randomly into the cell’s genome.
However, if the gene contains sequences that are homologous to an
endogenous gene, it will preferentially recombine with and replace
endogenous sequences. To select for cells that have undergone
homologous recombination, a drug-based selection strategy is
used. The fragment of homologous DNA to be inserted into a cell is
placed in a vector typically containing a neomycin resistance (neo)
gene and a viral thymidine kinase (tk) gene (Fig. A.5A). This
targeting vector is constructed in such a way that the neo gene is
always inserted into the chromosomal DNA, but the tk gene is lost
whenever homologous recombination (as opposed to random
insertion) occurs. The vector is introduced into cells, and the cells
are grown in neomycin and ganciclovir, a drug that is metabolized
by thymidine kinase to generate a lethal product. Cells in which the
gene is integrated randomly will be resistant to neomycin but will
be killed by ganciclovir, whereas cells in which homologous
recombination has occurred will be resistant to both drugs because
the neo gene will be expressed but the tk gene will not. This
positive-negative selection ensures that the inserted gene in
surviving cells has undergone homologous recombination with
endogenous sequences. The presence of the inserted DNA in the
middle of an endogenous gene usually disrupts the coding
sequences and ablates the expression or function of that gene. In
addition, targeting vectors can be designed such that homologous
recombination will lead to the deletion of one or more exons of the
endogenous gene.
To generate a mouse carrying a targeted gene disruption or
mutation, a targeting vector is used to ﬁrst disrupt the gene in a
murine embryonic stem (ES) cell line. ES cells are pluripotent cells
derived from mouse embryos that can be propagated and induced
to diﬀerentiate in culture or that can be incorporated into a mouse
blastocyst, which may be implanted in a pseudopregnant mother
and carried to term. Importantly, the progeny of the ES cells
develop normally into mature tissues that will express the
exogenous genes that have been transfected into the ES cells. Thus,
the targeting vector designed to disrupt a particular gene is
inserted into ES cells, and colonies in which homologous
recombination has occurred (on one chromosome) are selected with
drugs, as described earlier (Fig. A.5B). The presence of the desired
recombination is veriﬁed by analysis of DNA with techniques such
as Southern blot hybridization or polymerase chain reaction. The
selected ES cells are injected into blastocysts, which are implanted
into pseudopregnant females. Mice that develop will be chimeric
for a heterozygous disruption or mutation; that is, some of the
tissues will be derived from the ES cells and others from the
remainder of the normal blastocyst. The germ cells are also usually
chimeric, but because these cells are haploid, only some will
contain the chromosome copy with the disrupted (mutated) gene. If
chimeric mice are mated with normal (wild-type) animals and
either sperm or eggs containing the chromosome with the mutation
fuse with the wild-type partner, all cells in the oﬀspring derived
from such a zygote will be heterozygous for the mutation (so-called
germline transmission). Such heterozygous mice can be mated to
yield animals that will be homozygous for the mutation with a
frequency that is predictable by simple Mendelian segregation.
Such knockout mice are deﬁcient in expression of the targeted
gene.
Homologous recombination also can be used to replace a normal
gene sequence with a modiﬁed version of the same gene (or of
another gene), thereby creating a knockin mouse strain. Knockin
mice can be used to assess the biologic consequences of a change in
a single base, for instance, as opposed to the deletion of a gene. A
knockin approach also, in principle, could be used to replace a
defective gene with a normal one. In certain circumstances, a
diﬀerent gene may be placed at a deﬁned site in the genome by use
of a knockin strategy rather than in a random site as in
conventional transgenic mice. Knockin approaches are used when it
is desirable to have the expression of the transgene regulated by
certain endogenous DNA sequences, such as a particular enhancer
or promoter region. In this case, the targeting vector contains an
exogenous gene encoding a desired product as well as sequences
homologous to an endogenous gene that are needed to target the
site of recombination.
Although the conventional gene-targeting strategy has proved to
be very useful in immunology research, the approach has some
limitations. First, the mutation of one gene during development
may be compensated for by altered expression of other gene
products, and therefore the function of the targeted gene may be
obscured. Second, in a conventional gene knockout mouse, the
importance of a gene in only one tissue or at only one time during
development cannot be easily assessed. Third, a functional
selection marker gene, such as the neo gene, is permanently
introduced into the animal genome, and this alteration may have
unpredictable results on the phenotype of the animal. An
important reﬁnement of gene knockout technology that can
overcome many of these drawbacks is a “conditional” targeting
approach.
A commonly used conditional strategy takes advantage of the
bacteriophage-derived Cre/loxP recombination system. The Cre
enzyme is a DNA recombinase that recognizes a 34-bp sequence
motif called loxP, and the enzyme mediates the deletion of gene
segments ﬂanked by two loxP sites in the same orientation. To
generate mice with loxP-tagged genes, targeting vectors are
constructed with one loxP site ﬂanking the neo gene at one end and
a second loxP site ﬂanking the sequences homologous to the target
at the other end. These vectors are transfected into ES cells, and
mice carrying the loxP-ﬂanked but still functional target gene are
generated as described for conventional knockout mice. A second
strain of mice carrying a cre transgene is then bred with the strain
carrying the loxP-ﬂanked (“ﬂoxed”) target gene. In the oﬀspring,
expression of Cre recombinase will mediate deletion of the target
gene. Both the normal gene sequences and the neo gene will be
deleted. Importantly, expression of the cre gene, and therefore
deletion of the targeted gene, can be restricted to certain tissues or
speciﬁed times by the use of cre transgene constructs with diﬀerent
promoters. For example, selective deletion of a gene only in
macrophages and granulocytes can be accomplished by using a cre
transgenic mouse in which cre is driven by a lysozyme promoter, or
the selective loss of a gene only in regulatory T cells can be
accomplished using a foxp3 promoter driving a cre transgene.
Alternatively, a steroid-inducible promoter can be used so that Cre
expression and subsequent gene deletion occur only after mice are
given a dose of dexamethasone. Many other variations on this
technology have been devised to create conditional mutants.
Cre/loxP technology also can be used to create knockin mice. In this
case, loxP sites are placed in the targeting vector to ﬂank the neo
gene and the homologous sequences, but they do not ﬂank the
replacement (knockin) gene sequences. Therefore, after cre-
mediated deletion, the exogenous gene remains in the genome at
the targeted site.
Gene knockin technology has been applied to create “reporter”
mice in which cells that would normally express a particular protein
will express a ﬂuorescent molecule at the same time as the native
protein. This is accomplished by replacing the native gene with a
transgene that encodes the ﬂuorescent reporter protein and the
native protein, both under the control of the native promoter and
enhancer. Reporter mice have been developed that allow the
visualization of immune cells of particular subsets in vivo, such as
mice in which cells producing a cytokine also express a ﬂuorescent
protein. These cells can be detected using intravital ﬂuorescence
microscopy. The cells expressing the reporter genes also can be
isolated alive and subjected to functional studies ex vivo, even if the
native gene reported is a nuclear transcription factor whose
expression would otherwise be detectable only by methods that kill
the cells. For example, live regulatory T cells can be isolated by
FACS-sorting lymph nodes from a reporter mouse that expresses
green ﬂuorescent protein simultaneously with the transcription
factor FOXP3.
A new approach to generating mutations in cell lines, as well as
in ES cells, uses a modiﬁcation of a bacterial defense system against
foreign DNA called the CRISPR (Clustered Regularly Interspaced
Short Palindromic Repeats) Cas9 (CRISPR-associated nuclease 9)
system. In the gene-editing variation of this, a guide RNA
hybridizes with a chosen target DNA sequence and allows the Cas9
nuclease to generate a targeted double-stranded break. Although
such a break can disrupt a gene, co-transfecting a plasmid with a
mutated version of the target sequence allows eﬃcient homologous
recombination and the creation of a targeted knockin mutation.
This is the most rapid approach available for the generation of
knockout or knockin mutations in cell lines or in the germlines of
experimental animals.
FIG. A.5  Generation of gene knockout. A, The
disruption of gene X in an embryonic stem (ES)
cell is accomplished by homologous
recombination. A population of ES cells is
transfected with a targeting vector that contains
sequences homologous to two exons of gene X
flanking a neomycin resistance (neo) gene. The
neo gene replaces or disrupts one of the exons of
gene X on homologous recombination. The
thymidine kinase (tk) gene in the vector will be
inserted into the genome only if random,
nonhomologous recombination occurs. B, The ES
cells that were transfected by the targeting vector
are selected by neomycin and ganciclovir so that
only those cells with targeted insertion
(homologous recombination) survive. These cells
are then injected into a blastocyst, which is then
implanted into the uterus of a pseudopregnant
mouse. A chimeric mouse will develop in which
some of the tissues are derived from the ES cell
carrying the targeted mutation in gene X. These
chimeric mice are identified by a mixed-color coat,
including the color of the mouse strain from which
the ES cells were derived and the color of the
mouse strain from which the blastocyst was
derived. If the mutation is present in germ cells, it
can be propagated by further breeding.
Methods for Studying T Lymphocyte
Responses
Our current knowledge of the cellular events in T cell activation is
based on a variety of experimental techniques in which diﬀerent
populations of T cells are activated by deﬁned stimuli, and
functional responses are measured. In vitro experiments have
provided a great deal of information on the changes that occur in a
T cell when it is stimulated by antigen. More recently, several
techniques have been developed to study T cell proliferation,
cytokine expression, and anatomic redistribution in response to
antigen activation in vivo. The new experimental approaches have
been particularly useful for the study of naive T cell activation and
the localization of antigen-speciﬁc memory T cells after an immune
response has waned. These in vivo approaches have largely been
used in mice.
Polyclonal Activation of T Cells
Polyclonal activators of T cells bind to many or all T cell receptor
(TCR) complexes regardless of speciﬁcity and activate the T cells in
ways similar to peptide–major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
complexes on antigen-presenting cells (APCs). Polyclonal activators
are mostly used in vitro to activate T cells isolated from human
blood or the lymphoid tissues of experimental animals. Polyclonal
activators also can be used to activate T cells with unknown antigen
speciﬁcities, and they can evoke a detectable response from mixed
populations of naive T cells, even though the frequency of cells
speciﬁc for any one antigen would be too low to elicit a detectable
response. The polymeric carbohydrate-binding plant lectins, such
as concanavalin-A and phytohemagglutinin (PHA), are a commonly
used group of polyclonal T cell activators. These lectins bind
speciﬁcally to certain sugar residues on T cell surface glycoproteins,
including the TCR and CD3 proteins, and thereby stimulate the T
cells. Antibodies speciﬁc for TCR-associated CD3 proteins also
function as polyclonal activators of T cells and are now used more
commonly than plant lectins. Often, these antibodies need to be
immobilized on solid surfaces or beads or cross-linked with
secondary anti-antibodies to induce optimal activation responses.
Because soluble polyclonal activators do not provide costimulatory
signals that are normally provided by APCs, they are often used
together with stimulatory antibodies to receptors for costimulators,
such as anti-CD28. Superantigens, another kind of polyclonal
stimulus, bind to and activate all T cells that express particular
types of TCR β chain (see Chapter 16, Fig. 16.3). T cells of any
antigen speciﬁcity also can be stimulated with pharmacologic
reagents, such as the combination of the phorbol ester PMA and
the calcium ionophore ionomycin, that mimic signals generated by
the TCR complex.
Antigen-Induced Activation of Polyclonal T
Cell Populations
Polyclonal populations of normal T cells that are enriched for T
cells speciﬁc for a particular antigen can be derived from the blood
and peripheral lymphoid organs of individuals after immunization
with the antigen. The immunization serves to expand the number
of antigen-speciﬁc T cells, which can then be restimulated in vitro
by adding antigen and MHC-matched APCs to the T cells. This
approach can be used to study antigen-induced activation of a
mixed population of previously activated (“primed”) T cells
expressing many diﬀerent TCRs, but naive T cells usually do not
respond well to stimulation with antigen in vitro, probably because
the frequency of cells speciﬁc for any antigen is very low.
Antigen-Induced Activation of T Cell
Populations With a Single Antigen Specificity
Monoclonal populations of T cells, which express identical TCRs,
have been useful for functional, biochemical, and molecular
analyses. The limitation of these monoclonal populations is that
they are maintained as long-term tissue culture lines and therefore
may have phenotypically diverged from normal T cells in vivo. One
type of monoclonal T cell population that has been used in
experimental immunology is an antigen-speciﬁc T cell clone. Both
helper and cytotoxic T lymphocyte clones have been established
from mice and humans. Other monoclonal T cell populations used
in the study of T cell activation include antigen-speciﬁc T cell
hybridomas, which are produced like B cell hybridomas (see Fig.
5.9, Chapter 5), and tumor lines derived from T cells have been
established in vitro after removal of malignant T cells from animals
or humans with T cell leukemias or lymphomas. Although some
tumor-derived lines express functional TCR complexes, their
antigen speciﬁcities are not known and the cells are usually
stimulated with polyclonal activators for experimental purposes.
The Jurkat line, derived from a human T cell leukemia cell, is an
example of a tumor line that is widely used as a model to study T
cell signal transduction.
TCR 
transgenic 
mice 
are 
a 
source 
of 
homogeneous,
phenotypically normal T cells with identical antigen speciﬁcities
that are widely used for experimental studies. If the rearranged α
and β chain genes of a single TCR of known speciﬁcity are
expressed as a transgene in mice, a majority of the mature T cells in
the mice will express that TCR. If the TCR transgene is crossed onto
a RAG1- or RAG2-deﬁcient background, no endogenous TCR gene
expression occurs, and 100% of the T cells will express only the
transgenic TCR. TCR transgenic T cells can be activated in vitro or
in vivo with a single peptide antigen, and they can be identiﬁed by
antibodies speciﬁc for the transgenic TCR. One of the unique
advantages of TCR transgenic mice is that they permit the isolation
of suﬃcient numbers of naive T cells of deﬁned speciﬁcity to allow
one to study functional responses to the ﬁrst exposure to antigen.
This advantage has allowed investigators to study the in vitro
conditions under which antigen activation of naive T cells leads to
diﬀerentiation into functional subsets such as Th1 and Th2 cells
(see Chapter 9). Naive T cells from TCR transgenic mice also can be
injected into normal syngeneic recipient mice, where they home to
lymphoid tissues. The recipient mouse is then exposed to the
antigen for which the transgenic TCR is speciﬁc. By use of
antibodies that label the TCR transgenic T cells, it is possible to
follow their expansion and diﬀerentiation in vivo and to isolate
them for analysis of recall (secondary) responses to antigen ex vivo.
Methods to Enumerate and Study Functional
Responses of T Cells
In the past, measurement of proliferation of T lymphocytes, like
those of other cells, in vitro were often conducted by determining
the amount of 
3H-labeled thymidine incorporated into the
replicating DNA of cultured cells. Thymidine incorporation
provides a quantitative measure of the rate of DNA synthesis,
which is usually directly proportional to the rate of cell division. As
use of radioactive isotopes in laboratory research has declined for
safety and environmental reasons, other cellular proliferation
assays have become more common and these can be used in vitro
and in vivo.
Lymphocyte proliferation in vivo can be measured by injecting
the thymidine analogue bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) into animals, or
having animals drink BrDU-containing water, and then staining
cells harvested from the animals with anti-BrdU antibody to
identify and enumerate nuclei that have incorporated BrdU into
their DNA during DNA replication.
Fluorescent dyes can be used to study proliferation of T cells
in vitro or in vivo. T cells are ﬁrst labeled with chemically reactive
lipophilic ﬂuorescent esters and then the cell can be cultured
in vitro under various experimental conditions or adoptively
transferred into experimental animals. The dyes enter cells, form
covalent bonds with cytoplasmic proteins, and then cannot leave
the cells. One commonly used dye of this type is 5,6-
carboxyﬂuorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester (CFSE), which can
be detected in cells by standard ﬂow cytometric techniques. Every
time a cell divides, its dye content is halved, and therefore it is
possible to determine whether the cultured T cells or the adoptively
transferred T cells recovered from the lymphoid tissues of the
recipient mouse have divided. It is also possible to estimate the
number of doublings each T cell has gone through.
Peptide-MHC tetramers are used to enumerate T cells with a
single antigen speciﬁcity isolated from blood or lymphoid tissues of
experimental animals or humans. These tetramers contain four of
the peptide-MHC complexes that the T cell would normally
recognize on the surface of APCs. The tetramer is made by
producing a soluble (non–membrane bound) class I MHC molecule
to which is aĴached a small molecule called biotin by use of
recombinant DNA technology. Biotin binds with high aﬃnity to a
protein called avidin, and each avidin molecule binds four biotin
molecules. Thus, avidin forms a substrate for assembly of four
biotin-conjugated MHC proteins. The MHC molecules can be
loaded with a peptide of interest and thus stabilized, and the avidin
molecule is labeled with a ﬂuorochrome, such as FITC. This
tetramer binds to T cells speciﬁc for the peptide-MHC complex with
high enough avidity to label the T cells, even in suspension. This
method is the only feasible approach for identiﬁcation of antigen-
speciﬁc T cells in humans. For instance, it is possible to identify and
enumerate circulating HLA-A2–restricted T cells speciﬁc for an HIV
peptide by staining blood cells with a tetramer of HLA-A2
molecules loaded with the peptide. The same technique is being
used to enumerate and isolate T cells speciﬁc for self antigens in
normal individuals and in patients with autoimmune diseases.
Peptide-MHC tetramers that bind to a particular transgenic TCR
also can be used to quantify the transgenic T cells in diﬀerent
tissues after adoptive transfer and antigen stimulation. The
technique is now widely used with class I MHC molecules; in class I
molecules, only one polypeptide is polymorphic, and stable
molecules can be produced in vitro. This is more diﬃcult for class
II molecules because both chains are polymorphic and required for
proper assembly, but class II–peptide tetramers have also been
produced.
Cytokine secretion assays can be used to quantify cytokine-
secreting eﬀector T cells. The most commonly used methods are
cytoplasmic staining of cytokines with analysis of the stained cells
by ﬂow cytometry and single-cell enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assays (ELISpots). In these types of studies, antigen-induced
activation and diﬀerentiation of T cells take place in vivo, and then
T cells are isolated, restimulated with antigen or polyclonal
activators, and tested for cytokine expression in vitro. Cytoplasmic
staining of cytokines requires permeabilizing the cells so that
ﬂuorochrome-labeled antibodies speciﬁc for a particular cytokine
can gain entry into the cell, and the stained cells are analyzed by
ﬂow cytometry. Cytokine expression by T cells speciﬁc for a
particular antigen can be determined by additionally staining T
cells with peptide-MHC tetramers or, in the case of TCR transgenic
T cells, antibodies speciﬁc for the transgenic TCR. By use of a
combination of CFSE and anti-cytokine antibodies, it is possible to
examine the relationship between cell division and cytokine
expression. In the ELISpot assay, T cells freshly isolated from blood
or lymphoid tissues are cultured in plastic wells coated with
antibody speciﬁc for a particular cytokine. As cytokines are secreted
from individual T cells, they bind to the antibodies in discrete spots
corresponding to the location of individual T cells. The spots are
visualized by adding secondary enzyme-linked anti-Ig, as in a
standard ELISA (see earlier), and the number of spots is counted to
determine the number of cytokine-secreting T cells.
T Cell Receptor Repertoire Analyses
A powerful way to determine whether T cell clonal expansion has
occurred or to determine clonal relatedness across diﬀerent T cell
populations is to interrogate the sequence of one or both chains of
the TCR in T cell populations. Two broad approaches are used. On
populations of T cells, next-generation sequencing of either
genomic DNA or expressed RNA can be used to obtain the CDR3
sequences of the TCR α or β chain or of both chains. The most
prominent clones, the “identifying” CDR3 sequence for a clone, and
the V and J gene usages of individual clones can thus be
determined, and this can help identify both clonal expansion and
clonal relatedness between diﬀerent T cell subpopulations in a
given patient or mouse. Because only a very small number of
research laboratories use TCR (in recombinant soluble form) for
antigen discovery, in general identifying the matched TCR α and β
chain at a single cell level is not commonly undertaken. However,
the advent of new droplet capture techniques for the isolation of
single cells has allowed the development of procedures for fairly
easily sequencing TCR α and β chain genes from individual T cells.
In single-cell approaches, knowledge of the speciﬁc TCR in each cell
can also be correlated with the transcriptional proﬁle of the given
cell. In this manner, clonal expansion of diﬀerent subsets of T cells
in a disease seĴing can be assessed.
Methods for Studying B Lymphocyte
Responses
Activation of Polyclonal B Cell
Populations
A common approach to broadly interrogating B cell function in a
non–antigen-speciﬁc manner is the use of anti-Ig antibodies as
analogues of antigens, with the assumption that anti-Ig will bind to
constant (C) regions of membrane Ig molecules on all B cells and
will have the same biologic eﬀects as an antigen that binds to the
hypervariable regions of membrane Ig molecules on only the
antigen-speciﬁc B cells. Thus, anti-Ig antibody is frequently used as
a polyclonal activator of B lymphocytes, similar to the use of anti-
CD3 antibodies as polyclonal activators of T lymphocytes, discussed
earlier.
Antigen-Induced Activation of B Cell
Populations With a Single Antigen Specificity
Antigen-speciﬁc B cells can be puriﬁed using magnetic beads
coated with antigen, and antigen-speciﬁc proliferation assays can
be performed on the puriﬁed cells; these assays have been used in
patients with infectious diseases and in vaccination studies. While
cloning and expansion methods for single B cells have been
developed, they usually involve the use of CD40L-expressing
monolayers, which results in the activation and diﬀerentiation of B
cells and therefore limits the usefulness of the method. However,
transgenic mice have been developed in which virtually all B cells
express a transgenic Ig of known speciﬁcity, so that most of the B
cells in these mice respond to the same antigen. Another approach
has been to generate antigen receptor knockin mice, in which
rearranged Ig H and L chain genes encoding a particular Ig are
introduced into their endogenous loci. Such knockin animals have
proved particularly useful for studying receptor editing.
Assays to Measure B Cell Proliferation and
Antibody Production
Much of our knowledge of B cell activation is based on in vitro
experiments, in which diﬀerent stimuli are used to activate B cells
and their proliferation and diﬀerentiation can be measured
accurately. The same assays may be done with B cells recovered
from mice exposed to diﬀerent antigens or with homogeneous B
cells expressing transgene-encoded antigen receptors.
B cell proliferation is measured by use of CFSE labeling or 3H-
labeled thymidine incorporation in vitro and BrdU labeling in vivo,
as described earlier for T cell proliferation.
Antibody production is measured in two diﬀerent ways: with
assays for cumulative Ig secretion, which measure the amount of Ig
that accumulates in the supernatant of cultured lymphocytes or in
the serum of an immunized individual; and with single-cell assays,
which determine the number of cells in an immune population that
secrete Ig of a particular speciﬁcity or isotype. The most accurate,
quantitative, and widely used technique to measure the total
amount of Ig in a culture supernatant or serum sample is ELISA. By
use of antigens bound to solid supports, it is possible to use ELISA
to quantify the amount of antibody in a sample speciﬁc for a
particular antigen. In addition, the availability of anti-Ig antibodies
that detect Igs of diﬀerent heavy or light chain classes allows
measurement of the quantities of diﬀerent isotypes in a sample.
Other 
techniques 
to 
measure 
antibody 
levels 
include
hemagglutination for anti-erythrocyte antibodies and complement-
dependent lysis for antibodies speciﬁc for known cell types. Both
assays are based on the demonstration that if the amount of
antigen (i.e., cells) is constant, the concentration of antibody
determines the amount of antibody bound to cells, and this is
reﬂected in the degree of cell agglutination or subsequent binding
of complement and cell lysis. Results from these assays are usually
expressed as antibody titers, which are the dilution of the sample
giving half-maximal eﬀects or the dilution at which the endpoint of
the assay is reached.
The ELISpot assay is used to enumerate cells producing antibody
of a particular speciﬁcity. In this method, antigen is bound to the
boĴom of a well, antibody-secreting cells are added, and antibodies
that have been secreted and are bound to the antigen are detected
by an enzyme-linked anti-Ig antibody, as in an ELISA, in a
semisolid medium. Each spot represents the location of an
antibody-secreting cell. Single-cell assays provide a measure of the
numbers of Ig-secreting cells, but they cannot accurately quantify
the amount of Ig secreted by each cell or by the total population.
The ELISA and ELISpot techniques can be adapted to assess
aﬃnity of antibodies, by the use of antigens with diﬀering numbers
of hapten moieties. In this way, aﬃnity maturation can be assessed
by testing serum or B cells sampled at diﬀerent times during an
immune response.
B Cell Receptor Repertoire Analyses
Interrogation of the sequence of Ig H and L chain genes in sorted B
cell populations is a powerful way to determine whether B cell
clonal expansion has occurred or to determine clonal relatedness
across diﬀerent B cell populations. Next-generation sequencing of
either genomic DNA or of expressed RNA isolated from
populations of B cells can be used to obtain the CDR3 sequences of
the Ig H and L chains. The CDR3 sequences can then be used to
identify the most prominent clones and the “identifying” CDR3
sequence and V and J gene usages of individual clones. This
information can help identify both clonal expansion and clonal
relatedness between diﬀerent B cell populations in a given
individual. By cloning single B cells and sequencing Ig H and L
chain genes from single cells, it has been possible to create
recombinant monoclonal antibodies from single B cells in humans
and mice. These monoclonal antibodies have been used in
determining autoreactivity, developing monoclonal antibody
reagents against antigens from infectious agents and to purify
unknown antigens that drive large B cell responses in human
patients. Whereas previous single cell approaches were relatively
labor intensive, the advent of new droplet capture techniques for
the isolation of single cells has allowed the development of far
more eﬃcient procedures for sequencing Ig H and L chain genes
from individual B cells.
Clinical Diagnostic Applications of
Immunologic Assays
Many of the techniques discussed previously are used in clinical
laboratories to determine the status of the immune system of
patients. Here we will summarize some of the most common
laboratory approaches for diagnosis of immunologic abnormalities.
In many cases, abnormalities found by these approaches are
followed with highly specialized tests, including molecular genetic
analyses.
Flow Cytometry to Determine Numbers of
Subsets of Circulating Immune Cells
Flow cytometry is routinely used to determine total numbers of B
cells, T cells, natural killer (NK) cells, and T cells subsets (CD4+ and
CD8+) in circulation (see Chapter 2, Fig. 2.7). Follow-up approaches
include analyzing populations of naive and memory T cell subsets
(CD45RA+/RO+), γδ T cells, isotype switched memory B cells (CD27+
IgM − IgD − ), and even subsets of T helper cells (Th1, Th2, Th17,
Treg) depending on the context.
Assays for Innate Immunity
The neutrophil oxidative burst assay is commonly performed using
a dihydrorhodamine (DHR) ﬂow cytometric analysis and can be
used to detect both overt chronic granulomatous disease as well as
X-linked carriers of the disease In this test, DHR, which is a
nonﬂuorescent lipid soluble compound, is added to suspensions of
neutrophils, which are then stimulated by PMA. DHR can be
oxidized by hydrogen peroxide produced during neutrophil
respiratory burst by phagocyte oxidase or myeloperoxidase. DHR
oxidation converts DHR into a green ﬂuorescent cationic
rhodamine compound, which localizes in mitochondria and can be
detected by ﬂow cytometry.
NK cell cytotoxicity assays evaluate ex vivo NK cell killing of a
target cell population (e.g., cells lacking MHC). A low value
suggests NK cell dysfunction and is useful in the evaluation of
patients with recurrent infections (primarily viral), as well as in
patients with suspected primary cause of hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis (HLH).
Assays for Humoral Immunity
Serologic detection of speciﬁc antibodies has been used for
infectious disease diagnosis and blood grouping for well over a
century. In infections, speciﬁc IgM antibodies indicate recent
exposure to a pathogen, and IgG antibodies can be detected within
2 weeks of disease onset and persist decades later as well.
Serum protein electrophoresis can reveal decreased gamma
globulins in immunodeﬁciency and monoclonal Ig peaks associated
with malignant and premalignant clonal expansions of plasma cells.
Serum levels of diﬀerent antibody classes, including IgG, IgA,
IgM, and IgE as well as IgG subclasses, are usually determined by
automated nephelometry, which involves mixing a dilution of
patient’s serum with antibodies speciﬁc for diﬀerent Ig heavy chain
classes, forming small immune complexes that are detected and
quantiﬁed by measuring light scaĴering. Evaluation of the levels of
IgG subclasses in serum is most helpful in patients who have
normal to borderline low total IgG (≤400 mg/dL in the adult
population).
Complement levels and function are quantiﬁed in several clinical
contexts, including recurrent infections, recurrent angioedema,
and/or autoimmune disease. In the seĴing of recurrent infections
(particularly with encapsulated organisms such as Neisseria), a
CH50 level is recommended as the initial screening test followed by
more detailed pathway analysis in the seĴing of a low/absent CH50.
The CH50 is a screening test for deﬁciency of classical or terminal
pathways, and is determined by measuring the ability of a patent’s
serum to cause hemolysis of sheep erythrocytes pre-coated with
complement-ﬁxing antibodies. The dilution of the serum that
results in 50% hemolysis is of the erythrocytes is the CH50.
Analysis of individual complement proteins is performed by
nephelometry or variations of ELISAs. In the context of recurrent
angioedema, a C4 level is often recommended as the initial
screening test, followed by a C1 inhibitor level and function in the
seĴing of a low C4 and/or a high level of clinical suspicion of an
underlying C1 inhibitor deﬁciency. In the context of autoimmune
disease, a low C3 and/or C4 level can be useful measures of ongoing
immune complex formation.
Autoantibody screening for a range of speciﬁcities may be
performed depending on the clinical context, using various
techniques in which a patient’s serum is tested for the presence of
Ig that binds to puriﬁed antigens or to cells.
Vaccine responses are routinely measured to assess humoral
immune function. Responses are determined by measuring serum
levels of IgG speciﬁc to both T cell–dependent antigens (proteins or
glycoproteins, e.g., vaccination against tetanus toxoid, diphtheria
toxoid, and Haemophilus inﬂuenzae type B) and T cell–independent
antigens (polysaccharides, e.g., Pneumovax). Titers are most
commonly measured approximately 6 weeks after vaccination, and
low titers may warrant further evaluation for an underlying B cell
immunodeﬁciency.
Assays for Cellular Immunity
T cell receptor excision circles (TRECs), which are formed by V-D-J
recombination during T cell maturation, are measured in a
newborn blood screening assay that is now mandatory in most
states in the United States. TREC levels are used to assess recent T
cell output from the thymus, and a low level indicates deﬁciency of
T cells, which warrants further evaluation for severe combined
immunodeﬁciency (SCID).
T cell proliferation assays are performed to assess T cell function
and evaluated by stimulating cells ex vivo with mitogens such as
pokeweed mitogen (PWM) and PHA, speciﬁc antigens (Candida and
tetanus toxoid are commonly used), or antibodies to CD3 and
CD28. Robust cellular proliferation to these stimuli suggests intact
T cell function.
Index
Page numbers followed by f and t indicate ﬁgures and tables,
respectively.
A
Abnormal cellular functions, 439–440
ABO blood group antigens, in blood transfusion, 407–408 , 408f
Acquired immunity, See Adaptive immunity
Acquired immunodeﬁciencies, 481–482 , 482t
See also Acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome (AIDS)
Acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome (AIDS), 498–509
See also Human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV)
clinical features of, 505–506 , 506t
epidemiology of, 505
pathogenesis of, 502–505
treatment and prevention of, 507–509
vaccine development for, 507–509
Activating receptors, of natural killer (NK) cells, 82–85 , 83f
functions of, 82f
structure and ligands of, 84f
Activation protein 1 (AP-1) pathway, 169–170
Activation-induced deaminase (AID)
with germline transcripts, mechanism of, 274–275 , 275f
in isotype switching, 275–276
Acute antibody-mediated rejection, 399 , 400f
Acute cellular rejection, 398–399 , 399f
Acute graft-versus-host disease, 410–411 , 410f
Acute (early) infection, 502
Acute-phase proteins, 87
Acute-phase response, 87
Acute rejection, 398–399
Adaptive immune response(s)
to allografts, 390–397
antigen recognition by lymphocytes in, 7f
capture and display of microbial antigens in, 9
cardinal features of, 4–5 , 9f
cell-mediated immunity in, 6
development of, 8–10
in gastrointestinal system, 318–325
graft rejection due to, 389–390 , 391f
to HIV, 506–507
humoral immunity in, 10
immunologic memory in, 4–5
initiation of, 8–10
in skin, 328–330
speciﬁcity, memory, and contraction of, 4 , 4f
spleen in, 369–370
tumors stimulating, 415–416
types of, 6 , 6f–7f
Adaptive immune system(s)
antigen binding in, 104t
components of, 2
functional anatomy of, in gastrointestinal tract, 318–321
Adaptive immunity, 2–3 , 2f
antigen recognition by lymphocytes in, 7f
cell-mediated immunity in, 6
eﬀector mechanisms to, and microbes, 365–366
to extracellular bacteria, 369–370 , 370f
features of, 3t
compared with innate immunity, 64–65
to fungi, 375 , 376f
in gastrointestinal tract, 318–325
See also Gastrointestinal system immunity, adaptive
to intracellular bacteria, 373–375 , 374f
lymphocytes in, 21–29
mechanisms of, 2f
to microbes, 1
to parasites, 382–383 , 382f
in respiratory system, 328
speciﬁcity, 65 , 66t
in tumor growth, 422–423 , 423f
to viruses, 376–379 , 377f
Adaptor proteins
in lymphocyte activation, 155 , 156f
recruitment and modiﬁcation of, 162–164
Adenosine deaminase (ADA) deﬁciency, 487t , 488–489
Adenylate kinase 2 (AK2) gene mutation, 489
Adhesion molecules, in T cell activation, 225
Adjuvants
in adaptive immunity stimulation, 99
antigens administered with, 386–387
in T cell activation, 126 , 221
Adoptive cellular immunotherapy, for tumors, 428–430
Aerobic glycolysis, during T cell activation, 171
Aﬃnity maturation
in antigen recognition, 120 , 120f
helper T cells in, 10
in humoral immune response, 261
in somatic mutation, of Ig genes, 276–278 , 277f
Aﬃnity of antibody (Kd), 118
Agammaglobulinemias, X-linked, 491 , 492t
AIDS, See Acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome (AIDS)
Alemtuzumab, 426t
Alkaline phosphatase, 562
Allelic exclusion, 204–205
Allergen(s), 459
nature of, 461
Allergic disease(s)
genetic susceptibility to, 472–474 , 473t
in humans, pathogenesis and therapy of, 474–477
immunotherapy for, 477
Th2 cells and innate lymphoid cells in, 462
Allergic reactions
basophils in
IgE binding to, 463–464
mediators produced by, 464t
morphology of, 463f
properties of, 462–470 , 463t
eosinophils in, 470
mediators produced by, 464t
morphology of, 463f
properties of, 463t , 470
IgE-dependent, 459–461 , 460f
See also IgE-dependent allergic reactions
mast cells in
activation of, 465–467 , 466f–467f
IgE binding to, 463–464
mediators derived from, 467–470 , 468f
mediators produced by, 464t
morphology of, 463f
properties of, 462–470 , 463t
Th2 cells in, 462
Allergic rhinitis, pathogenesis and therapy of, 474
Allergy(ies), 459–480
environmental factors in, 473–474
food, pathogenesis and therapy of, 476
Alloantibodies, production and function of, 397
Alloantigen(s)
nature of, 390–393
sensitization to, 395 , 396f
T cell responses to, costimulation in, 396
Alloantigen recognition
direct, 393f , 397
indirect, 393f , 397
by T cells, 393–395 , 393f
Allogeneic graft, 390
Allogeneic strains, of mice, 129–130
Allograft(s)
adaptive immune responses to, 390–393
immunogenicity of, methods to reduce, 400–403
innate immune responses, 397
Allograft rejection, 397–400
acute, 398–399 , 399f–400f
chronic, 399–400 , 401f
graft vasculopathy in, 400
hyperacute, 397–398 , 398f
paĴerns and mechanisms of, 397–400
prevention and treatment of, 400–406
immunosuppression in, 403–406
Alloreactive B cells, activation of, 397
Alloreactive lymphocytes, 390
Alloreactive T lymphocytes, activation of, 395 , 396f
costimulation in T cell responses to alloantigens in, 396
eﬀector functions, of alloreactive T cells and, 396–397
mixed lymphocyte reaction in, 396
Allosteric eﬀects, 117
Allotypes, 111–112
Alternative macrophage activation, 19
by Th2 cells, 244 , 245f
Alternative pathway, of complement activation, 295–298 , 296f–297f ,
297t
Amines, vasoactive, derived from mast cells, 469
Ampliﬁcation, in T cell subset diﬀerentiation, 239
Anaphylatoxins, 308
Anaphylaxis, 460
systemic, pathogenesis and therapy of, 474
Anemia
hemolytic, autoimmune, 439 , 441t
pernicious, 439–440 , 441t
Anergy
B cell, 352
T cell, 341–342 , 343f , 445–446
Angioedema, hereditary, 304
Anterior chamber-associated immune deviation, 332
Antiallotypic antibody, 111–112
Antibody(ies), 103–122
in adaptive immune response, 6
in adaptive immunity to viruses, 376–379
aﬃnity of, 118
antiallotypic, 111–112
anti-CD20, 449
anti-idiotypic, 111–112
anti-lymphocyte, 404
antimouse, 112–114
binding of an antigen by, 109f
constant regions of, structural features of, 109–112
deﬁciencies in, congenital immunodeﬁciencies from, 491–494 ,
492t
deﬁnition of, 103
disease-producing, from extracellular bacteria immune response,
371
eﬀector functions of, 288–289
functions of, 288f
half-life of, 115 , 116f
against helminths, 293–294
humanized, 114
humoral immunity mediated by, 287
idiotypes of, 111–112
in immune response to tumors, 422
isotypes of, 109 , 110t , 288–289 , 289t
laboratory methods using, 555–562
cytokine bead assays as, 561
ﬂow cytometry as, 558–561 , 560f
identiﬁcation and puriﬁcation of proteins as, 557
immunoﬂuorescence and immunohistochemistry as, 561–562
immunoprecipitation and immune-aﬃnity chromatography,
557–558 , 557f
labeling and detection of, in cells and tissues as, 558
measurement of antigen-antibody interactions as, 562
puriﬁcation of cells as, 561
quantitation of, by immunoassays, 555–557 , 556f
Western bloĴing as, 558 , 559f
against microbes and microbial toxins, 289 , 290f
molecules of
ﬂexibility of, 111f
structure-function relationships of, 118–121
related to antigen recognition, 118–120
related to eﬀector functions, 120–121
synthesis, assembly, and expression of, 114–115
monoclonal, 13–14 , 112–114 , 113f
natural, 264
polyclonal, 104
production of, 261–286
structure of, 104–114 , 105f
general features of, 104–107
variable regions of, structural features of, 107–108 , 108f
Antibody feedback, 282–283
Antibody responses, 261 , 262f
to HIV antigens, 506–507
to protein antigens, helper T cell-dependent, 266–281
T cell-dependent, sequence of events during, 266 , 267f
T-independent
mechanisms of, 282
protection mediated by, 282
Antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC), 293 , 293f
Antibody-mediated glomerulonephritis, 442f
Antibody-mediated hypersensitivity diseases, 438–439 , 439t
caused by antibodies against ﬁxed cell and tissue antigens, 439–
440 , 440f , 441t , 442f
immune complex-mediated, 441–444
Antibody-mediated opsonization, 289–294 , 293f
Antibody-mediated rejection, acute, 399 , 400f
Antibody-secreting plasma cells, B cell diﬀerentiation into, 278–280
Anti-CD20
for multiple sclerosis, 453
for systemic lupus erythematosus, 450
Anti-CD52, for graft rejection, 404
Antigen(s), 2–3 , 103–122
ABO blood groups, in blood transfusion, 407–408 , 408f
alteration of, in viruses, 371–372
B cell receptor for
See also B cell receptor (BCR)
biologic antigens in, 116–118 , 117f
capture of, 125–129 , 263–264 , 264f
and display of, by dendritic cells, 126–129 , 127f
and transport of, by dendritic cells, 127–128
deﬁnition of, 103
delivery of, to B cells, 263–264 , 264f
eﬀector functions and, 120–121
entry of, routes of, 127f
environmental, reactions against, causing hypersensitivity
diseases, 438
human leukocyte, 130
locus, 130
Lewis, 408
nature of, in activation of CD8+ T lymphocytes, 252
nonprotein, presentation of, to subsets of T cells, 118polyvalent,
119f , 147–148
protein, See Protein antigens
recognized by T cells, properties of, 124–125 , 124f , 124t
Rhesus (Rh), 409
structural and chemical basis of, 130
T-independent, antibody responses to, 262f , 282
tolerogenic, 337
tumor, 417–420
altered glycolipid and glycoprotein antigens, 420
cancer/testis antigens, 418 , 419f
loss of expression of, 425
neoantigens, 417–418 , 417f
of oncogenic viruses, 418
oncofetal Antigens, 419–420
overexpressed cellular proteins, 418–419 , 419f
as product of mutated genes, 417–418
vaccination with, 432–434 , 433f
Antigen binding, 129–130
biologic antigen features and, 116–118 , 117f
structural and chemical basis of, 118
Antigen II, 129–130
Antigen presentation
by B cells, 266–269 , 268f
MHC-associated, physiologic signiﬁcance of, 146–147 , 146f
to T lymphocytes, 123–150
viruses inhibiting, mechanisms of, 380 , 381f
Antigen processing, 139
class I MHC pathway of, 139–143 , 140f–141f , 140t
class II MHC pathway of, 140f , 140t , 143–145 , 143f
viruses inhibiting, mechanisms of, 380 , 381f
Antigen receptor genes
in B and T lymphocytes, rearrangement of, 191–200
diversity of, 194–195 , 195f , 199f
in lymphocyte development, rearrangement and expression of,
187–216
Antigen receptors, 104t
Antigen recognition, 118–120 , 263–266
activation of cytotoxic T lymphocytes and, 254–255 , 255f
aﬃnity maturation in, 118
diversity of, 118–120
recognition of, T cell activation and, 219–220
speciﬁcity in, 118
Antigen sampling, by intestinal dendritic cells, 316 , 325f
Antigen-antibody complexes, 108 , 119f
Antigen-antibody interactions, measurement of, 562
Antigenic determinants, 117–118 , 117f
Antigenic drift, 379
Antigenic shift, 379 , 380f
Antigen-presenting cells (APCs), 9 , 123 , 420
B cells as, 126t
See also B cell(s)
dendritic cells as, 128
See also Dendritic cell(s)
functions of, 125–126 , 126t , 127f
macrophages as, 126t , 129
See also Macrophage(s)
nature of, in activation of CD8+ T lymphocytes, 252
professional, 125–126
properties of, 125–126 , 125f , 126t , 127f
in T cell activation, 217
vascular endothelial cells as, 126t , 129
Anti-Her2/Neu, 427–428
Anti-idiotypic antibody, 111–112
Antiinﬂammatory agents
for allograft rejection, 405
for immunologic diseases, 447–450
Antimetabolites, for graft rejection, 404
Antimicrobial substances, in IL-17, 246
Antiserum, 103–104
Anti-thymocyte globulin, for graft rejection, 404
Antitoxins, 7–8
Antitumor T cells, adoptive cellular immunotherapy with, 428–430
Antiviral response, 97–98 , 97f
APCs, See Antigen-presenting cells (APCs)
Apoptosis
in peripheral tolerance, 339
T cell deletion by, 348–350 , 349f
Apoptotic bodies, 349f , 350
APRIL, 543t–549t
ARTEMIS, in hairpin opening, 198 , 198f
Arthus reaction, 443
Aspergillus fumigatus, 367t–368t
Asthma
bronchial, pathogenesis and therapy of, 474–475 , 475f–476f
exacerbations of, respiratory infections and, 473–474
genes associated with, 473t
Ataxia-telangiectasia, 496
ATG16L1, autoimmune diseases and, 357 , 358t
Atopic dermatitis, pathogenesis and therapy of, 477
Atopy, 459
See also Allergy(ies)
genes associated with, 473t
AĴenuated vaccines, 384–385 , 384t
Atypical mycobacteria, 486
Autoantibodies, diseases caused by, 440
Autoimmune diseases, 337 , 437
general features of, 353–354
immunosuppression for, 497t
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia, 439 , 441t
Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS1), 340
Autoimmune regulator (AIRE), 214 , 340 , 341f
Autoimmune thrombocytopenic purpura, 441t
Autoimmunity, 337–364
anatomic alterations in, 360–361
causing hypersensitivity, 437
factors aﬀecting, 353
gender distribution, 361 , 361f
genetic basis of, 355–359
immunologic abnormalities leading to, 354–355
infections in, 359–360 , 360f
inherited single-gene abnormalities causing, 357–359 , 359t
mechanisms of, 353–361 , 354f
MHC alleles associated with, 355–356 , 356t
polymorphisms in non-HLA genes associated with, 356–357 , 358t
regulatory T cells in, 348
Autologous graft, 390
Automated nephelometry, 569
Autophagy, 144
Autosomal recessive WAS-like disease, 495t
Avidity, of antibody-antigen interaction, 118 , 119f
B
Bacterial cell wall constituents, 70
Bacterial surface proteins, 70
B cell receptor (BCR) complex
CR2/CD21 complement receptor, 173–174 , 174f
downstream signaling pathways, 174–175
signaling chains, 172
signal initiation, 172–173 , 173f
structure of, 172 , 172f
B cell(s)
activation, immunodeﬁciency caused by defects in, 488f
alloreactive, activation of, 397
antigen capture and delivery in, 263–264 , 264f
antigen presentation by, 266–269 , 268f
as antigen-presenting cells, 126t
B-1, 24t
development and activation, defects in, 491–494
development of, 200–207
stages of, 200–207 , 202f
stages of pro-B and pre-B, 202–205 , 204f
diﬀerentiation of
into antibody-secreting plasma cells, 278–280 , 280f
defects in, common variable immunodeﬁciency from, 492–493
diversity in, generation of, 199
follicular, 205 , 206f
functions of, 125f , 126t
high-aﬃnity, selection of, 276–278 , 277f
IFN-γ in, 239
immature, 205
initial activation and migration of helper, 266 , 267f
marginal zone, 207 , 282
maturation of
Ig gene expression during, 114–115 , 115f
immunodeﬁciency caused by defects in, 493f
mature
repertoire, selection of, 207
subsets of, 205–207
memory, See Memory B cells
proliferating, in germinal center, 277 , 278f
recirculating, 206
responding to T-independent antigens, 282
subsets of, 205–207 , 282
transcriptional regulators in determining fate of activated, 281
B cell activation, 261–286
antigen-induced, 263–266
by antigens and other signals, 264–266
extrafollicular, 270
in IgE production, 460
regulation of, by FcγRIIB, 282–283 , 283f
T cell-dependent, defects in, 493–494
T-dependent, CD40L:CD40 interaction in, 269–270
B cell follicles, 206
B cell lineage, commitment to, 200–202 , 203f
B cell response(s)
extrafollicular, 270t
germinal center, 270t
B cell tolerance, 351–352
central, 351–352 , 351f
peripheral, 352 , 352f
B cell-activating factor (BAFF), 206
antagonists of, 449t
for systemic lupus erythematosus, 450
B lymphocyte response, methods for studying of, 568–569
activation of
antigen-induced, with single antigen speciﬁcity, 568
polyclonal B cell populations, 568
B cell proliferation and antibody production and, assays for, 568–
569
B cell receptor repertoire analyses, 569
B lymphocytes
anatomic organization of, 34–37
functions of, 23
in humoral immunity, 10
immunodeﬁciencies, features of, 482t
marginal zone, 24t
g
segregation of, 36f , 37
subsets of, 23 , 24t
B-1 cells, 205 , 282
B-2 cells, 205
B7 family, of costimulators, 222–223 , 222f
Bacteria
extracellular
immune evasion by, 371–372 , 372f , 372t
immune responses to, injurious eﬀects of, 370–371 , 371f
immunity to, 369–372
adaptive, 369–370 , 370f
innate, 369
mechanisms of pathogenicity of, 367t–368t
infections from
eradication of, mast cell-mediated immune reactions in, 477
respiratory, asthma or exacerbations and, 473–474
intracellular
immune evasion by, 375
immunity to, 372–375
adaptive immunity to, 373–375 , 374f
innate immunity to, 372–373 , 373f
mechanisms of pathogenicity of, 367t–368t
Bacterial vaccines, aĴenuated and inactivated, 384–385 , 384t
Bare lymphocyte syndrome, 134 , 487t , 490–491
Basophil(s), 15
IgE binding to, 463–464
in innate and adaptive immune responses, 20
mediators produced by, 464t
morphology of, 15f , 463f
normal counts of, 14t
properties of, 462–470 , 463t
Bcl-6 (B cell lymphoma gene 6), 270–271
in germinal B cell, 281
BCMA, 278–279
BCR, See B cell receptor (BCR)
Belatacept, 404–405
Bevacizumab, 426t
Binding protein (BiP), in Ig heavy and light chains, 114
Biologic antigens, features of, 116–118
Bispeciﬁc T cell engagers (BiTEs), 428
Blimp-1, 270t
Blinatumomab, 426t
Blood cell generation, bone marrow in, 15 , 15f
Blood transfusion, ABO and Rh blood group antigens and, 407–409
Blood-brain barrier, 330–331
immune privilege in eye and, 332
BLyS (B lymphocyte stimulator), 206
Bone marrow
anatomy and functions of, 30 , 31f
leukemia involving, 497t
Brain, immune privilege in, 330–332
Branchial pouches, 32
Brentuximab vedotin, 426t
Bronchial asthma, pathogenesis and therapy of, 474–475 , 475f–476f
Bruton’s agammaglobulinemia, 491
Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK), 204
Bystander activation, 359
C
Cathelicidin, 80
C chemokines, 48t
C1 inhibitor (C1 INH), 304 , 304t , 305f
C1 protein, 298
binding of, to Fc portions of IgM and IgG, 298 , 300f
structure of, 300f
C1q protein, 298 , 300t
C1r protein, 298 , 300t
C1s protein, 300t
C2 deﬁciency, 308
C2 kinin, 304
C2 protein, 300t
C3 convertase
in complement activation, 294
inhibition of formation of, 304–305 , 305f
C3 nephritic factor (C3NeF), 309
C3 protein
internal thioester bonds of, 297f
structure and function of, 300t
C3 tickover, 295–296
C3b, factor I-mediated cleavage of, 307–308 , 307f
C3d, in B cell activation, 265
C4-binding protein (C4BP), 304t
C5 convertase
in complement activation, 294
inhibition of formation of, 304–305
in late steps of complement activation, 300–302 , 301t , 302f
Cadaveric donors, 401
Calcineurin inhibitors, in immunosuppression, 403 , 404f
Cancer, 415
irradiation and chemotherapy for, 497t
metastases, 497t
Cancer/testis antigens, 418 , 419f
Candida albicans, 367t–368t
5,6-Carboxyﬂuorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester (CFSE), 567
Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA, CD6) protein, 419
Carrier, 116
Caspases, in apoptotic death, 350
Cathepsin B, 256–257
CC chemokines, 48t
CCR7, 53
on naive T cells, 36–37
CD1a-d, 551t–554t
CD1e, 551t–554t
CD1-lipid complexes, NKT cell recognition of, 147–148
CD2 (LFA-2), 551t–554t
costimulatory receptors, 171
CD3δ, 551t–554t
CD3ε, 551t–554t
CD3γ, 551t–554t
CD4, 551t–554t
CD4+ eﬀector T cells
diﬀerentiation and functions of, 233–250
immune responses in, 233–235 , 235f–236f
subsets of, 235–238 , 237f
Th1 cells as, 238–242
development of, 238 , 239f
functions of, 239–242 , 240f
macrophage activation by, 240–242 , 241f
properties of, 236–238 , 237f
Th2 cells as, 242–244
development of, 238 , 242 , 242f
functions of, 242–244 , 243f
in host defense, 244
properties of, 236–238 , 237f
Th9 cells, 247
Th17 cells as, 244–247
development of, 238 , 244–245 , 246f
functions of, 245–247 , 246f
in host defense, 247
properties of, 236–238 , 237f
CD4+ helper T cells, 418–419
in adaptive response to extracellular bacteria, 370f
Th9 cells, 247
Th22 cells, 247
CD4+ helper T lymphocytes, 24t
CD4+ T cells
antigen presentation to, 126
in defense against intracellular bacteria, 374–375 , 374f
in HIV infection, 497
CD5, 551t–554t
CD8+ cytotoxic T cells, in defense against intracellular bacteria, 373
CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), 24t , 415–416 , 416f
activation of, and recognition of antigen, 254–255 , 256f
cytotoxicity mediated by, mechanisms of, 254–257 , 255f
diﬀerentiation of CD8+ T cells into, 252f , 256–257
eﬀector functions of, 254–257
killing of target cells by, 255–257 , 257f
role of, in host defense, 257–258
T cell receptor, 158–159 , 158f
CD8+ eﬀector cells, 233
CD8+ eﬀector T cells
cytokine production by, 257
diﬀerentiation of, 251–260
into cytotoxic T lymphocytes, 252f , 256–257
functions of, 251–260
CD8+ T cell activation
costimulation, helper T cells in, role of, 252–253 , 253f
cytokines in, role of, 253
nature of antigen and antigen-presenting cells for, 252
transcription factors, 253
CD8+ T cells
antigen presentation to, 123–125
cross-presentation and, 141–142
in MHC expression, 143
responses of, inhibition of, 253–254 , 254f
CD8α, 551t–554t
CD8β, 551t–554t
CD10, 551t–554t
CD11a (LFA-1 α chain), 551t–554t
CD11b (Mac-1; CR3), 551t–554t
CD11c (p150,95; CR4α chain), 551t–554t
CD14, 551t–554t
CD16a (FcγRIIIA), 551t–554t
CD16b (FcγRIIIB), 551t–554t
CD18, 551t–554t
CD19, 302 , 551t–554t
CD20, 551t–554t
for systemic lupus erythematosus, 450
CD21 (CR2; C3d receptor), 551t–554t
CD22, 283 , 551t–554t
CD23 (FcεRIIB), 551t–554t
CD25 (IL-2 receptor α chain), 346 , 449t , 551t–554t
autoimmune diseases and, 357 , 358t
in T cell activation, 224
CD27, as memory T cell marker, 230
CD28, 342–343 , 344f , 551t–554t
of costimulators, 220–223 , 221f–222f
costimulatory receptors, 170
CD29, 551t–554t
CD30 (TNFRSF8), 551t–554t
CD31 (platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule 1), 551t–554t
CD32 (FcγRII), 551t–554t
CD34, 53 , 551t–554t
CD35 (type 1 complement receptor, CR1), 551t–554t
CD36, 551t–554t
CD40, 551t–554t
CD40L and, interaction of, in T-dependent B cell activation, 269–
270
in isotype switching, 274–275
CD40 ligand (CD40L, CD154)
CD40 and, interaction of, in T-dependent B cell activation, 269–
270
in T cell activation, 126 , 223 , 224f
CD40L gene, mutations in, 269–270
CD43, 551t–554t
CD44, 234 , 551t–554t
CD45 (leukocyte common antigen [LCA]), 28–29 , 551t–554t
CD45R, 551t–554t
CD45RA, 28–29
on naive T cells, 230
CD45RO, 28–29
on memory T cells, 230
CD46 (membrane cofactor protein), 551t–554t
CD47, 551t–554t
CD49d, 551t–554t
CD52, 551t–554t
CD54 (ICAM-1), 551t–554t
CD55 (decay-accelerating factor), 551t–554t
CD58 (leukocyte function-associated antigen 3), 551t–554t
CD59, 304t , 305–306 , 551t–554t
CD62E (E-selectin), 551t–554t
CD62L (L-selectin), 551t–554t
CD62P (P-selectin), 551t–554t
CD64 (FcγRI), 551t–554t
CD6e (carcinoembryonic antigen), 551t–554t
CD69, 551t–554t
in T cell activation, 224
CD74 (class II MHC invariant chain), 551t–554t
CD79a (Igα), 551t–554t
CD79b (Igβ), 551t–554t
CD80 (B7-1), 551t–554t
CD81 (target for antiproliferative antigen 1), 302
CD86 (B7-2), 551t–554t
CD88 (C5a receptor), 551t–554t
CD89 (Fcα receptor Facer), 551t–554t
CD90 (Thy-1), 551t–554t
CD94, 551t–554t
CD95 (Fas), 551t–554t
CD102 (ICAM-2), 551t–554t
CD103 (αE integrin subunit), 551t–554t
CD106 (vascular cell adhesion molecule 1), 551t–554t
CD134 (OX40, TNFRSF4), 551t–554t
CD150 (signaling lymphocyte activation molecule), 551t–554t
CD152 (cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated protein 4), 551t–554t
CD154 (CD40 ligand), 551t–554t
CD158(killer Ig-like receptor), 551t–554t
CD159a (NKG2A), 551t–554t
CD159c (NKG2C), 551t–554t
CD162 (P-selectin glycoprotein ligand 1), 551t–554t
CD178 (Fas ligand), 551t–554t
CD206 (mannose receptor), 551t–554t
CD223 ( lymphocyte-activation gene 3), 551t–554t
CD244 (2B4), 551t–554t
CD247, 551t–554t
CD252 (OX40 ligand), 551t–554t
CD267 (TACI), 551t–554t
CD268 (BAFF receptor), 551t–554t
CD269 (B cell maturation antigen), 551t–554t
CD273 (PD-L2), 551t–554t
CD274 (PD-L1), 551t–554t
CD275 (ICOS ligand), 551t–554t
CD278 (inducible costimulator), 551t–554t
CD279 (PD1), 551t–554t
CD303 (BDCA2,CLEC4C), 551t–554t
CD314 (NKG2D), 551t–554t
CD319 (SLAM-F7, CS1), 551t–554t
CD357 (GITR, TNFRSF18), 551t–554t
CD363 (type 1 sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 1), 551t–554t
CD365 (hepatitis A virus cellular receptor 1), 551t–554t
CD369 (C-type lectin domain family 7), 551t–554t
Celiac disease, 455
pathogenesis, 455–456 , 456f
Cell exhaustion, T cell, 253–254 , 254f
Cell(s), sorting of, ﬂuorescence-activated, 560f , 561
Cell surface receptor(s), signaling from, 151
in lymphocyte development, 188
Cell-associated paĴern recognition receptors
cytosolic receptors, 72–77
autoinﬂammatory syndromes, 73–74
DNA sensors, 72–74
gain-of-function mutations, 73–74
inﬂammasomes, 75–77 , 76f
NOD1 and NOD2, 72 , 73f
RLRs, 74–75
STING pathway, 73 , 74f
TLRs, 67–72 , 69f
types, 67
Cell-mediated cytotoxicity, antibody-dependent, 293 , 293f
Cell-mediated diseases, 446t
Cell-mediated immune defects, in severe combined
immunodeﬁciencies, 492t
Cell-mediated immune responses
CD4+ T cells in, 233–235 , 235f–236f
HIV-speciﬁc, 506
Cell-mediated immunity
in adaptive immunity, 10
overview of, 6–8
Cellular functions, abnormal, 439–440
Cellular immunity, assays for, 570
Cellular rejection, acute, 398–399 , 399f
Central lymphoid organs, 338–339
Central tolerance, 191 , 213–214 , 338–339 , 338f
in B cell, 351–352 , 351f
in T cell, 339–340 , 340f
Cetuximab, 426t
CH50 level, 569
α Chain, in Fcγ receptors, 290
Chaperones, in Ig heavy and light chains, 114
Checkpoint signaling defects, pre-TCR, 489
p
g
g
p
Checkpoints, in lymphocyte development, 190 , 191f
Chédiak-Higashi syndrome, 484t , 485
ChemoaĴraction, 47
Chemokine(s), 35–36 , 47–49
functions, 49
structure, production, and receptors of, 47–49
Chemokine receptors
for HIV, 500
in T cell activation, 225
Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cell therapy, 428–430 , 430f
CHIPS (Chemokine inhibitory protein of staphylococci), 310
Chlamydia, 367t–368t
Chromatography, immuno-aﬃnity, 557–558 , 557f
Chronic graft-versus-host disease, 410
Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD), 483 , 484t
Chronic rejection, graft vasculopathy and, 400 , 401f
Chymase, 469
C-Kit ligand, 19–20
Class I MHC pathway, for protein antigens processing and
presentation, 139–143 , 140f–141f , 140t
Class II MHC pathway, for protein antigens processing and
presentation, 140f , 140t , 143–145 , 143f
Class II-associated invariant chain peptide (CLIP), 144–145
Classical dendritic cells, 20
Classical macrophage activation, 19 , 239–242 , 240f
by Th1 cells, 240–242 , 241f
Classical monocytes, 16
Classical pathway of complement activation, 298 , 299f–300f , 300t
Cleavage, in V(D)J recombination, 197
Clinical transplantation, 389 , 390f
Clonal deletion, 191
Clonal expansion
in adaptive immune responses, 9
of T cells, 217–219 , 218f
Clonal selection hypothesis, 4 , 5f
Clostridium tetani, 367t–368t
Cluster of diﬀerentiation (CD) system, for naming cell surface
molecules, 13–14
Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats
(CRISPR)
CRISPR-associated nuclease 9 (Cas9) system, 564–566
Coinhibitors, of T cells, 223
Collectins, 87
Colony-stimulating factors, 15
Combinatorial diversity, in B and T cells, 198–199 , 200t
Commensal microbiome, role of, in immune regulation, 326–327
Commensal organisms, intestinal, 324
Common variable immunodeﬁciency, 492–493 , 492t
Complement, levels and function of, 569
Complement activation
alternative pathways of, 295–298 , 296f–297f , 297t
classical pathways of, 298 , 299f–300f , 300t
in innate immunity to extracellular bacteria, 369
late steps of, 300–302 , 301t , 302f
lectin pathway of, 298–300 , 301t
pathways of, 294–302 , 295f
products of, 294
regulation of, 303–307 , 304t , 305f–306f
Complement proteins, 294
of alternative pathway of complement, 297t
of classical pathway of complement, 300t
of lectin pathway of complement, 301t
receptors for, 302–303 , 303t
Complement receptor
of immunoglobulin family (CRIg), 303
type 1, 302 , 303t
type 2, 302 , 303t
type 3, 302–303 , 303t
type 4, 303 , 303t
Complement receptor type 2, in B cell activation, 265 , 265f
Complement system, 294–310
activation of, See Complement activation
deﬁciencies, 308–309
evasion of, 309–310
functions of, 307–308
complement-mediated cytolysis in, 308
inﬂammatory response in, stimulation of, 308
opsonization and phagocytosis in, 307–308 , 307f
pathologic eﬀects of, 309
Complementarity determining region 3 (CDR3), 193
Complementarity-determining regions (CDRs), of Ig domain, 107–
108 , 109f
Complement-mediated cytolysis, 307f , 308
Complement-mediated cytotoxicity tests, 402–403
Conformational determinants, 118
Congenital immunodeﬁciency(ies), 482–497
ataxia-telangiectasia as, 496
defects in
of B cell development and activation, 491–494 , 492t
of innate immunity, 483–486 , 484t
severe combined, 486–491 , 487t
T lymphocyte activation and function, 494–496 , 495t
therapeutic approaches to, 496–497
WiskoĴ-Aldrich syndrome, 496
Conjugate vaccines, 280–281 , 384t , 385 , 385f
Constant regions, of antibody, 109–112
Contact sensitivity, 445
Cortical epithelial cells, 32
Corticosteroids
for allograft rejection, 405
for asthma, 475 , 476f
for immunologic diseases, 447
Corynebacterium diphtheriae, 367t–368t
y
p
Costimulators
B7 family of, 220–223 , 222f
CD28 family of, 220–223 , 221f–222f
pathways of, 223
in T cell activation, 126 , 220–223 , 220f
in T cell responses to alloantigens, 396
therapeutic, blockade, 223–224 , 224f
Costimulatory blockade
for allograft rejection, 404–405
to induce donor-speciﬁc tolerance, 175–176
therapeutic, 223–224 , 224f
Costimulatory receptors, 157
Cre/loxP recombination system, 564
Crohn’s disease, postulated pathogenesis, 454 , 455f
Cross-presentation, 141–142 , 252
Cross-priming, 141–142
Cross-reaction, 118
Cryptococcus neoformans, 367t–368t , 375
CTLA-4 (cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen 4), 176 , 223 , 347
in regulation of T cell responses, 342–343 , 344f , 345t
CTLs, See Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs)
C-type lectin-like receptors, 77 , 78t
microbial carbohydrates, 77–78
Cutaneous immune system, 314t , 328–330
cellular components of, 329f
innate and adaptive immune responses in skin, 328–330 , 331f
CX3C chemokines, 48t
CXC chemokine receptors, for HIV, 500
CXC chemokines, 48t
CXCL13, in B cell migration, 48t
Cyclophilin, 403
Cyclosporine, on allograft rejection, 403 , 404f
CyTOF, 561
Cytokine(s), 543t–549t
antagonists of, for immunologic diseases, 447–449 , 449t
in CD4+ T cell subsets, 235–236
derived from mast cells, 470
in eosinophil activation, 470
in gastrointestinal system immunity regulation, 326
general properties of, 36–37
hematopoietic, 32t
inﬂammation mediated by, diseases caused by, 444–446 , 446t ,
447f–448f
in innate immunity, 9–10
in MHC expression, 134 , 134f
produced by regulatory T cells, 347–348
production of
by CD8+ eﬀector T cells, 257
from mast cell activation, 465–466
role of, in CD8+ T cell diﬀerentiation, 253
T cell activation, 225–226
Cytokine bead assays, 561
Cytokine receptors, 99
classes of, 177–180
IL-1, 179
IL-17, 179–180
TNF receptor family, 177–179 , 179f
type I, 177
type II, 177
intracellular signaling pathways, 176
JAK-STAT signaling, 180–181 , 180f
NF-κB activation pathways, 181–183 , 182f
structure of, 177 , 178f
transforming growth factor-β signaling, 183–184 , 183f
Cytokine secretion assays, 567
Cytokine signaling components, autosomal recessive mutations in,
489
Cytokine stem cell factor, 19–20
Cytokine therapy, 434
Cytokine-secreting innate lymphoid cells, 29–30
Cytolysis, complement-mediated, 307f , 308
Cytomegalovirus (CMV), 486
Cytosolic proteins
peptide-class II MHC complex assembly in endoplasmic
reticulum and, 143–144
processing and presentation, 139–143 , 141f
proteasomal digestion of, 142–143
transport of peptides from, to endoplasmic reticulum, 142
Cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA-4), 424
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), 10 , 13–14 , 219
diseases caused by, 446–447
and viral infections, 376–377
tissue injury from, 377
Cytotoxicity, cell-mediated, antibody-dependent, 293 , 293f
D
Damage-associated molecular paĴerns (DAMPs), 66 , 67t
Death by neglect, 210f , 212
Death receptor, of apoptosis, 349–350 , 349f
Decay-accelerating factor (DAF), 304t
Dectin, 78 , 375
Defective pre-TCR checkpoint, 487t
Defective T cell signaling, 487t
Defective T cell thymic egress, 487t
Defensins, 79–80
in innate immunity in gut, 317
Degranulation, from mast cell activation, 465
Delayed xenograft rejection, 407
Delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH), 235 , 445–446 , 447f–448f
Deletion
in B cell tolerance, 351–352
in T cell tolerance, 339–340 , 340f
Dendritic cell(s), 3 , 9 , 20–21 , 21f , 80 , 485
in antigen capture
display and, 126–129 , 127f
transport and, 128–129
classical, 20 , 127
follicular, 264
functions of, 125f , 126t
in gastrointestinal immune system, 318
intestinal, antigen sampling by, 325f
in lamina propria, in innate immunity in gut, 325f
maturation of, 22f
in naive T cell activation, 217
plasmacytoid, 127
properties of, 125–126
in skin, 127f
subsets of, 20
in T cell subset diﬀerentiation, 244–245
tolerogenicity and, 350–351
Dendritic cell (DC) vaccines, in tumor vaccination, 432 , 433f
Denosumab, 426t
Desensitization, for allergic disease, 477
Determinants, 4 , 134
antigenic, 117–118 , 117f
on macromolecules, 116
Diabetes mellitus, type 1, 446t , 453–454
new therapies for, 454
pathogenesis of, 454
Diapedesis, 50
DiGeorge syndrome, 487t
due to defective thymic epithelial development, 490
T cell deﬁciency in, 32
Diphtheria toxin, 369
Direct recognition, of alloantigens, 393 , 393f
Diversity
in adaptive immune responses, 3t , 4
in antigen recognition, 118–120
DNA vaccines, 386
in tumor vaccination, 432
Donor, 389
Donor cells, direct recognition of MHC alloantigens on, 394f
Donor-speciﬁc antibodies, 397
Donor-speciﬁc tolerance, 406
Double-negative thymocytes, 209 , 211f
Double-positive thymocytes, 210–212 , 211f
Double-stranded break, 487t
Driver mutations, 417
Drugs, acquired immunodeﬁciencies from, 497
Dysgenesis, reticular, 487t , 489
E
E2A transcription factor, in commiĴing lymphocytes to B lineage,
188–189
EBF transcription factor, in commiĴing lymphocytes to B lineage,
188–189
Eczema, 445
pathogenesis and therapy of, 477
Eﬀector cells, 9
Eﬀector functions
of alloreactive T cells, 395–397
of antibody, features related to, 120–121
Eﬀector lymphocyte(s), 28 , 28f
Eﬀector memory T cells, 230
Eﬀector T cells, 217
diﬀerentiation of activated T cells into, 228
migration to sites of infection, 44f
Electrophoresis, 104
ELISA (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay), 555–557 , 556f
ELISpot assay, 568–569
Elite controllers, of HIV, 507
Embryonic stem (ES) cell line, 564
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
peptide transport from cytosol to, 142
peptide-class I MHC complex assembly in, 142
resident aminopeptidase (ERAP), 142–143
Endotoxin, 369
Environmental antigen, reactions against, causing hypersensitivity
diseases, 438
Environmental factors, in allergy, 473–474
Environmental triggers, for autoimmunity, 353 , 354f
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), 555–557 , 556f
Enzymes, granule, derived from mast cells, 468f , 469
Eomesodermin, 253
Eosinophil(s), 15
activation of, in late-phase reaction sites, 470
in cell-mediated immunity, 10
in innate and adaptive immune responses, 20
mediators produced by, 464t
morphology of, 15f , 463f
normal counts of, 14t
properties of, 463t , 470
Epithelial barriers, at immunity, 313–315
See also Regional immunity
Epithelial cells
as antigen-presenting cells, 126t , 129
thymic medullary, 214
Epitope spreading, 453
in autoimmune disorders, 354
Epitopes, 4
antigenic, 117f
immunodominant, 146–147 , 147f
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), 269 , 367t–368t , 380
ER, See Endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
Erythroblastosis fetalis, 409
Escherichia coli, 367t–368t
E-selectin, in leukocyte recruitment, 45–46
Exhaustion, 380–381
Exotoxins, 369
Extracellular bacteria, immunity to, 367t–368t , 369–372
See also Bacteria, extracellular
Extracellular fungi, 367t–368t
Extrafollicular B cell activation, 270
Extrafollicular B cell response, 270t
Extrinsic pathway, of apoptosis, 349–350 , 349f
Eye, immune privilege in, 332
F
Fab (fragment, antigen binding), 106 , 107f
Factor B, 297–298 , 297t
Factor D, 297–298 , 297t
Factor H, 304t
Factor I, 304t , 305
Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis syndromes, 495–496
Fas ligand (Fas-L), 349–350
in target cell killing, 256
Fc (fragment, crystallizable), 106 , 107f
Fc receptors
leukocyte, 290–293 , 292f
regulation of humoral immune responses by, 282–283 , 283f
Fcε receptor, in IgE binding, 463–464 , 465f
Fcγ receptors, 290
FcγRI (CD64) as, 291
FcγRII (CD32) as, 291
FcγRIIA as, 291
FcγRIIB as, 291
FcγRIIC as, 291
in phagocytosis, 292 , 293f
subunit composition of, 292f
FcγRIIB, 176
associated with autoimmune disease, 357 , 358t
in B cell activation regulation, 282–283 , 283f
inhibitory signaling by, 293
FcRn, 290
Feedback, antibody, 282–283
α-Fetoprotein (AFP), 419
Fetus
mammalian, immune privilege in, 332–333
passive immunity, 333 , 334f
Fever, 96
Fibroblastic reticular cells (FRCs), 35–36 , 36f , 128–129
Fingolimod (FTY720), 55
for multiple sclerosis, 453
First-set rejection, 389–390 , 391f
Flare, 470–471
Flow cytometric assays, 402–403
Flow cytometry, 558–561 , 560f
and circulating immune cells, determination of, 569–570
Fluorescent dyes, 567
Fluorescent-activated cell sorter, 560f , 561
Follicles, 34
B cells, 205
Follicular B cells, 24t , 205 , 206f
Follicular dendritic cells (FDCs), 264 , 271
in HIV infection, 503
Follicular helper T cells, induction and functions of, 270–271 , 271f
Food allergies, pathogenesis and therapy of, 476
Formyl peptide receptor-1 (FPR1), 79
FoxN1 deﬁciency, 487t
FoxP3, 345
Fractalkine, 48t
Fungi
immunity to, 375
innate and adaptive immunity to, 375 , 376f
mechanisms of pathogenicity of, 367t–368t
G
Gamma globulins, 104
Gangliosides, 420
Gasdermin D, 75
Gastrointestinal system immunity, 315–327 , 315f
adaptive, 318–325 , 319f
functional anatomy in, 318–321
innate, 316–318
regulation
commensal microbiome in, 326–327
by regulatory T cells and cytokines, 325–326
GATA3, 242
GATA-3 transcription factor, in commiĴing lymphocytes to T
lineage, 212–213
Gemtuzumab ozogamicin, 426t
Gene(s)
antigen receptor, See Antigen receptor genes
associated with atopy and asthma, 473t
Ig, germline organization of, 192–194 , 192f
immune response, 130
major histocompatibility, 130–134
human and mouse loci for, 132–133 , 133f
minor histocompatibility, 130
mutated, neoantigens encoded by, 417–418
Gene replacement, for congenital immunodeﬁciencies, 496–497
Gene targeting, and transgenic mice, 562–566 , 564f–565f
Generative lymphoid organs, 27–28
Genetic basis, of autoimmunity, 355–359 , 358t–359t
Genetic susceptibility
to allergic disease, 472–474 , 473t
for autoimmunity, 353 , 354f
Genitourinary system, immunity in, 328
Germinal center B cell response, 270t
Germinal center reaction, 270
in lymph node, 264
Germinal centers, 34–35 , 272f
B cells in, proliferating, 277
high aﬃnity B cell selection in, 276–278 , 277f
Germline transcripts
with AID, mechanism of, 274
in isotype switching, 275f
Globulin, anti-thymocyte, for graft rejection, 404
Glomerulonephritis
antibody-mediated, 442f
poststreptococcal, 444 , 444t
GlyCAM-1 (glycan-bearing cell adhesion molecule 1), 45t
Glycocalyx, 316–317
Glycolipid antigens, altered, 420
Glycoprotein antigens, altered, 420
Glycoprotein C-1, 310
Goodpasture syndrome, 441t
Gout, 77
G protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs), 154
GP160, 310
Graft(s), 389
allogeneic, 390
autologous, 390
syngeneic, 390
xenogeneic, 390
Graft rejection, 389–390 , 392f
acute, 398–399
acute antibody-mediated, 399
acute cellular, 398–399 , 399f
allograft, 389–390 , 397–400
hyperacute, 397–398
Graft vasculopathy, chronic rejection and, 400
Graft-versus-host disease, 410–411
Graft-versus-leukemia eﬀect, 434
Granule enzymes, derived from mast cells, 468f , 469
Granule fusion, 495t
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), in neutrophil
production, 15
Granulocyte CSF (G-CSF), 543t–549t
Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), 329
Granulocyte-monocyte CSF (GM-CSF), 543t–549t
y
y
Granulomas, 446 , 448f
Granulomatous inﬂammation, 446 , 448f
Granulysin, 255–256
Granzymes, 82
function of, 255
Graves’ disease, 441t
Gut-associated lymphoid tissues (GALT), 318
H
Hairpin opening and end-processing, in V(D)J recombination, 198 ,
198f
Haplotype, MHC, 132–133
Hapten, 116
Hapten-carrier complex, 116
Hapten-carrier eﬀect, 266–269
HAT medium, 113f
Hay fever, 475–476
Heavy chain isotype (class) switching, 115
in humoral immune response, 272–276 , 274f
mechanism of, 274–275 , 275f
Heavy chains, in antibody molecules, 105–106 , 105f
C regions of, 106
tissue distribution of antibody molecules and, 121
membrane and secreted forms of, 110–111 , 111f
Helminthic infections
adaptive immunity to, 383
innate immunity to, 381
Helminthic parasites, eradication of, IgE-initiated immune
reactions in, 477
Helminths, antibody-mediated clearance of, 293–294
Helper B cells, initial activation and migration of, 266 , 268f
Helper T cells, 10
antibody presentation on B cells to, 266–269 , 268f
antibody responses to protein antigens, 266–281
B cell activation mediated by, 269f
in CD8+ T cell diﬀerentiation, 252–253 , 253f
follicular, 270-271 271f , See Follicular helper T cells
initial activation and migration of, 266 , 268f
type 2 cytokine-producing, activation of, 461–462
Hematopoiesis, 30 , 31f
Hematopoietic chimerism, to induce donor-speciﬁc tolerance, 406
Hematopoietic cytokines, 32t
Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs)
in lymphocyte development, 188
transplantation of, 409–411
Hemolytic anemia, autoimmune, 441t
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, 258
Hepatitis B, 367t–368t , 379
Hereditary angioedema, 304
Herpes simplex, 367t–368t
Heterotopic transplantation, 389
H-ﬁcolin, in complement activation, 298–300
High endothelial venules (HEVs), 35 , 36f , 46
Hinge region, in antibodies, 106
Histamine, derived from mast cells, 468f , 469
Histocompatibility molecules, 390
Histocompatibility-2, 129–130
Histoplasma capsulatum, 367t–368t , 375
HIV, See Human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV)
HLA, See Human leukocyte antigens (HLA)
HLA-DM, 144–145
Homing
leukocyte, 43
of naive T cells
into lymph nodes and lymphoid tissues, 52–55
into spleen, 56
Homing properties, of intestinal lymphocytes, 320f
Homologous recombination, 563–566
Hormones, in autoimmunity, 361
Horror autotoxicus, 353
Horseradish peroxidase, 562
Host, 389
Host defense
role of CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes in, 257–258
Th2 cells in, 244
Th17 cells in, 247
Host restriction factors, 506
HSCs, See Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs)
Human antibody isotypes, 110t
Human antimouse antibody (HAMA), 112–114
Human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV), 367t–368t , 498–509
See also Acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome (AIDS)
clinical course of, 504f , 505–506
clinical features of, 505–506 , 506t
elite controllers and long-term nonprogressors, 507
and genes, 498
HIV-1 genome, 499f
immune evasion by, mechanisms of, 507
immune responses to, 506–507
infection, 497t
progression, 503f
life cycle, 498–502 , 500f–501f
mechanisms of immunodeﬁciency caused by, 502–504
pathogenesis of, 502–505 , 503f–504f
reservoirs of, 504–505
structure of, 498 , 499f
transmission of, 505
treatment and prevention, 507–509
vaccines against, development of, 507–509
viral turnover of, 504–505
virology, 498
Human leukocyte antigen G (HLA-G), 333
in trophoblast cells, 333
Human leukocyte antigens (HLA), 130
autoimmune diseases and, 356 , 356t
matching, in organ transplantation, 392 , 402f
Humanized antibody, 112–114
Humoral immune response(s), 173–174 , 174f
characteristics of, elucidated by hapten-carrier conjugates, 268
HIV-speciﬁc, 506
overview of, 261–263 , 262f
phases of, 262f
primary and secondary, 261–262 , 263f
regulation of, by Fc receptors, 282–283 , 283f
to T cell-dependent antibody responses, sequence of events
during, 266 , 267f
Humoral immunity, 10 , 233
assays for, 569–570
complement system in, 294–310
defects in, in severe combined immunodeﬁciencies, 486–491
eﬀector mechanisms of, 287–312
to extracellular bacteria, 369–370
in gastrointestinal tract, 321–323
overview of, 6–8 , 287–289
vaccine-induced, 288t
vaccines and, 384
to viral infections, 377–378
Hybridomas, 112 , 113f
Hygiene hypothesis, 473
Hyperacute rejection, in xenogeneic transplantation, 397–398 , 398f
Hyper-IgE syndromes (HIES), 247 , 494
Hyper-IgM syndromes, 494
Hypersensitivity, 437–438
delayed-type, 445–446 , 447f–448f
y
yp
immediate, 459
See also Allergic reactions, Allergy(ies)
Hypersensitivity diseases, 437–458
antibody-mediated diseases, 438
causes of, 437–438
deﬁnition of, 437
immediate (type I), 438
immune complex-mediated diseases, 441–444
immunologic diseases, 450–456
immunologic, therapeutic approaches to, 447–450 , 448f
mechanisms and classiﬁcation of reactions in, 438 , 439t
T cell-mediated (type IV) hypersensitivity, 438
T lymphocytes, 444–447
Hyperthyroidism, 441t
Hypervariable regions, in Ig molecules, 107–108 , 108f
Hypogammaglobulinemias, 492t
I
I exon, in isotype switching, 274–275
90Y-Ibritumomab tiuxetan, 426t
ICF syndrome, 492t
Idiotypes, of antibodies, 111–112
Ig gene
germline organization of, 192–194 , 192f
somatic mutation of, aﬃnity maturation and, 276–278 , 277f
Ig proteins, domains of, 193f
Ig superfamily, 106–107
Ig V genes, somatic mutations in, 277 , 278f
IgA, 109 , 110t
deﬁciency of, selective, 492t
gut, 321
across epithelial cells, 324f
class switching in, 321–323
gut, 322f
IgD, 110t
IgE, 110t
allergic reactions dependent on, 459–461 , 460f
See also IgE-dependent allergic reactions
binding of, to mast cells and basophils, 463–464
in cell-mediated immunity, 10
immune reactions mediated by, protective role of, 477–478
production of, 461–462
IgE-dependent allergic reactions, 470–472 , 471f
overview of, 459–461
sequence of events in, 460 , 460f
IgG, 110t
gut, 321
IgG2, deﬁciency of, selective, 492t
IgM, 110t
IL-1 antagonists, in gout, 67–69 , 91–92
IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1RA), 100
IL-12/IFN-γ pathway, defects in, 483
Immature B cells, 205
Immediate hypersensitivity, 438 , 439t
See also Allergic reactions, Allergy(ies)
Immediate hypersensitivity reactions, 470–471 , 472f
late-phase reaction and, 472
pathogenesis and therapy of, 475–477
sequence of events in, 460 , 460f
Immediate reaction, of allergy, 470–471 , 472f
Immune checkpoint blockade, 430–431 , 431f
Immune complexes, 118 , 119f
Immune complex-mediated hypersensitivity diseases, 438 , 439t ,
441–444 , 443f , 444t
experimental models of, 441–443 , 443f
pathogenesis of, 443–444
Immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked
(IPEX), 345
Immune evasion
by extracellular bacteria, 371–372 , 372f , 372t
by HIV, mechanisms of, 507
by intracellular bacteria, 375
by parasites, 383–384 , 383t
by viruses, 379–381 , 380f , 380t
Immune privilege
in brain, 330–332
in eye, 332
of mammalian fetus, 332–333
in testis, 332
tissues, 330–332
Immune reactions
IgE-mediated, protective role of, 477–478
mast cell-mediated, protective role of, 477–478
Immune receptors, 151–186
aĴenuation of, 175–176
B cells, 175–176
inhibitory signaling, 175 , 175f
natural killer cells, 175–176
T cells, 175–176
ubiquitin-dependent degradation, 176 , 177f
B cells and T cells, antigen receptors, 156
tyrosine-containing motifs, 155–156 , 156f
y
g
Immune regulation, role of commensal microbiome in, 326–327
Immune response(s)
adaptive, in skin, 328–330
to extracellular bacteria, injurious eﬀects of, 370–371 , 371f
to HIV, 506–507
inhibition of
and parasites, 383
and viruses, 376–377 , 377f
innate and adaptive immunity, 1
to microbes, 366f
overview of, 365–369
to parasites, 382t
positive feedback loops regulating, 5
properties and overview of, 1–12
to tumors, 420–423
adaptive immunity in, 422–423 , 423f
antibodies in, 422
evasion of, 423–425 , 424f
growth of, 416–417
inhibition of, 424–425
innate immunity in, 422–423 , 423f
macrophages in, 422
natural killer (NK) cells in, 422
T lymphocytes in, 420–422 , 421f
type 2, 460
to viral infections, 379
Immune response genes, 130
Immune surveillance, 415
Immune synapse, 254
Immune system(s)
cells of, 13–42
cutaneous, 38–39
functional defects of, in HIV disease, 503
gastrointestinal, 315–327 , 315f
See also Gastrointestinal system immunity
mucosal, 38–39
tissues of, 13–42
Immune-mediated inﬂammatory diseases, 353
Immunity
adaptive, 2–3
See also Adaptive immunity
cell-mediated, See Cell-mediated immunity
at epithelial barriers, 313–336
See also Regional immunity
general features of, 313–315
to extracellular bacteria, 367t–368t , 369–372
See also Bacteria, extracellular
to fungi, 375
humoral, See Humoral immunity
to intracellular bacteria, 372–375
See also Bacteria, intracellular
to microbes, 365–388
mucosal, 313
to parasites, 381–384
See also Parasite(s)
regional, 313 , 314t
See also Regional immunity
to tumors, 415–436
experimental demonstration of, 415–416
to viruses, 375–381
See also Virus(es)
Immuno-aﬃnity chromatography, 557–558 , 557f
Immunoassays, quantitation of antigen by, 555–557 , 556f
Immunodeﬁciency(ies)
acquired, 497–498 , 497t
aﬀecting T or B lymphocytes, features of, 482t
after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, 411
common variable, 492t
congenital, 482–497
multisystem disorders with, 496
Immunodeﬁciency diseases
acquired, 498–509
See also Acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome (AIDS)
congenital, 482–497
See also Congenital immunodeﬁciency(ies)
general features of, 481
overview of, 481–482
Immunodiagnosis, monoclonal antibodies for, 112
Immunodominant epitopes, 146–147 , 147f
Immunoﬂuorescence, 561–562
Immunogenicity
of allografts, methods to reduce, 400–403 , 402f
of protein antigens, 146–147 , 147f
reduction of, and parasites, 383
Immunogens, 7–8 , 116
Immunoglobulin (Ig) domain(s), 104 , 105f
Immunoglobulin E (IgE), See IgE
Immunoglobulin G (IgG), intravenous, 449
Immunoglobulin M (IgM), See IgM
Immunoglobulins (Igs), 104t
See also Antibody(ies)
molecules of, synthesis, assembly, and expression of, 114–115
Immunohistochemistry, 561–562
Immunologic assays, clinical diagnostic applications of, 569–570
Immunologic diseases, pathogenesis and therapeutic strategies for,
447–450
Immunologic memory, 4–5
Immunologic tolerance, 337–364
B lymphocyte tolerance as, 351–352
overview on, 337–339
T lymphocyte tolerance as, 339–351
y
p
y
Immunological abnormalities, leading to autoimmunity, 354–355
Immunology
laboratory techniques in, 555–562
See also Laboratory techniques
transplantation, 389–414
See also Transplantation immunology
to tumors, 415–436
experimental demonstration of, 415–416
Immunomagnetic reagents, 561
Immunomodulators, 386–387
Immunoperoxidase technique, 562
Immunoprecipitation, 557–558 , 557f
Immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs), 156
Immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motif (ITIM), 156
Immunoreceptor tyrosine-based switch motif (ITSM), 156
Immunosuppression
for allograft rejection, 403–406
iatrogenic, 497
Immunotherapy
for allergic diseases, 477
for multiple sclerosis, 453
for tumors, 425–434 , 425f
antibody-like molecules, 426–428 , 427f
adoptive cellular immunotherapy, 428–430
passive, monoclonal antibodies, 426–428 , 427f
T cell inhibitory pathways, 430–432
vaccination with tumor antigen, 432–434 , 433f
Immunotoxins, 427
Inactivated bacterial vaccines, 384–385 , 384t
Inactivated C3b (iC3b) fragment, 46
Indirect recognition, of alloantigens, 393f , 395
Induction therapy, 405
Infection(s)
acquired immunodeﬁciencies from, 498
control of, in congenital immunodeﬁciencies, 485
increased susceptibility, due to immunodeﬁciency, 481–482 , 482t
sites of
migration of eﬀector T lymphocytes to, 54f , 56–57
migration of neutrophils and monocytes to, 51
Infectious diseases, common, eﬀectiveness of vaccines for, 2t
Inﬂammasomes, 75–77 , 76f
Inﬂammation, 369
antibody-mediated, 439 , 440f
in autoimmunity, 343
chemokines in, 49
cytokine-mediated, diseases caused by, 444–446 , 446t , 447f–448f
deﬁnition of, 3
from extracellular bacteria immune response, 370
granulomatous, 446 , 448f
leukocyte recruitment in, 45–47
T cell, 235
Inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD), 320–321 , 446t , 454–455
immunotherapies, 455
pathogenesis, 454–455 , 455f
Inﬂammatory diseases
in CD4+ T cell subsets, 237
immune-mediated, 353
Th17 cells in, 247
Inﬂammatory response
activated phagocytes, 94–96 , 94f
acute, 88 , 89f
IL-1, 91–92
IL-6, 92
IL-12, 93
IL-15, 93
IL-18, 93
innate immunity, major proinﬂammatory cytokines, 88–93 , 90t
systemic and pathologic consequences, 96–97
TNF, 89–91 , 91f
vascular changes and leukocyte migration, 93–94
Inﬂuenza, 367 , 367t–368t , 379
Inhibitory receptor(s)
in regulation of T cell responses, 342–345
signaling by, in peripheral B cell tolerance, 352
Innate immune response(s)
in autoimmunity, 355
mechanisms, 99–100
in skin, 328–330
Innate immunity, 2 , 2f , 3t
assays for, 569
cellular components of
cytokine-producing innate lymphoid cells, 80–85
dendritic cells, 80
epithelial barriers, 79–80 , 79f
functions, 79
mast cells, 85
natural killer cells, 81–82
phagocytes, 80
T and B lymphocytes, 85
comparative features, 64–65
congenital disorders of, 484t
defects in, in congenital immunodeﬁciencies, 483–486 , 484t
deﬁnition, 63
early defense of, 3
eﬀector mechanisms to, and microbes, 365–366
evolution of, 65
to extracellular bacteria, 369
features of, 3t
functions, 63–64
to fungi, 375 , 376f
gastrointestinal, 315f , 316–318
to intracellular bacteria, 372–373 , 373f
overview, 63–65
to parasites, 381
paĴern recognition receptors, 63 , 64f , 68t
cellular, 67–79
C-type lectin-like receptors, 77–78 , 78t
scavenger receptors, 78–79
recognition of microbes and damaged tissue, 65–67 , 66t
in respiratory system, 327–328
soluble eﬀector molecules
collectins, 87
complement activation, 86–87 , 86f
ﬁcolins, 88
inﬂammatory responses, 85
MBL, 87 , 88f
opsonins, 85
pentraxins, 87
surfactant protein A (SP-A), 87
speciﬁcity, 65 , 66t
in tumor growth, 422–423 , 423f
to viruses, 376 , 377f
Innate lymphoid cells (ILCs), 369
in allergic disease, 462
type I, and intracellular bacteria, 373
Insect venom, destruction of, mast cell-derived proteases in, 478
Inside-out signaling, 46–47
Insulin, autoimmune diseases and, 357
Integrins
activation of, 46–47
adhesion of leukocytes to endothelium mediated by, 49
in leukocyte recruitment, 45t
Interferon(s) (IFNs)
type I, 20 , 55 , 378f
and CD8+ T cell diﬀerentiation, 253
inherited defects in, 485–486
in innate immunity against viruses, 376
Interferon-α (IFN-α), 543t–549t
Interferon-β (IFN-β), 543t–549t
Interferon-γ (IFN-γ), 444 , 543t–549t
CD8+ T cell production of, 257
in class II MHC expression, 134 , 134f
in Th1 subset, 239 , 239f
Interferon-λs (type III interferons), 543t–549t
Interleukin 2 (IL-2), and CD8+ T cell diﬀerentiation, 253
Interleukin-1 (IL-1)
antagonists of, 449t
for rheumatoid arthritis, 451
Interleukin-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1RA), 543t–549t
Interleukin-1α (IL-1α), 543t–549t
Interleukin-1β (IL-1β), 543t–549t
Interleukin-2 (IL-2), 543t–549t
in antigen-activated T cells, 226
biologic actions of, 227f
consumption of, 347
functions of, 226
in NK cells/B cells, 226
regulation of, receptor expression, 227f
in regulatory T cells, 226
secretion/receptor expression, 226 , 226f–227f
survival of regulatory T cells dependent on, 346 , 347f
Interleukin-2 receptor (CD25), antagonists of, 449t
Interleukin-3 (IL-3), 543t–549t
Interleukin-4 (IL-4), 543t–549t
in Th2 cells, 242 , 242f
Interleukin-5 (IL-5), 543t–549t
Interleukin-6 (IL-6), 543t–549t
in inﬂammatory response, 92
Interleukin-6 (IL-6) receptor, antagonists of, 449t
for rheumatoid arthritis, 451
Interleukin-7 (IL-7), 27 , 543t–549t
in proliferation of T cell progenitors, 189
Interleukin-9 (IL-9), 543t–549t
Interleukin-10 (IL-10), 99–100 , 543t–549t
in gastrointestinal system immunity regulation, 326
production and structure of, 348
Interleukin-11 (IL-11), 543t–549t
Interleukin-12 (IL-12), 543t–549t
in CD8+ T cell diﬀerentiation, 253
in inﬂammatory response, 93
p40 chain of, antagonists of, 449t
Interleukin-13 (IL-13), 543t–549t
in Th2 cells, 242
Interleukin-15 (IL-15), 543t–549t
in CD8+ T cell diﬀerentiation, 253
in inﬂammatory response, 93
Interleukin-17 (IL-17)
antagonists of, 444 , 449t
in Th17 cells, 245–246
Interleukin-17A (IL-17A), 543t–549t
Interleukin-17F (IL-17F), 543t–549t
Interleukin-18 (IL-18), 543t–549t
in inﬂammatory response, 93
Interleukin-21 (IL-21), 543t–549t
in Th17 cells, 247
Interleukin-22 (IL-22), 543t–549t
in Th17 cells, 246–247
Interleukin-23 (IL-23), 543t–549t
p40 chain of, antagonists of, 449t
Interleukin-23 receptor (IL-23R), autoimmune diseases and, 357
Interleukin-25 (IL-25), 543t–549t
Interleukin-33 (IL-33), 543t–549t
Intestinal dendritic cells, antigen sampling by, 325f
Intestinal lymphocytes, homing properties of, 320f
Intestinal mucosa, eﬀector and regulatory T cells in, 325f
Intestine, IgA-secreting plasma cells in, 321f
Intracellular bacteria, immunity to, 372–375
See also Bacteria, intracellular
Intracellular fungi, 367t–368t
Intrinsic pathway, of apoptosis, 348–349
Invariant chain, 144
Invariant NKT (iNKT), 248
IPEX (Immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-
linked), 345
IRF4, 281
Isotypes
of antibodies, 109 , 110t , 288–289 , 289t
secreted by B cells, 45
switching of, 120f
See also Heavy chain isotype (class) switching
J
Janus kinase 1 (JAK1), 180–181 , 180f , 348
Job syndrome, 247
Joining (J) chain, in multimeric IgM and IgA molecules, 111
Joining, in V(D)J recombination, 198
Junctional diversity, in B and T cells, 199 , 201f
K
Kabat-Wu plot, 108f
Keratinocytes, 329
Kidney transplantation, HLA matching in, 401–402
Killer immunoglobulin receptor (KIR) family, 176 , 255
Knockout mice, creation of, 563–564 , 564f–565f
Kruppel-like factor 2 (KLF-2), in naive T cell phenotype
maintenance, 29
Kupﬀer cells, complement receptor of immunoglobulin family
(CRIg) in, 303
L
Laboratory techniques
and immunologic assays, clinical diagnostic applications of, 569–
570
in immunology,
for studying B lymphocyte responses, 568–569
activation of polyclonal B cell populations, 568
in antigen-induced activation of B cell populations with single
antigen speciﬁcity, 568
assays to measure B cell proliferation and antibody production,
568–569
for studying T lymphocyte responses, 566–568
antigen-induced activation of polyclonal populations of, 566
antigen-induced activation of T cell populations with single
antigen speciﬁcity, 566–567
functional responses of, methods to enumerate and study, 567
polyclonal activation as, 566
transgenic mice and gene targeting, 562–566 , 564f–565f
using antibodies, 555–562
cytokine bead assays as, 561
ﬂow cytometry asf, 558–561 , 560f
for identiﬁcation and puriﬁcation of proteins, 557
immunoﬂuorescence and immunohistochemistry as, 561–562
immunoprecipitation and immunoaﬃnity chromatography,
557–558 , 557f
labeling and detection of antigens in cells and tissues as, 558
g
g
measurement of antigen-antibody interactions as, 562
puriﬁcation of cells as, 561
quantitation of, by immunoassays, 555–557 , 556f
Western bloĴing as, 558 , 559f
Lamina propria, 317
in gastrointestinal adaptive immune responses, 320–321 , 320f
Langerhans cells, 20–21
Langerin, 78
Large lymphocytes, 28
Latency, 384
viral DNA and, 379
Late-phase reaction, 459 , 471f
eosinophils in, 470
immediate reactions and, 472
Lectin pathways, of complement activation, 298–300 , 301t
Legionella pneumophila, 367t–368t
Lepromatous leprosy, 374–375
Leprosy, T cell response in, 374–375
Lethal hit, 255
Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), 543t–549t
Leukocyte(s)
circulation and migration into tissues, 43–62
Fc receptors of, 290–293 , 291t
inﬂammatory, in late-phase reaction, 471
normal counts of, 14t
polymorphonuclear, 15
transmigration of, through endothelium, 50
Leukocyte adhesion deﬁciencies (LADs), 51 , 309 , 483–485
type 1, 484 , 484t
type 2, 484–485 , 484t
type 3, 484t , 485
Leukocyte homing, 43
Leukocyte migration inhibitors, for immunologic diseases, 449
Leukocyte migration/recruitment, 43
adhesion molecules in, 45–47 , 45t
from blood into tissues, main functions served by, 44f
chemokines and chemokine receptors in, 47–49
overview of, 43–45
principles governing, 43–45
to site of infection, or tissue damage, 49
into tissues, leukocyte-endothelial interactions mediating, 49–51 ,
50f
Leukocyte-endothelial adhesion molecules
integrins and integrin ligands as, 45t , 46–47
selectins and selectin ligands as, 45–46 , 45t
Leukocyte-endothelial interactions, 49–51 , 50f
Leukocytosis, 96
Leukotrienes, derived from mast cells, 469 , 476f
Lewis antigen, in blood transfusion, 408
LFA-1 (CD11aCD18), 45t , 46
L-ﬁcolin, in complement activation, 301t
p
Licensing, 223
Light chain(s)
of antibody molecules, 105–106
surrogate, 114–115
Light chain isotype exclusion, 205
Linear determinants, 104t
Lipid kinase(s), 152
Lipid mediator
derived from mast cells, 467
production of, from mast cell activation, 465
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 369
Listeria monocytogenes, 367t–368t
cell-mediated immunity to, 234 , 236f
Listeriolysin, 141
Live viral vaccines, involving recombinant viruses, 386
LMP1, EBV, 269
Long-term nonprogressors, with HIV, 507
L-selectin (CD62L), in leukocyte recruitment, 45t , 46
Lymph, 32–34
Lymph node(s), 34–37 , 35f
exit of T cells from, 55 , 56f
germinal center reaction in, 272f
migration of naive T cells into, 52–55
Lymphatic system, anatomy and function of, 32–34
Lymphoblast(s), 28
Lymphocyte(s), 3
in adaptive immunity, 21–29
alloreactive, activation and eﬀector functions of, 395–396 , 396f
B, See B cell(s)
classes of, 23
development, in diﬀerent tissues, 314t
development of, 25 , 187–216
checkpoints in, 190 , 191f
overview of, 187–191
stages of, 200–207 , 202f
eﬀector, 28
See also Eﬀector lymphocyte(s)
gut-homing properties of, 320–321
intestinal, homing properties of, 320f
large, 28
morphology of, 28f
maturation of, 58f , 200
memory, 28–29
morphology of, 28f
naive, 25–28
normal counts in, 14t
population of, distinguished by history of antigen exposure, 25
resting, 25–27
skin, homing properties of, 331f
small, 28
morphology of, 28f
subsets of, generation of, 205–207 , 206f
T, See T cell(s)
Lymphocyte recirculation, 51
Lymphocyte repertoire, 4
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) infection, 379
Lymphoid cells, innate, See Innate lymphoid cells (ILCs)
Lymphoid organs, secondary, germinal centers in, 272f
Lymphoid tissue(s)
anatomy and functions of, 30–39
gut-associated, 317–318
Lymphotoxin(s), 34
Lymphotoxin-α (LTα), 543t–549t
Lymphotoxin-αβ (LTαβ), 543t–549t
Lysosomes, 16
protein antigens targeting to, 143–144
proteolytic digestion of, 144
M
M cells, in small intestine, 319f
MAC, See Membrane aĴack complex (MAC)
Mac-1 (CD11bCD18), 45t , 302–303
Macrophage(s), 14
activation of, 19
alternative, by Th2 cells, 244 , 245f
classical, 240–242 , 241f
by extracellular bacteria, 369
by intracellular bacteria, 374
by parasites, 382 , 382f
by Th1 cells, 240–242 , 241f
in antigen presentation, 129
functions of, 125f , 126t
in gastrointestinal immune system, 323–325
in HIV infection, 495–496
in immune response to tumors, 422
in lamina propria, in innate immunity in gut, 317
tissue repair, 96
Macrophage colony-stimulating factor, 15
MadCAM-1 (mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule 1), 46
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
alleles of, associated with autoimmunity, 355–356
antigen presentation associated with physiologic signiﬁcance of,
146–147 , 146f
in cell-mediated immunity, 10
class I, deﬁciencies in, autosomal recessive, 487t
cross-presentation, 141–142 , 252
discovery of, 129–130
human, 130
mouse, 129–130
features of, 135t
genes of, 130–134
human and mouse loci for, 132–133 , 133f
haplotype, 132–133
human, molecular map of, 132 , 133f
restriction, 124–125 , 130 , 131f
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) binding, 422
Major histocompatibility complex loci, human and mouse, 132–133 ,
133f
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules, 134–136 , 390
alleles of, matching of, in graft survival, 402
alloantigens, recognition of
direct, 393 , 393f
indirect, 393 , 393f
class I, 133–134
with bound peptides surface expression of, 143
features of, 135t
polymorphic residues of, 135 , 137f
for processing and presentation of protein antigens, 139–142 ,
140f–141f , 140t
structure of, 136f
class II, 134
biosynthesis and transport of, to endosomes, 144
with bound peptides, surface expression of, 145
features of, 135t
polymorphic residues of, 136 , 137f
for processing and presentation of protein antigens, 139–142 ,
140f–141f , 140t
structure of, 137f
in vesicles, association of processed peptides with, 139
expression, 133–134
functions of, 123–150
general properties of, 134–135
peptide binding to, 136–139
in endoplasmic reticulum, 142
structural basis, 138–139
in strong (rapid) rejection reactions, 392
Malaria, 383
Malnutrition, acquired immunodeﬁciencies from, 497
Mammalian fetus, immune privilege of, 332–333
Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), 403–404
Mannose receptor, 78
Mannose-binding lectin (MBL), 298–300 , 301t
Mantle zone, of follicle, surrounding germinal center, 271
Marenostrin
See Pyrin.
Marginal sinus, of spleen
Marginal zone B cells, 207
Marginal zone, of spleen
Markers, phenotypic, 13–14
Mast cell(s), 15f
activation of
biochemical events of, 465 , 467f
in IgE production, 465 , 466f
connective tissue, 469
degranulation of, 465
IgE binding to, 463–464
immune reactions mediated by, protective role of, 477–478
in innate and adaptive immune responses, 19–20
mediators derived from, 467–470 , 468f
mediators produced by, 464t
morphology of, 463f
mucosal, 466
properties of, 462–470 , 463t
sensitization of, 460
wheal-and-ﬂare reaction dependent on, 471
Mature B cells, subsets of, 205–207 , 206f
MBL-associated serine proteases (MASPs), in complement
activation, 298–300 , 301t
Medullary thymic epithelial cells (MTECs), 32 , 340 , 341f
y
y
p
Melanoma-associated antigens (MAGE) proteins, 418
Membrane aĴack complex (MAC), 87 , 300–302
regulation of formation of, 306f
Membrane cofactor protein (MCP), 304t
Memory
in adaptive immune responses, 4–5 , 4f
immunologic, 4–5
Memory B cells
generation of, 271
membrane Ig expressed by, 29
Memory cells, 25
Memory lymphocytes, 25–27
characteristics of, 27t
Memory T cells, 219
central, 57
development of, 228–230 , 229f
eﬀector, 57
migration of, 57
properties of, 228–230
in skin, 324
surface molecules expressed by, 13–14
Mendelian disorders, causing autoimmunity, 357–359
Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial disease (MSMD), 486
Mesenchymal cells, as antigen-presenting cells, 126t , 129
Methylcholanthrene (MCA)-induced tumor, 416
M-ﬁcolin, in complement activation, 298–300 , 301t
MHC, See Major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
MHC class I deﬁciency, 487t
MHC restriction, 124–125 , 130 , 131f
Microbes
See also Bacteria, Fungi, Parasite(s), Virus(es)
cell-mediated immune responses in, 234
early exposure to, allergy risk and, 473
immune responses to, 366f
overview of, 365–369
immunity to, 365–388
intracellular, elimination of, in cell-mediated immunity, 8
neutralization of, 289 , 290f
pathogenic, 367t–368t
pathogenicity of, 366
population elicit immune responses, 367
reaction against, causing hypersensitivity diseases, 437–438
survival of, 366
in T cell subset diﬀerentiation, 238
Microbial toxins, neutralization of, 289 , 290f
Microbiome
autoimmunity and, 360
commensal, in immune regulation, 326–327
Microfold (M) cells, in gut epithelium, 319f
Microglia, 331–332
β2-Microglobulin, 135
MicroRNAs (miRNAs), 170
in lymphocyte development, 189–190
Migration, leukocyte, 43
See also Leukocyte migration/recruitment
Minor histocompatibility antigens, in organ transplantation, 392–
393
Mitochondrial pathway, of apoptosis, 350
Mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase signaling pathways, 164–
167 , 166f
Mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR), 131 , 396
Modulation CD366 (hepatitis A virus cellular receptor 2), 551t–554t
Molecular mimicry, 359–360
Monoclonal antibodies, 13–14 , 112–114
application of, 112
in clinical use, 114t
generation of, 113f
for graft rejection, 404
for immunologic diseases, 449
in immunotherapy for tumors, 427–428
Monocyte(s)
classical, 4–5
development of, 4–5
migration to sites of infection or tissue injury, 51
normal counts in, 14t
subsets of, 4–5
Monocyte CSF (M-CSF), 543t–549t
Mother-to-child transmission, HIV and, 505
mRNA vaccines, 386
Mucins, in innate immunity in gut, 316–317
Mucosa-associated invariant T cells (MAIT), 247–248
Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT), 313–314
Mucosal barriers, host defense at, 244
Mucosal tissues, immunity in, 327–328
Mucosal tolerance, 326
Multiple sclerosis, 446t , 453
new therapies for, 453
pathogenesis of, 453
Multisystem disorders, with immunodeﬁciencies, 496
Multivalency, 116–117
Myasthenia gravis, 441t
Mycobacterial disease, Mendelian susceptibility to (MSMD), 484t ,
486
Mycobacterium leprae, 367t–368t
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 367t–368t
Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), for graft rejection, 404
Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), 425
Myeloid-lymphoid progenitor, 30
Myeloid-megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitors, 30
Myeloma, Ig gene structure in, 191–192
N
N nucleotides, 199 , 201f
Naive B cell, migration of, 57
Naive B lymphocytes, membrane Ig expressed by, 25
Naive lymphocytes, 25
Naive T cells
exit of, from lymph nodes, 55
migration of,
into lymph nodes, 52–55
into spleen, 56
Naive T lymphocytes, activation of, 217
Native immunity, See Innate immunity
Natural antibodies, 282
Natural immunity, See Innate immunity
Natural killer (NK) cells, 3 , 23–25 , 24t , 81–82
activating and inhibitory receptors, 82–85 , 83f–84f
activation of, defective, 485
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity and, 293 , 293f
defects in, 485
deﬁciencies, 484t
functions, 82 , 82f
in immune response to tumors, 422
in innate immunity against viruses, 376
and intracellular bacteria, innate immunity for, 372–373
uterine, 333
Natural killer T (NKT) cells, 187–188 , 248
in CD1-lipid complex recognition, 147–148
Negative selection, 339–340 , 340f
of lymphocytes, 191 , 191f , 207
Neisseria meningitidis, 367t–368t
Neoantigenic determinants, 117–118
Neoantigens, 417–418 , 417f
Neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn), 115 , 116f
Neonatal immunity, 289t
Neoplasms, See Tumor(s)
Neutrophil(s), 14–15 , 14t , 94–95 , 94f
activation of, by extracellular bacteria, 369
migration to sites of infection or tissue injury, 51
Neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs), 95–96
Neutrophil oxidative burst assay, 569
Neutrophil-rich inﬂammation, in IL-17, 246
Nimotuzumab, 426t
Nitric oxide, microbicidal molecules and, 95
NK cell cytotoxicity assays, 569
NK cells, See Natural killer (NK) cells
NKT cells, See Natural killer T (NKT) cells
NOD2, autoimmune diseases and, 357 , 358t
NOD-like receptors (NLRs), in innate immunity in gut, 317
Nonreactivity to self (self tolerance), in adaptive immune
responses, 5
p
Non-receptor tyrosine kinases, 153
Nonspeciﬁc inﬂammatory stimuli, 434
Notch 1 transcription factor, in commiĴing lymphocytes to T
lineage, 188–189 , 189f
Nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT), 167–169
Nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB), 170
signaling, inherited defects in, 485
Nuclear receptors, 153–154
Nucleotide metabolism, defects in, 488–489
O
Ofatumumab, 426t
Omenn syndrome, 489
Oncofetal antigens, 419–420
Oncogenic viruses, antigens of, 418
Oncostatin M, 543t–549t
One gene-one polypeptide hypothesis, 191–192
Opsonins, 19 , 85 , 289–290
Opsonization
antibody-mediated, 289–294 , 439 , 440f
complement activation and, 307–308 , 307f
Oral tolerance, 326 , 353
Oral vaccines, 326
Orthotopic transplantation, 389
Overexpressed cellular proteins, 418–419
P
P nucleotides, 199 , 201f
Paneth cells, in innate immunity in gut, 317
Panitumumab, 426t
Paracellular transmigration, 50
Paracortex, 34
Parafollicular cortex, 34
Parasite(s)
immune evasion by, 383–384 , 383t
immune responses for, 382t
inhibition by, 384
immunity to, 381–384
adaptive immunity to, 382–383 , 382f
innate immunity to, 381
Passenger mutations, 417
Passive immunity, 7 , 8f
Passive immunization, 387
Passive immunotherapy, with antibodies, 426–428 , 426t
Pathogen-associated molecular paĴerns (PAMPs), 65 , 67t
in innate immunity in gut, 327–328
Pathogenic microbes, 367t–368t
Pathogenic organisms, in gastrointestinal system, 316
PaĴern recognition receptors, 63 , 64f , 68t
cellular, 67–79
C-type lectin-like receptors, 77–78 , 78t
scavenger receptors, 78–79
PAX5 transcription factor, in commiĴing lymphocytes to B lineage,
188–189
PD-1 (programmed death 1), 176 , 223
regulation of T cell responses, 343–345 , 344f , 345t
Pemphigus vulgaris, 441t
Pentraxins, 87
Peptide-binding clefts, 134–135
Peptide-MHC binding, 136–139
in endoplasmic reticulum, 142
Peptide-MHC interactions, characteristics of, 137–138
Peptide-MHC tetramers, 567
Perforin, 82
functions of, 255
Perforin deﬁciencies, 495t
Periarteriolar lymphoid sheaths, 37–38
Peripheral tolerance, 338f , 339
B cell, 352 , 352f
T cell, 340–350 , 342f
Pernicious anemia, 441t
Phagocyte(s)
activation of
by extracellular bacteria, 369
Fcγ receptors in, 292
in adaptive immune response to intracellular bacteria, 373
p
p
defective microbicidal activity of, 483
defects in, 485
functional responses of, 14–19
inﬂammatory response, 94–96 , 94f
in innate immunity response, to extracellular bacteria, 371–372
mononuclear, 15
maturation of, 16f–17f
morphology of, 16f–17f
T cells in, 234
Phagocytosed microbes, killing of, by Th1 cells, 240–242
Phagocytosis
antibody-mediated, 289–294 , 439 , 440f
complement activation and, 307–308 , 307f
role of Fcγ receptors in, 292 , 293f
Phagolysosomes, 144
Phagosomes, 144 , 292
Phenotypic markers
monoclonal antibodies for, 112
of regulatory T cells, 345–346
Phosphatidylinositol-speciﬁc phospholipase C (PLC), 174–175
Phospholipase C (PLCγ1), 167
PI3-kinase, 162 , 175
Pilin, 371–372
PKCβ activation, 175
Plasma cells, 28 , 29f
antibody-secreting, B cell diﬀerentiation into, 278–280
intestinal, IgA-secreting, 319 , 321f
Plasmablasts, 28 , 59 , 278–279
Plasmacytoid dendritic cells, 127
Plasmacytoma, Ig gene structure in, 191–192
Platelet-activating factor (PAF), derived from mast cells, 469–470 ,
476f
Pneumocystis jiroveci, 367t–368t , 375
Polio, 367t–368t
Polyarteritis nodosa, 444 , 444t
Polyclonal activators, 566
Polyclonal antibodies, 104
Poly-Ig receptor, in IgA transport, 323
Polymorphisms, 130–131
associated with autoimmunity, 356–357 , 358t
Polymorphonuclear leukocytes, 15
Polyvalency, 116–117
Polyvalent antigens, 118 , 119f
Positive selection, of lymphocytes, 190–191 , 191f , 212–213
Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis, 444 , 444t
Poxviruses, 380
Pre-B cell, 114–115
Pre-B cell receptor (pre-BCR), 202–205 , 204f
Pre-T cell receptor (pre-TCR), 204f , 210
checkpoint signaling defects, 489
Pre-Tα, 210
Primary immunodeﬁciencies, 482–497
Pro-B cell, 202–205 , 204f
Professional APCs, 125–126
Programmed cell death protein (PD-1), 424
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, 332
Proinﬂammatory molecules, in tumor vaccination, 432
Proliferation assays, 570
Properdin, 298
Prostaglandin D2 (PGD2), derived from mast cells, 469
Proteasomal degradation, of cytosolic proteins, 139–141
Proteasomes
in digestion of cytosolic proteins, 142
protein antigens degradation in, 139–142
Protein antigens
adaptive immunity and, 370
degradation of, in proteasomes, 139–142
foreign, tolerance induced by, 352–353
helper T cell-dependent antibody responses to, 266–281
immunogenicity of, 146–147 , 147f
presentation of, and viruses, 380 , 381f
processing of, 139–147
See also Antigen processing
Protein kinase C (PKC), 167
Protein tyrosine kinases, 152
Protein-calorie malnutrition, acquired immunodeﬁciencies from,
497 , 497t
Proteins, identiﬁcation and puriﬁcation of, 557
Proteoglycans, derived from mast cells, 469
Proteolytic digestion, of antigens in lysosomes, 144
Proteolytic enzymes, 95
Protozoal infections
adaptive immunity to, 382–383
innate immunity to, 381
Proximal TCR signaling defects, 495t
P-selectin (CD62P), in leukocyte recruitment, 45–46 , 45t
Psoriasis, 446t , 456
PTPN22, autoimmune disease and, 357 , 358t
Puriﬁed antigen (subunit) vaccines, 385 , 385f
Purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP) deﬁciency, 487t , 489
R
Rabies, 367t–368t
Radioimmunoassay (RIA), 555–557 , 556f
RAG1 deﬁciency, 487t
RAG2 deﬁciency, 487t
Rapamycin (Sirolimus), on allograft rejection, 403–404
Reactive oxygen species (ROS), 95
Receptor(s)
B cell, See B cell receptor (BCR)
poly-Ig, in IgA transport, 323
T cell, See T cell receptor (TCR)
Receptor editing, 191
central B cell tolerance, 351
Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), 153
Recipient, 389
Recirculating B cells, 206
Recombination-activating gene 1 and 2, 197
Recruitment, leukocyte, 43
See also Leukocyte migration/recruitment
Regenerating islet-derived protein III (REG III), 317
Regional immunity
cutaneous, 328–330
features of, 314t
gastrointestinal system immunity as, 314t , 315f
See also Gastrointestinal system immunity
genitourinary, 328
Regulatory T cells, 345 , 346f , 424
in autoimmunity, 348
generation and maintenance of, 345–346
inhibitory cytokines produced by, 347–348
maintenance of, B7:CD28-mediated costimulation in, 221
mechanisms of action, 347
natural, 347
peripheral, 339
phenotypic markers and heterogeneity of, 345–346
regulation of immunity in gastrointestinal tract, 325–326
in self-tolerance, 337
suppression of self-reactive lymphocytes by, 338–339
transfer or induction of, to induce donor-speciﬁc tolerance, 406
Rejection
allograft, 389–390 , 397–400
See also Allograft rejection
graft, 389
genetics of, 392f
Repertoire, antibody, 118–120
Reporter mice, 564
Respiratory burst, 95
Respiratory system, 314t
adaptive immunity in, 328
immunity in, 327–328
innate immunity in, 327–328
Resting lymphocytes, 25–27
Reticular dysgenesis, 487t , 489
Retinaldehyde dehydrogenases (RALDH), 321
Rhesus (Rh) antigen, in blood transfusion, 409
Rheumatic fever
acute, 441t
after pharyngeal infection, 371
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), 446t , 451–452
new therapies for, 452
pathogenesis of, 451–452 , 452f
RickeĴsia, 367t–368t
RIG-like receptors (RLRs), 74–75
Rituximab, 426t
for immunologic diseases, 449
R-loop, of DNA, 275–276
RORγt, in Th17 cells, 245
S
Salmonella typhi, 367t–368t
Sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, 555–557 , 556f
Sandwich techniques, 562
SAP (SLAM-associated protein), 270–271
encoding mutations in, 494–495
Schistosoma mansoni, and tissue injury, 383
Secondary immunodeﬁciencies, 497–498 , 497t
Second-set rejection, 389–390
Secretory component, of poly-Ig receptor, 323
Selectins
in leukocyte recruitment, 45–46
rolling of leukocytes on endothelium mediated by, 50
Selective immunoglobulin isotype deﬁciencies, 491–492
Self antigen(s)
abnormal display of, in autoimmunity, 355
tolerance to
central, 338–339 , 338f
peripheral, 339
tolerogenicity of, 350–351 , 350t
Self-tolerance, 5 , 213–214 , 337
regulatory T cells in, 338–339
Sensitization, 460
to alloantigens, 395–396 , 396f
Sepsis, from extracellular bacteria immune response, 370–371
Septic shock, 96
from extracellular bacteria immune response, 370–371
Serglycin, 255
Serology, 103–104
Serum, 103–104
Serum disease, 441–443
Serum protein electrophoresis, 569
Serum sickness, 112–114 , 441–443 , 443f
Severe combined immunodeﬁciencies (SCIDs), 486–491 , 487t
from defective B cell activation, 486–488
from pre-TCR checkpoint signaling defects, 489
from V(D)J recombination defects, 489
X-linked, 486–488
Sexual contact, HIV transmission and, 505
Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT), 180–181 ,
180f
Signal transduction, 151–186
adaptor proteins function, 155 , 155f
antigen receptor signaling, 157
B lymphocyte antigen receptor complex, 172–175
cell surface, cytosolic and nuclear phases, 151 , 152f
GPCRs, 154
intracellular biochemical pathways, 153
lipid kinases, 152
modular signaling proteins and adaptors, 154–155 , 154f
g
g p
p
non-receptor tyrosine kinases, 153
Notch family, 154
nuclear receptors, 153–154
overview, 152–155
phase separation, 155
phosphate residue, 152
protein kinases, 152
protein tyrosine kinases, 152
RTKs, 153
T cell signaling, 157–171
calcium-mediated and protein kinase C–Mediated signaling
pathways, 167 , 168f
CD4 and CD8 coreceptors, 159–160 , 161f–162f
CD3 and ζ proteins, 159 , 160f
components, 159 , 160f
costimulatory receptor signaling, 170–171
immune synapse, 164 , 165f
lymphocyte antigen receptors, properties of, 157 , 158t
metabolic changes, 171 , 171f
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase signaling pathways,
164–167 , 166f
modulation, by protein tyrosine phosphatases, 170
peptide– major histocompatibility complex, 159 , 159f
RAS pathway, 166 , 166f
recruitment and modiﬁcation, adaptor proteins, 162–164
structure of, 158–159 , 158f
transcription factors, gene expression, 167–170 , 169f
tyrosine kinases and lipid kinase, 162 , 163f–164f
TCR, defects in, 494
WNT proteins, 154
Signaling lymphocytic activation molecule (SLAM), 171
Single-gene mutations, causing autoimmunity, 359t
Single-positive thymocytes, 212 , 213f
Skin
immune responses in, innate and adaptive, 328–330
innate and adaptive immune responses in, 328–330
lymphocytes, homing properties of, 331f
SLAM-associated protein (SAP), encoding mutations in, 494–495
Small lymphocytes, 25–27
morphology of, 28f
Snake venom, destruction of, mast cell-derived proteases in, 478
Somatic hypermutation, 277
Somatic mutations, in Ig V genes, 276–278 , 277f
Specialized immunity, at epithelial barriers and in immune
privileged tissues, 313–336
Speciﬁc immunity, 8
Speciﬁcity
in adaptive immune responses, 4 , 4f
in antigen recognition, 118
Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P), 55
Sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor 1 (S1PR1), 55 , 56f
Spleen
p
adaptive immunity and, 369–370
anatomy and functions of, 37–38
naive T cell migration into, 56
removal of, 497t
segregation, 39f
Splenic development, defects in, 486
SRC family kinases, 154–155
SRC homology 2 (SH2), 154–155
SRC homology 3 (SH3), 154–155
Staphylococcal complement inhibitor (SCIN), 310
Staphylococcus aureus, 367t–368t
STAT3, in Th17 cells, 245
Stem cell factor (c-Kit ligand), 543t–549t
Stem cell transplantation, hematopoietic, 409–410
immunodeﬁciency after, 411
immunologic complication of, 410–411
indications, methods, and immune barriers in, 409–410
Streptococcus pyogenes
group A, 367t–368t
pneumococcus, 367t–368t
Superantigens, 566
bacterial, 371 , 371f
Surface antigens, variation of
immune evasion and, 371–372
parasites and, 383
Surfactant protein A (SP-A), 87
Switch recombination, in isotype switching, 274–275
Switching, isotype, See Heavy chain isotype (class) switching
Synapsis, in V(D)J recombination, 197 , 198f
Syngeneic graft, 390
Synthetic antigen vaccines, 385–386
Systemic anaphylaxis, pathogenesis and therapy of, 474
Systemic inﬂammatory response syndrome (SIRS), 96
Systemic inﬂammatory syndrome, 371
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 444t , 450
new therapies for, 450
pathogenesis of, 450 , 451f
T
T cell(s)
alloreactive, activation of, 395–396
αβ
MHC-restricted, maturation of, 212–214
thymocytes expressing, 214
antigens recognized by, properties of, 124–125 , 124f , 124t
central tolerance in, 339–340 , 340f
deletion of, by apoptotic cell death, 339–340 , 340f
γδ, thymocytes expressing, 214
helper, See Helper T cells
in infections, 234f
memory, See Memory T cells
MHC restriction, 130 , 131f
migration and recirculation of, 51–57
movement of, within secondary lymphoid organs, 55
naive, See Naive T cells
peripheral tolerance in, 340–350 , 342f
recirculation of, through lymphoid tissues, 56
recognition of alloantigens by, 393–395 , 393f
regulatory, See Regulatory T cells
signaling pathways for, inhibitors of, 403–404
T cell activation, 157–171
calcium-mediated and protein kinase C–Mediated signaling
pathways, 167 , 168f
CD4 and CD8 coreceptors, 159–160 , 161f–162f
CD3 and ζ proteins, 159 , 160f
components, 159 , 160f
costimulatory receptor signaling, 170–171
immune synapse, 164 , 165f
lymphocyte antigen receptors, properties of, 157 , 158t
metabolic changes, 171 , 171f
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase signaling pathways, 164–
167 , 166f
modulation, by protein tyrosine phosphatases, 170
peptide– major histocompatibility complex, 159 , 159f
polyclonal, by bacterial superantigens, 371f
RAS pathway, 166 , 166f
recruitment and modiﬁcation, adaptor proteins, 162–164
structure of, 158–159 , 158f
transcription factors, gene expression, 167–170 , 169f
tyrosine kinases and lipid kinase, 162 , 163f–164f
T cell exhaustion, 253–254 , 254f
T cell inhibitory pathways, blocking, 430–432
T cell lineage, commitment to, 188–189 , 189f
T cell maturation, 208–209
immunodeﬁciency caused by defects in, 488f
MHC-restricted αβ T cells, selection process in, 212–214
stages of, 208f , 209–212
thymus in, 209
T cell proliferation assays, 570
T cell receptor (TCR)
defects in signal transduction, 494
genes for, expression of, 207
T cell receptor excision circles (TRECs), 570
T cell response(s)
to alloantigens, costimulation in, 396
to intracellular microbes, 374–375
nature of, 146 , 146f
regulation of, by inhibitory receptors, 342–345
T cell tolerance, 339–351
central, 339–340 , 340f
peripheral, 340–350 , 342f
T cell-dependent B cell activation, defects in, 493–494
T cell-dependent inﬂammation, 235
T cell-mediated hypersensitivity diseases, 438 , 439t , 445f
T cell-mediated immunity, in gastrointestinal tract, 323–325
γδ T cells, 248
T lymphocyte response, methods for studying, 566–568
antigen-induced activation of
in polyclonal populations, 566
with single antigen speciﬁcity, 566–567
functional responses of, methods to enumerate and study, 567
polyclonal activation as, 566
T lymphocytes, 4
activation of, 217–232
adjuvants in, 221
CD40 ligand in, 223 , 224f
changes in surface molecules during, 224–225 , 225f
overview of, 217–219 , 218f
role of costimulation in, 220–224 , 220f
signals for, 219–224
anatomic organization of, 34–37
clonal expansion of, 226–228 , 228f
cytokines and, 225–226
cytotoxic, 10
defects in, activation and function, 494–496
eﬀector T cells, 219
diﬀerentiation of activated T cells into, 228
γδ, 24t
in immune response to tumors, 420–422
immunodeﬁciencies, features of, 482t
interleukin-2 (IL-2) secretion/receptor expression and, 226 , 226f–
227f
maturation of, in thymus, 32
memory T cells, 219
development of, 228–230 , 229f
properties of, 228–230
responses of
decline of, 230–231
functional, 224–230
segregation of, 36f
subsets of, 23
TACI, 274
Tail pieces, in secreted forms of Ig heavy chains, 105f , 111
Target cell, 251
killing of, by cytotoxic T lymphocytes, 255–257 , 257f
Target of antiproliferative antibody-1 (TAPA-1), 302
Tat protein, in pathogenesis of immunodeﬁciency from HIV, 501
T-bet, 239 , 253
TCR, See T cell receptor (TCR)
TCR α chain deﬁciency, 487t
TCR gene, diversity in, generation of, mechanisms contributing to,
200t
TCR gene loci, germline organization of, 195–197
TCR proteins, domains of, 193f , 194
TCR signal transduction, defects in, 494
TCR transgenic mice, 566–567
Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (Td), 198
Testis, immune privilege in, 332
TGF-β, 424
Th1 cells, immune responses mediated by, abnormal, in IBD, 325
Th1 subset, of CD4+ T cells, 238–242
development of, 238 , 239f
functions of, 239–242 , 240f
classical macrophage activation in, 240–242 , 241f
p
g
interferon-γ, 239–240
other Th1 cytokines, 240
phagocytosed microbes in, 240–242
properties of, 236–238 , 237f
Th2 cells
activation of, for helminthic infections, 383
in allergic disease, 462
in barrier immunity, 325
Th2 subset, of CD4+ T cells, 242–244
development of, 238 , 242 , 242f
functions of, 242–244 , 243f
in host defense, 244
interleukin-4 in, 242–244
interleukin-5 in, 244
interleukin-13 in, 244
properties of, 236–238 , 237f
Th17, 370
Th17 cells, in mucosal immune system, 324–325
Th17 subset, of CD4+ T cells, 244–247
development of, 238 , 244–245 , 246f
functions of, 245–247 , 246f
in host defense, 247
IL-21 in, 247
IL-22 in, 246–247
interleukin-17 in, 245–246
properties of, 236–238 , 237f
Therapy, monoclonal antibodies for, 112
Thioester domain, 295–296 , 297f
Thoracic duct, 32–34
Thrombocytopenic purpura, autoimmune, 441t
Thymic development, epithelial, defective, 487t
Thymic medullary epithelial cells, 209
Thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP), 321–323 , 543t–549t
Thymocyte T cell receptors (TCRs), 339–340
Thymocytes, 209
double-negative, 209 , 211f
double-positive, 210–212 , 211f
negative selection of, 191 , 191f , 207 , 339–340 , 340f
positive selection of, 190–191 , 191f , 212–213
single-positive, 212 , 213f
Thymus
anatomy and functions of, 32
morphology of, 33f
in T cell maturation, 209
Tissue(s)
diﬀerent, lymphocytes in, 314t
immune privileged, 330–332
Tissue-restricted antigens (TRAs), 340 , 341f
TLR pathways, inherited defects in, 485–486
TLRs, See Toll-like receptors (TLRs)
TNF, See Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)
Tolerance
B lymphocytes, 351–352
central, 191 , 213–214 , 339–340 , 340f
defective, 354–355
donor-speciﬁc, induction of, 397
immunologic, 337–364
See also Immunologic tolerance
induced by foreign protein antigens, 353
mucosal, 326
oral, 326 , 353
peripheral, 340–350 , 342f
therapeutic induction, 353
T lymphocytes, 339–351
Tolerance-inducing therapies, 449–450
Tolerogen, 337
Tolerogenicity, of self antigens, 350–351 , 350t
Toll-like receptor signaling defects, 483
Toll-like receptors (TLRs), 67–72 , 69f
in B cell activation, 265 , 265f
binding of, 70
IL-1, 67–69
in innate immunity in gut, 317
intracellular membranes, 70
microbes, 69
pathways and functions, 70–71 , 71f
recognition, 70–71
responses to, endogenous molecules, 70
structure, location, and speciﬁcities, 67–69 , 69f
Tonsils, immune responses in, 320
Toxins, 369–370
microbial, neutralization of, 289 , 290f
Transcellular migration, 50
Transcription factors
in lymphocyte development, 188–189
in T cell subset diﬀerentiation, 236
Transcriptional regulators, in determining fate of activated B cells,
281
Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), 543t–549t
in gastrointestinal system immunity regulation, 317
Tregs and, 346
Transfusion, 389
blood, 407–409
Transfusion reactions, 409
Transgenes, 562–563
Transgenic mice
and gene targeting, 562–566 , 564f–565f
TCR, 566–567
Transplantation
blood transfusion as, 407–409
hematopoietic stem cell, 409–411
p
xenogeneic, 406–407
Transplantation immunology, 389–414
general principles of, 389–390
Transplants, immunosuppression for, 497t
Transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP), 134
Trastuzumab, 426t
Tregs, See Regulatory T cells
Tryptase, 469
Tuberculoid leprosy, 374–375
Tubulitis, 398–399
Tumor(s), 89–91
acquired immunodeﬁciencies from, 498
antigens of, 417–420
identiﬁcation of, monoclonal antibodies for, 112
immune responses to, 420–423
evasion of, 423–425
immunity to, 415–417
immunotherapy for, 425–434
lymphocytic inﬂammation associated with, 415–416 , 416f
overview of, 415–417
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF), 89–91 , 543t–549t
antagonists of, 449t
for rheumatoid arthritis, 451
inﬂammatory response, 89–91 , 91f
for intracellular bacteria, 370–371
local and systemic actions, 91 , 92f
structure of, 91f
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor family, in T cell activation, 223
Tumor-speciﬁc T cells, adoptive cellular therapy with, 428
Two-signal hypothesis, 98–99
Type I interferons, 20
Tyrosine kinase 2 (TYK2), 348
U
Ulcerative colitis, 454
Urticaria, pathogenesis and therapy of, 476–477
Uterine decidua, 333
Uterine NK cells, 333
V
V regions, of Ig domain, 106
Vaccines
aĴenuated vaccines, 384–385 , 384t
conjugate, 280–281 , 384t , 385 , 385f
DNA vaccines, 386
against HIV, development of, 508–509
inactivated bacterial vaccines, 384–385
live viral vaccines, involving
recombinant viruses, 386
oral, 326
puriﬁed antigen (subunit) vaccines, 385 , 385f
responses to, 570
strategies for development of, 384–387
synthetic antigen vaccines, 385–386
viral vaccines, 384–385
Vaccinia virus complement inhibitory protein 1 (VCP-1), 310
Valency, of antibody-antigen interactions, 119f
Variable regions, of antibody, 107–108 , 109f
Vascular endothelial cells, in antigen presentation, 126t , 129
Vasculitis, caused by ANCA, 441t
Vasculopathy, graft, and chronic rejection, 400
Vasoactive amines, derived from mast cells, 468f , 469
VCAM-1 (CD106), 46
Venom, snake and insect, destruction of, mast cell-derived
proteases in, 478
Vibrio cholerae, 367t–368t
Viral nucleic acids, 70
Viral vaccines, 384–385
Virus(es), 251
human immunodeﬁciency, 498–509
See also Human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV)
immune evasion by, 379–381 , 380f , 380t
immunity to, 375–381
adaptive immunity to, 376–379 , 377f
innate immunity to, 376 , 378f
infections from
latent, 375–376
respiratory, asthma or exacerbations and, 473–474
mechanisms of pathogenicity of, 367t–368t
recombinant, live viral vaccines involving, 386
V(D)J recombinase, 197
V(D)J recombination, 191 , 194–198 , 195f
defects, in severe combined immunodeﬁciencies from, 489
mechanisms of, 197–198 , 198f
recognition signals in, 195–197 , 196f–197f
sequential events during, 198f
VLA-4 (very late antigen 4), 45t , 46
W
Waldeyer ring, 320
Western bloĴing, 558 , 559f
Wheal, 470–471
Wheal-and-ﬂare reaction, 470–471 , 472f
WiskoĴ-Aldrich syndrome, 495t , 496
X
Xenoantigens, 390
Xenogeneic graft, 390
Xenogeneic transplantation, 390
Xenograft, 390
Xenoreactive, lymphocytes, 390
X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA), 491 , 492t
from BTK gene mutations, 204
X-linked hyper-IgM syndrome, 241 , 269 , 492t
X-linked immunodeﬁciency-magnesium defects-EBV infection-
neoplasia syndrome, 495 , 495t
X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome (XLP), 270–271 , 494–495 ,
495t
X-linked pre-BCR signaling defect, 491
X-linked SCID, 486–488 , 487t
X-linked severe combined immunodeﬁciency disease (X-SCID), 189
Z
ZAP70
deﬁciency of, 491
Zone of equivalence, in antigen-antibody complexes, 118 , 119f
Zymogens, in complement activation, 294
