Clinical Pharmacology During Pregnancy
Clinical Pharmacology 
During Pregnancy
Edited by 
Donald R. Mattison
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON 
NEW YORK • OXFORD PARIS • SAN DIEGO 
SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
Academic Press in an imprint of Elsevier
Second Edition
Clinical Pharmacology
During Pregnancy
Second Edition
Edited by
Donald Mattison
University of South Carolina,
Arnold School of Public Health,
Columbia, SC, United States
Risk Sciences International, Ottawa, ON, Canada
School of Epidemiology and Public Health,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada
Lee-Ann Halbert
Associate Professor of Nursing
University of South Carolina
Beaufort, Bluffton
SC, United States
Academic Press is an imprint of Elsevier
125 London Wall, London EC2Y 5AS, United Kingdom
525 B Street, Suite 1650, San Diego, CA 92101, United States
50 Hampshire Street, 5th Floor, Cambridge, MA 02139, United States
The Boulevard, Langford Lane, Kidlington, Oxford OX5 1GB, United Kingdom
Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information
storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on
how to seek permission, further information about the Publisher’s permissions policies
and our arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the
Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright
by the Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this ﬁeld are constantly changing. As new research and
experience broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional
practices, or medical treatment may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in
evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described
herein. In using such information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety
and the safety of others, including parties for whom they have a professional
responsibility.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or
editors, assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a
matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any
methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN: 978-0-12-818902-3
For information on all Academic Press publications visit our
website at https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals
Publisher: Andre Gerhard Wolff
Acquisitions Editor: Erin Hill-Parks
Editorial Project Manager: Tracy I. Tufaga
Production Project Manager: Stalin Viswanathan
Cover Designer: Victoria Pearson
Typeset by TNQ Technologies
This book is dedicated to all the individuals who have added to
and beneﬁt from the collective knowledge and wisdom presented
within this book. The chapter authors share their insights with the
express goal of helping health care practitioners and their clients
make the best clinical decisions when it comes to the use of
medications in pregnancy.
         
This page intentionally left blank
Contributors
Mahmoud Abdelwahab
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, United States
Mahmoud S. Ahmed
Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX, United States
Sarah Armstrong
Frimley Park Hospital, Surrey, United Kingdom
Cheston M. Berlin, Jr.
Department of Pediatrics/Division of Academic General Pediatrics, Penn State
College of Medicine, Penn Statae Children’s Hospital, Hershey, PA, United States
Brookie M. Best
University of California, Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, San Diego, CA, United States
Carolyn Bottone-Post
University of Northern Colorado, Greeley, CO, United States
Shannon M. Clark
Department of ObGyn, Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, University of Texas
Medical Branch-Galveston, Galveston, TX, United States
Maged M. Costantine
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, United States
Kala R. Crobarger
Tanner Health System School of Nursing, University of West Georgia, Carrollton,
GA, United States
Cara D. Dolin
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Pennsylvania, Perelman
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, United States
Jeffrey W. Fisher
Division of Biochemical Toxicology, National Center for Toxicological Research,
Food and Drug Administration, Jefferson, AR, United States; ScitoVation, LLC,
Durham, NC, United States
David A. Flockhart
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, United States
Jeffrey S. Fouche-Camargo
School of Health Sciences, Georgia Gwinnett College, Lawrenceville, GA, United
States
xxi
William D. Fraser
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Universite´ de Sherbrooke,
Sherbrooke, QC, Canada
Jennifer L. Grasch
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, United States
David M. Haas
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, United States
Lee-Ann Halbert
University of South Carolina Beaufort, Bluffton, SC, United States
Isabelle Hardy
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Universite´ de Sherbrooke,
Sherbrooke, QC, Canada
Carmen V. Harrison
School of Nursing, Simmons University, Boston, MA, United States
Mary F. Hebert
Departments of Pharmacy and Obstetrics & Gynecology, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA, United States
Henry M. Hess
Emeritus Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Rochester School
of Medicine, Rochester, NY
Janelle Komorowski
Department of Nurse-midwifery, Frontier Nursing University, Versailles, KY,
United States
Miao Li
Division of Biochemical Toxicology, National Center for Toxicological Research,
Food and Drug Administration, Jefferson, AR, United States
Megan Lutz
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Department of
Medicine, Madison, WI, United States
Donald R. Mattison
University of South Carolina, Arnold School of Public Health, Columbia, SC,
United States; Risk Sciences International, Ottawa, ON, Canada; School of
Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada
xxii
Contributors
Darshan Mehta
Division of Biochemical Toxicology, National Center for Toxicological Research,
Food and Drug Administration, Jefferson, AR, United States
Jeremiah D. Momper
University of California, Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, San Diego, CA, United States
Luis A. Monsivais
Department of ObGyn, Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, University of Texas
Medical Branch-Galveston, Galveston, TX, United States
Jennifer A. Namazy
Scripps Clinic, San Diego, CA, United States
Luis Pacheco
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, United States
Maria P. Ramirez-Cruz
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of New Mexico School of
Medicine, Albuquerque, NM, United States
William F. Rayburn
Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of New Mexico School of Medicine,
Albuquerque, NM, United States
Michael D. Reed
Professor Emeritus of Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine,
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, United States
Sharon E. Robertson
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, United States
Erik Rytting
Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX, United States
Rachel Ryu
Department of Pharmacy, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States
Sumona Saha
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Department of
Medicine, Madison, WI, United States
Michael Schatz
Kaiser Permanente, San Diego, CA, United States
Contributors
xxiii
Jeanne M. Schilder
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, United States
Steven A. Seifert
Department of Emergency Medicine, University of New Mexico School of
Medicine, Albuquerque, NM, United States; Medical, New Mexico Poison and
Drug Information Center, Clinical Toxicology, Albuquerque, NM, United States
Harry Soljak
Frimley Park Hospital, Surrey, United Kingdom
Kimberly K. Trout
Department of Family and Community Health, University of Pennsylvania, School
of Nursing, Philadelphia, PA, United States
Jennifer Waltz
School of Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, United
States
Xiaoxia Yang
Division of Infectious Disease Pharmacology, Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, MD, United States
Andrew Youmans
University of Michigan School of Nursing, MI, United States
xxiv
Contributors
Acknowledgment
Although each chapter author is acknowledged by having his/her/their name
associated with the chapters, the timing of this book necessitates an additional thank
you to each author. Research and writing for this book started before anyone was
aware that a pandemic would change the world and raise concerns about therapeutic
interventions during pregnancy.
As the authors became involved with the challenges of working in healthcare, a
world turned upside downdlong hours in uncertain times, isolation, trying to
understand and predict the impact of coronavirus on pregnancy, shortages of
equipment and staff, and countless other trials of the timesdthe authors continued
their research and writing for these chapters.
Under normal times, completing a book chapter takes dedication and commit-
ment, and during pandemic, it goes beyond measure. For this, we are appreciative.
xxv
         
This page intentionally left blank
Introduction
1
Donald R. Mattison1,2,3, Lee-Ann Halbert 4
1University of South Carolina, Arnold School of Public Health, Columbia, SC, United States;
2Risk Sciences International, Ottawa, ON, Canada; 3School of Epidemiology and Public Health,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada; 4University of South Carolina Beaufort, Bluffton,
SC, United States
Over the past decade, attention to clinical therapeutics during pregnancy has grown
substantially [1e3]. Examples of these advances are summarized in many different
chapters in this edition Despite these advances, there is increasing concern that
discovery and development of new drugs for these important populations is lagging
[4e9]. For example, while there are many advances in treating depression and mood
disorders, we are still struggling with questions concerning whether these diseases
should be treated during pregnancy [Chapter 14]. Clearly, select populations are
excluded from drug development, especially women and children [5,10e12]. One
consequence of this failure to develop drugs for maternal and child health is to disso-
ciate therapeutic opportunities for women and children from the drugs and treat-
ments currently available. This distancing of women and children from drug
development and therapeutic knowledge produces a host of clinical challenges for
the concerned practitioner. In the absence of sufﬁcient therapeutic knowledge,
appropriate dosing is not known [[13e17], see Chapter 26]. Without the understand-
ing of appropriate dosing, the clinician does not know if the dose recommended on
the product label will produce the desired drug concentration at the site of action, or
if the concentration produced will be above or below the needed concentration,
producing toxicity or inadequate response, respectively. Similarly, without thought-
ful therapeutic development in women and children, it is not known if differences in
pharmacodynamics will produce different treatment goals and needs for monitoring
effectiveness and safety [14,18e21].
A consequence of the failure to develop drugs for use in pregnancy is that most
drugs are not tested for use during pregnancy [4,22]; consequently, labeling, which
may include extensive information about fetal safety [10,23], includes nothing about
dosing, appropriate treatment, efﬁcacy, or maternal safety [3e5,10,11,22,23]. Yet,
these are concerns of health care providers considering treatment during pregnancy.
Therefore, the practitioner treats the pregnant woman with the same dose recom-
mended for use in adults (typically men) or may decide not to treat the disease at
all. However, is the choice of not treating a woman during pregnancy better than
dealing with the challenges which accompany treatment? Clearly, treatment of
CHAPTER
1
Clinical Pharmacology During Pregnancy. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818902-3.00012-9
Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
depression poses risks for both mother and fetus, as does stopping treatment
[24e26]. This is also the case with respect to inﬂuenza during pregnancy
[13,27,28]. All combined, the state of therapeutics during pregnancy underscores
the continued tension that exists between maternaleplacentalefetal health and
maternal quality of life during pregnancy and the lack of critical study of “gesta-
tional therapeutics.” This book hopes to address many of these imbalances.
A second and equally important aspect of this edition is the focus on collabora-
tive practice. Physicians and their students, nurses (advanced practice and gener-
alist) and their students, and physician assistants (and their students) are all
involved in the care of the pregnant woman. The American College of Nurse-
Midwives and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists formalized
support of the collaborative practice between midwives and physicians in statements
dating back to 2011 [29]. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
2016 Executive Summary on collaborative practice extends interdisciplinary prac-
tice support to include not only physicians and nurses but also pharmacists and
physician assistants [30]. This edition reﬂects this goal of collaborative practice,
with an editorial team comprised of a physician and certiﬁed nurse-midwife.
Medical and health care providers caring for women during pregnancy have
many excellent resources describing the safety of medications for the fetus
[10,23]. However, none of these references provide information on appropriate
dosing as well as the efﬁcacy of the various medications used during pregnancy
for maternal/placental therapeutics. We are all familiar with the potential/actual
costs, ﬁnancial and psychosocial, of having treatments which produce develop-
mental toxicity; however, how many of us ever think critically about the costs of
having inadequate therapeutic options to treat the major diseases of pregnancy,
growth restriction, pregnancy loss, and preeclampsia/eclampsia? Where we have
effective treatments for maternal diseases, infection, depression, diabetes, and
hypertension, we are recognizing that continuation of treatment during pregnancy
carries beneﬁt for mother, placenta, and baby. In the end what is important for the
mother, baby, and family is the appropriate balancing of beneﬁt and riskdas indeed
is the important balancing for all clinical therapeutics [11,12]. This book provides
medical and health professionals involved in the care of pregnant women with
contemporary information on clinical pharmacology for pregnancy. It covers an
overview of the impact of pregnancy on drug disposition, summarizing current
research about the changes of pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics during
pregnancy. This is followed by speciﬁc sections on the treatment, dosing, and clin-
ical effectiveness of medications during pregnancy, providing health care providers
with an essential reference on how to appropriately treat women with medications
during pregnancy. At one level, the question is simple: how to treat, how to monitor
for beneﬁt and risk, or how to know if treatment is successful? This book was devel-
oped to explore that question for women during pregnancy. The book is meant to be
a guide to clinicians who care for women during pregnancy. We hope the busy
clinician and student of obstetrics will ﬁnd this a useful guide.
2
CHAPTER 1 Introduction
References
[1] Zajicek A, Giacoia GP. Obstetric clinical pharmacology: coming of age. Clin Pharma-
col Ther 2007;81(4):481e2.
[2] Schwartz JB. The current state of knowledge on age, sex, and their interactions on clin-
ical pharmacology. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2007;82(1):87e96.
[3] Kearns GL, Ritschel WA, Wilson JT, Spielberg SP. Clinical pharmacology: a discipline
called to action for maternal and child health. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2007;81(4):463e8.
[4] Malek A, Mattison DR. Drug development for use during pregnancy: impact of the
placenta. Expet Rev Obstet Gynecol 2010;5(4):437e54.
[5] Thornton JG. Drug development and obstetrics: where are we right now? J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 2009;22(Suppl. 2):46e9.
[6] Woodcock J, Woosley R. The FDA critical path initiative and its influence on new drug
development. Annu Rev Med 2008;59:1e2.
[7] The PME. Drug development for maternal health cannot be left to the whims of the
market. PLoS Med 2008;5(6):e140.
[8] Hawcutt DB, Smyth RL. Drug development for children: how is pharma tackling an
unmet need? IDrugs 2008;11(7):502e7.
[9] Adams CP, Brantner VV. Estimating the cost of new drug development: is it really $802
million? Health Aff 2006;25(2):420e8.
[10] Lo WY, Friedman JM. Teratogenicity of recently introduced medications in human
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 2002;100(3):465e73.
[11] Fisk NM, Atun R. Market failure and the poverty of new drugs in maternal health. PLoS
Med 2008;5(1):e22.
[12] Thornton J. The drugs we deserve. BJOG 2003;110(11):969e70.
[13] Beigi RH, Han K, Venkataramanan R, Hankins GD, Clark S, Hebert MF, et al. Pharma-
cokinetics of oseltamivir among pregnant and nonpregnant women. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 2011;204(6 Suppl. 1):S84e8.
[14] Rothberger S, Carr D, Brateng D, Hebert M, Easterling TR. Pharmacodynamics of
clonidine therapy in pregnancy: a heterogeneous maternal response impacts fetal
growth. Am J Hypertens 2010;23(11):1234e40.
[15] Eyal S, Easterling TR, Carr D, Umans JG, Miodovnik M, Hankins GD, et al. Pharma-
cokinetics of metformin during pregnancy. Drug Metab Dispos 2010;38(5):833e40.
[16] Hebert MF, Ma X, Naraharisetti SB, Krudys KM, Umans JG, Hankins GD, et al. Are we
optimizing gestational diabetes treatment with glyburide? The pharmacologic basis for
better clinical practice. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2009;85(6):607e14.
[17] Andrew MA, Easterling TR, Carr DB, Shen D, Buchanan ML, Rutherford T, et al.
Amoxicillin pharmacokinetics in pregnant women: modeling and simulations of dosage
strategies. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2007;81(4):547e56.
[18] Na-Bangchang K, Manyando C, Ruengweerayut R, Kioy D, Mulenga M, Miller GB,
et al. The pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of atovaquone and proguanil for
the treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria in third-trimester pregnant
women. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2005;61(8):573e82.
[19] Hebert MF, Carr DB, Anderson GD, Blough D, Green GE, Brateng DA, et al. Pharma-
cokinetics and pharmacodynamics of atenolol during pregnancy and postpartum. J Clin
Pharmacol 2005;45(1):25e33.
References
3
[20] Meibohm B, Derendorf H. Pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic studies in drug product
development. J Pharmacol Sci 2002;91(1):18e31.
[21] Lu J, Pfister M, Ferrari P, Chen G, Sheiner L. Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic
modelling of magnesium plasma concentration and blood pressure in preeclamptic
women. Clin Pharmacokinet 2002;41(13):1105e13.
[22] Feghali MN, Mattison DR. Clinical therapeutics in pregnancy. J Biomed Biotechnol
2011;2011:783528.
[23] Adam MP, Polifka JE, Friedman JM. Evolving knowledge of the teratogenicity of med-
ications in human pregnancy. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet 2011;157(3):
175e82.
[24] Markus EM, Miller LJ. The other side of the risk equation: exploring risks of untreated
depression and anxiety in pregnancy. J Clin Psychiatr 2009;70(9):1314e5.
[25] Marcus SM, Heringhausen JE. Depression in childbearing women: when depression
complicates pregnancy. Prim Care 2009;36(1):151e65 [ix].
[26] Marcus SM. Depression during pregnancy: rates, risks and consequences e Motherisk
Update 2008. Can J Clin Pharmacol 2009;16(1):e15e22.
[27] Mirochnick M, Clarke D. Oseltamivir pharmacokinetics in pregnancy: a commentary.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 2011;204(6 Suppl. 1):S94e5.
[28] Greer LG, Leff RD, Rogers VL, Roberts SW, McCracken Jr GH, Wendel Jr GD, et al.
Pharmacokinetics of oseltamivir according to trimester of pregnancy. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 2011;204(6 Suppl. 1):S89e93.
[29] Statement of policy: joint statement of practice relations between obstetrician-
gynecologists and certiﬁed nurse-midwives/certiﬁed midwives, vol. 129; 2017. p.
e117ee122.
[30] Executive summary: collaboration in practice: implementing team-based care. Obstet
Gynecol 2016;127:612e7.
4
CHAPTER 1 Introduction
Physiologic changes
during pregnancy
2
Mahmoud Abdelwahab1, Maged M. Costantine1, Luis Pacheco2
1Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, United States; 2University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX, United States
2.1 Physiologic changes during pregnancy
Human pregnancy is characterized by profound anatomic and physiologic changes
that affect virtually all systems and organs in the body. Many of these changes begin
in early gestation. Understanding of the various physiologic adaptations in preg-
nancy is vital to the clinician and the pharmacologist as many of these alterations
will have a signiﬁcant impact on pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of
different therapeutic agents. A typical example involves the increase in glomerular
ﬁltration rate (GFR) during pregnancy leading to increased clearance of heparins,
thus requiring the use of higher doses during pregnancy. This chapter discusses
the most relevant physiologic changes that occur during human gestation.
2.2 Cardiovascular system
Profound changes in the cardiovascular system characterize human pregnancy and
are likely to affect the pharmacokinetics of different pharmaceutical agents.
Table 2.1 summarizes the main cardiovascular changes during pregnancy.
Cardiac output (CO) increases by 30%e50% during pregnancy, secondary to an
increase in both heart rate and stroke volume; the increase in CO in early pregnancy
is thought to be mainly mediated by an increase in stroke volume, whereas later in
gestation the increase is attributed to elevated heart rate [1]. Most of the increase in
CO occurs early in pregnancy such that by the end of the ﬁrst trimester 75% of the
increase has already occurred. In addition, CO is expected to be 15% more in a twin
pregnancy compared to a singleton [2]. CO plateau at 28e32 weeks and afterward
remains relatively stable until delivery. At 32 weeks, CO increased to about 7.21
l/min vs 4.88 l/min prior to conception [3].
As CO increases, pregnant women experience a signiﬁcant decrease in both
systemic and pulmonary vascular resistances [4]. Systemic vascular resistance
decreases in early pregnancy, reaching a nadir (5e10 mm below baseline) at 14e
24 weeks. Subsequently, vascular resistance starts rising, progressively approaching
the prepregnancy value at term [4]. Blood pressure tends to fall toward the end of the
CHAPTER
5
Clinical Pharmacology During Pregnancy. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818902-3.00008-7
Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
ﬁrst trimester and then rises again in the third trimester to prepregnancy levels [5].
Physiologic hypotension may be present between weeks 14 and 24, likely due to the
decrease in the systemic vascular resistance observed during pregnancy.
Maternal blood volume increases in pregnancy by 40%e50%, reaching
maximum values at 32 weeks [6]. Despite the increase in blood volume, central
ﬁlling pressures like the central venous and pulmonary occlusion pressures remain
unchanged secondary to an increase in compliance of the right and left ventricles [7].
The precise etiology of the increase in blood volume is not clearly understood. How-
ever, increased mineralocorticoid activity with water and sodium retention does
occur [8]. Production of arginine vasopressin (resulting in increased water absorp-
tion in the distal nephron) is also increased during pregnancy and thought to further
contribute to hypervolemia. Secondary hemodilutional anemia and a decrease in
serum colloid osmotic pressure (due to a drop in albumin levels) are observed.
Finally, left ventricular wall thickness and left ventricular mass increase by 28%
and 52% above pregnancy values [9]. Despite the multiple changes in cardiovascular
parameters, left ventricular ejection fraction does not appear to change during
pregnancy [10].
The latter physiological changes could have theoretical implications on the phar-
macokinetics of drugs in pregnancy. The increase in blood volume, increased capil-
lary hydrostatic pressure, and decrease in albumin concentrations would be expected
to increase signiﬁcantly the volume of distribution of hydrophilic substances. In
addition, highly protein-bound compounds may display higher free levels due to
decreased protein binding availability.
Table 2.1 Summary of cardiovascular changes during pregnancy.
Variable
Change
Mean arterial pressure
No signiﬁcant change
Central venous pressure
No change
Pulmonary arterial occlusion
pressure
No change
Systemic vascular
resistance
Decreased by 21% (nadir at 14e24 weeks)
Pulmonary vascular
resistance
Decreased by 34%
Heart rate
Increased by 10e20 bpm maximum in third trimester
Stroke volume
Increases to a maximum of 85 mL at 20 weeks of
gestation
Colloid osmotic pressure
Decreased by 14% (associated with a decrease in serum
osmolarity noticed as early as the ﬁrst trimester of
pregnancy)
Hemoglobin concentration
Decreased (maximum hemodilution is achieved
at 30e32 weeks)
6
CHAPTER 2 Physiologic changes during pregnancy
2.3 Respiratory system
The respiratory system undergoes both mechanical and functional changes during
pregnancy. Table 2.2 summarizes these changes.
The sharp increase in estrogen concentrations during pregnancy leads to hyper-
vascularity and edema of the upper respiratory mucosa [11]. These changes result in
an increased prevalence of rhinitis and epistaxis in pregnant individuals. Theoreti-
cally, inhaled medications such as steroids used in the treatment of asthma could
be more readily absorbed in the pregnant patient. Despite this theoretical concern,
however, there is no evidence of increased toxicity with the use of these agents
during pregnancy.
Progesterone acts centrally to increase the sensitivity of respiratory center to car-
bon dioxide [12]. This drives an increase in minute ventilation by 30%e50% sec-
ondary to an increase in tidal volume. As a result of in the increase in ventilation,
there in an increase in the arterial partial pressure of oxygen to 101e105 mmHg
and a diminished arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2), with normal
values of PaCO2 of the range 28e31 mmHg during pregnancy. This decrement al-
lows for a gradient to exist between the PaCO2 of the fetus and the mother so that
carbon dioxide can diffuse freely from the fetus into the mother through the placenta
and then be eliminated through the maternal lungs. Of note, maternal respiratory rate
remains unchanged during pregnancy [13].
The normal maternal arterial blood pH in pregnancy is between 7.4 and 7.45,
consistent with a mild respiratory alkalosis. The latter is partially corrected by an
Table 2.2 Summary of respiratory changes during pregnancy.
Variable
Change
Tidal volume
Increased by 30%e50% (increase starts as early as the ﬁrst
trimester)
Respiratory rate
No change
Minute ventilation
Increased by 30%e50% (increase starts as early as the ﬁrst
trimester)
Partial pressure of
oxygen
Increased (increase starts as early as the ﬁrst trimester)
Partial pressure of carbon
dioxide
Decreased (decrease starts as early as the ﬁrst trimester)
Arterial pH
Slightly increased (increase starts as early as the ﬁrst
trimester)
Vital capacity
No change
Functional residual
capacity
Decreased by 10%e20% (predisposes pregnant patients to
hypoxemia during induction of general anesthesia)
Total lung capacity
Decreased by 4%e5% (maximum diaphragmatic elevation
happens during the third trimester of pregnancy)
2.3 Respiratory system
7
increased renal excretion of bicarbonate to allow for a normal serum bicarbonate
between 18 and 21 meq/L during gestation [14]. As pregnancy progresses, the
increased intraabdominal pressure (likely secondary to uterine enlargement, bowel
dilation, and third-spacing of ﬂuids into the peritoneal cavity secondary to decreased
colloid osmotic pressure) displaces the diaphragm upward by 4e5 cm leading to alve-
olar collapse in the bases of the lungs. Bibasilar atelectasis results in a 10%e20%
decrease in the functional residual capacity and increased right to left vascular shunt
[15,16]. The decrease in expiratory reserve volume is coupled with an increase in
inspiratory reserve volume. As a result, no change is seen in the vital capacity [15].
An increase in the transverse diameter of the rib cage occurs to accommodate the
upward shit of the diaphragm due to the enlarging gravid uterus and upward
displacement of intraabdominal contents, in order to allow space for the lung and
preserve total lung capacity. The average subcostal angle of the ribs at the xiphoidal
level increases from 68.5 degrees at the beginning of pregnancy to 103.5 degrees at
term [17].
Changes in respiratory physiology may impact the pharmacokinetics of certain
drugs. Topical drugs administered into the nasopharynx and upper airway could
be more readily available to the circulation as local vascularity and permeability
of the mucosa are increased. As discussed earlier, the latter assumption is theoret-
ical, and no evidence of increased toxicity from inhaled or topical agents during
pregnancy has been demonstrated.
2.4 Renal system
Numerous physiologic changes occur in the renal system during pregnancy. These
changes are summarized in Table 2.3.
The relaxing effect of progesterone on smooth muscle and mechanical effects of
the enlarging uterus leads to dilation of the urinary tract with subsequent urinary sta-
sis. It is estimated that the dilated collecting system seen in pregnancy can hold
200e300 mL of urine [18]. Hydronephrosis affects 43%e100% of pregnant women
and is more prevalent with advancing gestation. However, studies have shown that
exogenous administration of progesterone in nonpregnant women fails to cause
hydronephrosis. The changes observed in the urinary tract predispose pregnant
women to infectious complications, most notably urinary tract infections [19].
The 50% increase in renal blood ﬂow during early pregnancy leads to a parallel
increase in the GFR of approximately 50%. This massive elevation in GFR is present
as early as 14 weeks of pregnancy [20]. As a direct consequence of increased GFR,
creatinine clearance increases and serum values of creatinine and blood urea nitro-
gen decrease. In fact, a serum creatinine above 0.8 mg/dL may be indicative of un-
derlying renal dysfunction during pregnancy.
Besides detoxiﬁcation, one of the most important functions of the kidney is to
regulate sodium and water metabolism. Progesterone favors natriuresis, while
8
CHAPTER 2 Physiologic changes during pregnancy
estrogen favors sodium retention [21]. Although the increase in GFR leads to more
sodium wasting, it is counterbalanced by an elevated level of aldosterone which re-
absorbs sodium in the distal nephron [21]. Relaxin may also play a role in water
retention since it stimulates ADH production in animal studies and is normally
elevated in pregnancy [22]. The net effect during pregnancy is a state of avid water
and sodium retention leading to a signiﬁcant increase in total body water with up to
6 L of ﬂuid gained in the extracellular space and 2 L in the intracellular space. This
“dilutional effect” leads to a mild decrease in both serum sodium (concentration of
135e138 meq/L) and serum osmolarity (normal value in pregnancy w280 mOsm/
L) [23]. In comparison, in the nonpregnant state, normal serum osmolarity is
286e289 mOsm/L with a concomitant normal serum sodium concentration of
135e145 meq/L.
Changes in renal physiology have profound repercussions on drug pharmacoki-
netics. Agents cleared renally are expected to have shorter half-lives, and ﬂuid reten-
tion is expected to increase the volume of distribution of hydrophilic agents. A
typical example involves lithium. Lithium is mainly cleared by the kidney, and dur-
ing the third trimester of pregnancy, clearance is doubled compared to the nonpreg-
nant state [24]. However, not all renally cleared medications undergo such dramatic
increases in excretion rates. For example, digoxin clearance is only increased by
30% during the third trimester of pregnancy.
Table 2.3 Summary of renal changes during pregnancy.
Variable
Change
Renal blood ﬂow
Increased by 50%. Increase noticed as early as 14 weeks
of gestation
Glomerular ﬁltration rate
Increased by 50%. Increase noticed as early as 14 weeks
of gestation
Serum creatinine
Decreased (normal value is 0.5e0.8 mg/dL during
pregnancy)
Renineangiotensine
aldosterone system
Increased function leading to sodium and water retention
noticed from early in the ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy
Total body water
Increased by up to 8 L. 6 L gained in the extracellular
space and 2 L in the intracellular space
Ureterebladder muscle tone
Decreased secondary to increases in progesterone.
Smooth muscle relaxation leads to urine stasis with
increased risk for urinary tract infections
Urinary protein excretion
Increased secondary to elevated ﬁltration rate. Values up
to 260 mg of protein in 24 h are considered normal in
pregnancy
Serum bicarbonate
Decreased by 4e5 meq/L. Normal value in pregnancy is
18e22 meq/L (24 meq/L in nonpregnant individuals)
2.4 Renal system
9
2.5 Gastrointestinal system
The gastrointestinal tract is signiﬁcantly affected during pregnancy secondary to
progesterone-mediated inhibition of smooth muscle motility [25]. Table 2.4 summa-
rizes these changes.
Gastric emptying and small bowel transit time are considerably prolonged during
pregnancy. The increase in intragastric pressure (secondary to delayed emptying and
external compression from the gravid uterus) together with a decrease in resting
muscle tone of the lower esophageal sphincter favors gastroesophageal regurgita-
tion. Of note, studies have shown that gastric acid secretion is not affected during
pregnancy [26]. However, overall gastric acidity might be increased due to increased
serum levels of gastrin [27]. Finally, constipation commonly affects pregnant
women and is multifactorial in nature. The combination of increased bowel transit
time, mechanical obstruction by gravid uterus, decreased maternal activity,
decreased motilin, increased colonic water and sodium absorption, and routine
iron supplementation all contribute to constipation in pregnancy [28].
Conﬂicting data exist regarding liver blood ﬂow during pregnancy. Recently,
with the use of Doppler ultrasonography, investigators found that blood ﬂow in
the hepatic artery does not change during pregnancy, but portal venous return to
the liver was increased [29].
Most of the liver function tests are not altered. Speciﬁcally, serum transaminases,
bilirubin, lactate dehydrogenase, and gamma-glutamyl transferase are all unaffected
by pregnancy. Serum alkaline phosphatase is elevated secondary to production from
the placenta and levels two to four times higher than that of nonpregnant individuals
may be seen [30]. Other liver products that are normally elevated include
serum cholesterol, ﬁbrinogen, and most of the clotting factors, ceruloplasmin,
Table 2.4 Summary of gastrointestinal changes during pregnancy.
Variable
Change
Gastric emptying time
Prolonged, increasing the risk of aspiration in pregnant
women. Intragastric pressure is also increased
Gastric acid secretion
Unchanged
Liver blood ﬂow
Unchanged in the hepatic artery; however, more venous
return in the portal vein has been documented with
ultrasound Doppler studies
Liver function tests
No change during pregnancy except for alkaline
phosphatase (increases in pregnancy secondary to
placental contribution)
Bowel/gallbladder motility
Decreased, likely secondary to smooth muscle
relaxation induced by progesterone
Pancreatic function enzymes
(amylase and lipase)
Unchanged
10
CHAPTER 2 Physiologic changes during pregnancy
thyroid-binding globulin, and cortisol-binding globulin (CBG). The observed
increase in all of these proteins is likely estrogen mediated [30]. Progesterone, on
the other hand, decreases gallbladder motility rendering the pregnant woman at
increased risk for cholelithiasis.
These observed physiologic changes can clearly affect pharmacokinetics of
orally administered agents, with delayed absorption and onset of action resulting.
For example, the pharmacokinetics of antimalarial agents undergo signiﬁcant
changes at the gastrointestinal level during pregnancy that could decrease their
therapeutic efﬁcacy [31].
2.6 Hematologic and coagulation systems
Pregnancy is associated with an increased white cell count, mainly consisting of an
increase in neutrophils. On the contrary, lymphocyte count decreases during the
ﬁrst and second trimesters with return to baseline in the third trimester. The rise
in white cell count is thought to be related to increased bone marrow granulopoiesis
and may make a diagnosis of infection difﬁcult at times. However, it is usually not
associated with signiﬁcant elevations in immature forms like bands. There is also an
absolute monocytosis and increase in the monocyte-to-lymphocyte ratio, which is
thought to aid in preventing fetal allograft rejection by inﬁltrating decidual tissue
at 7e20 weeks of gestation [32].
An increase in red cell mass by 30% during pregnancy is likely secondary to an
increase in renal erythropoietin production. Placental lactogen may also enhance the
effect of erythropoietin on erythropoiesis [32]. This occurs simultaneously with a
much higher (around 45%) increase in plasma volume leading to what is referred
to as “physiologic anemia” of pregnancy which peaks early in the third trimester
(30e32 weeks) [33,34]. This hemodilution is thought to confer maternal and fetal
survival advantage as the patient will lose more dilute blood during delivery. In addi-
tion, the decreased blood viscosity improves uterine perfusion, while the increase in
red cell mass serves to optimize oxygen transport to the fetus. As an example,
patients with preeclampsia, despite having ﬂuid retention, suffer from reduced intra-
vascular volume (secondary to diffuse endothelial injury and resultant third-
spacing), which makes them less tolerant to peripartum blood loss [35,36].
Pregnancy is also associated with changes in the coagulation and ﬁbrinolytic
pathways that favor a hypercoagulable state. Plasma levels of ﬁbrinogen, clotting
factors (VII, VIII, IX, X, and XII), and von Willebrand factor increase during preg-
nancy leading to a hypercoagulable state. Factor XI decreases and levels of
prothrombin and factor V remain the same. Protein C is usually unchanged, but pro-
tein S is decreased in pregnancy. There is no change in the levels of antithrombin III.
The ﬁbrinolytic system is suppressed during pregnancy as a result of increased levels
of plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI-1) and reduced plasminogen activator levels.
Platelet function remains normal in pregnancy. Routine coagulation screen panel
will show values around normal.
2.6 Hematologic and coagulation systems
11
This hypercoagulable state predisposes the pregnant patient to a higher risk of
thromboembolism. However, it is also thought to offer survival advantage in mini-
mizing blood loss after delivery [37]. Tables 2.5 and 2.6 summarize some of the most
relevant changes discussed previously.
2.7 Endocrine system
Pregnancy is deﬁned as a “diabetogenic” state. Increased insulin resistance is due
to elevated levels of human placental lactogen, progesterone, estrogen, and
cortisol. Carbohydrate intolerance that occurs only during pregnancy is known
Table 2.5 Hemoglobin values during pregnancy.
Gestational age
Mean hemoglobin value (g/dL)
12 weeks
12.2
28 weeks
11.8
40 weeks
12.9
Table 2.6 Summary of hematological changes during pregnancy.
Variable
Change
Fibrinogen level
Increased (elevation starts in the ﬁrst trimester of
pregnancy and peaks during the third trimester)
Factors VII, VIII, and X
Increased
Von Willebrand factor
Increased
Factors II, IX, and V
No change
Clotting times (prothrombin and
activated partial thromboplastin times)
No change
Protein C, antithrombin III
No change
Protein S
Decreased. Free antigen levels above 30% in the
second trimester and 24% in the third trimester
are considered normal during pregnancy
Plasminogen activator inhibitor
Levels increase 2e3 times leading to a decrease
in ﬁbrinolytic activity
White blood cell count
Elevated. This increase results in a “left shift” with
granulocytosis. Increased peaks at 30 weeks of
gestation. May see values of 20,000e30,000/
mm3 during labor
Platelet count
No change
12
CHAPTER 2 Physiologic changes during pregnancy
as gestational diabetes. Most gestational diabetes patients are managed solely with
a modiﬁed diet. Approximately 10% of patients will require pharmacological treat-
ment, mainly in the form of insulin, glyburide, or even metformin. Available liter-
ature suggests that glyburide and metformin may be as effective as insulin for the
treatment of gestational diabetes.
Pregnancy is also associated with higher glucose levels following a carbohydrate
load. In contrast, maternal fasting is characterized by accelerated starvation,
increased lipolysis, and faster depletion of liver glycogen storage [38]. This is
thought to be related to the increased insulin resistance state of pregnancy induced
by placental hormones such as human placental lactogen. Pancreatic b-cells undergo
hyperplasia during pregnancy resulting in increased insulin production leading to
fasting hypoglycemia and postprandial hyperglycemia. All of these changes facili-
tate placental glucose transfer, as the fetus is primarily dependent on maternal
glucose for its fuel requirements [39].
Leptin is a hormone primarily secreted by adipose tissues. Maternal serum levels
of leptin increase during pregnancy and peak during the second trimester. Leptin in
pregnancy is also produced by the placenta.
When considering changes in certain endocrine glands during pregnancy, the
thyroid gland faces a particular challenge. Due to the hyperestrogenic milieu,
thyroid-binding globulin (the major thyroid hormone (TH)ebinding protein in
serum) increases by almost 150% from a prepregnancy concentration of
15e16 mg/L to 30e40 mg/L in mid-gestation. This forces the thyroid gland to in-
crease its production of THs to keep their free fraction in the serum constant
[40,41]. The increase in THs production occurs mostly in the ﬁrst half of gestation
and plateaus around 20 weeks until term.
Other factors that inﬂuence THs in pregnancy include a minor thyrotropic action
of human chorionic gonadotropin hormone (hCG), higher maternal metabolic rate as
pregnancy progresses, in addition to increase in transplacental transport of TH to the
fetus early in pregnancy, inactivity of placental type III monodeiodinase (which con-
verts T4 to reverse T3), and in maternal renal iodine excretion.
Although the free fraction of T4 and T3 concentrations declines somewhat dur-
ing pregnancy (but remains within normal values), these patients remain clinically
euthyroid [40,41]. Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) decreases during the ﬁrst
half of pregnancy secondary to a negative feedback from peripheral THs secondary
to thyroid gland stimulation by hCG. During the ﬁrst half of pregnancy, the upper
limit of normal value of TSH is 2.5 mIU/L (as compared to 5 mIU/L in the nonpreg-
nant state).
Serum cortisol levels are increased during pregnancy. Most of this elevation is
secondary to increased synthesis of CBG by the liver. Free cortisol levels are also
increased by 30% during gestation.
Serum parathyroid hormone and 1, 25 dihydroxy vitamin D increase to favor an
environment of calcium accumulation in the fetus. The placenta forms a calcium
2.7 Endocrine system
13
pump in which a gradient of calcium and phosphorus is established which favors
the fetus. The total level of calcium decreases, but ionized calcium remains the
same [42].
Finally, the anterior pituitary enlarges 2e3-fold in pregnancy primarily due to
hyperplasia and hypertrophy of lactotrophs, which causes increase in serum prolac-
tin as pregnancy progress. The increase in pituitary size is thought to cause hypophy-
seal artery compression and predisposes the pituitary to infarction in cases of
hypotension secondary to postpartum (i.e., Sheehan syndrome) [43]. The endocrine
changes during pregnancy are summarized in Table 2.7.
2.8 Summary
Pregnancy is associated with profound changes in human physiology. Virtually
every organ in the body is affected and the clinical consequences of these changes
are signiﬁcant. Unfortunately, our knowledge of how these changes affect the phar-
macokinetics and pharmacodynamics of therapeutic agents is still very limited.
Future research involving pharmacokinetics of speciﬁc agents during pregnancy is
desperately needed.
Table 2.7 Summary of endocrine changes during pregnancy.
Variable
Change
Leptin
Increases
Free T4 and T3 levels
Unchanged
Total T4 and T3 levels
Increased secondary to increased levels of thyroid-binding
globulin (TBG) induced by estrogen. This elevation begins as
early as 6 weeks and plateaus at 18 weeks of pregnancy
Thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH)
Decreases in the ﬁrst half of pregnancy and returns to normal in
the second half of gestation. During the ﬁrst 20 weeks of
pregnancy, a normal value is between 0.5 and 2.5 mIU/L
Parathyroid hormone
Increases to favor calcium accumulation in the fetus (PTH) and
1, 25 dihydroxy vitamin D
Total calcium
Decreases
Ionized calcium
Unchanged
Prolactin
Increases
Total cortisol levels
Increased, mainly driven by increased liver synthesis of cortisol-
binding globulin (CBG)
Free serum cortisol
Increased by 30% in pregnancy
14
CHAPTER 2 Physiologic changes during pregnancy
References
[1] Sanghavi M, Rutherford JD. Cardiovascular physiology of pregnancy. Circulation 2014;
130(12):1003e8.
[2] Hunter S, Robson S. Adaptation of the maternal heart in pregnancy. Br Heart J 1992;
68(6):540e3.
[3] Robson SC, Hunter S, Boys RJ, et al. Serial study of factors inﬂuencing changes in car-
diac output during human pregnancy. Am J Physiol 1989;256:H1060e5.
[4] Clark SL, Cotton DB, Lee W, et al. Central hemodynamic assessment of normal term
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161:1439e42.
[5] Seely EW, Ecker J. Chronic hypertension in pregnancy. N Engl J Med 2011;365(5):
439e46.
[6] Hytten FE, Paintin DB. Increase in plasma volume during normal pregnancy. J Obstet
Gynaecol Br Commonw 1963;70:402e7.
[7] Bader RA, Bader MG, Rose DJ, et al. Hemodynamics at rest and during exercise in
normal pregnancy as studied by cardiac catheterization. J Clin Invest 1955;34:
1524e36.
[8] Winkel CA, Milewich L, Parker CR, et al. Conversion of plasma progesterone to des-
oxycorticosterone in men, non pregnant, and pregnant women, and adrenalectomized
subjects. J Clin Invest 1980;66:803e12.
[9] Robson S, Dunlop W, Hunter S. Haemodynamic changes during the early puerperium.
Br Med J 1987:294.
[10] Ducas RA, Elliott JE, Melnyk SF, Premecz S, daSilva M, Cleverley K, Wtorek P,
Mackenzie GS, Helewa ME, Jassal DS. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance in preg-
nancy: insights from the cardiac hemodynamic imaging and remodeling in pregnancy
(CHIRP) study. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson 2014;16:1.
[11] Taylor M. An experimental study of the inﬂuence of the endocrine system on the nasal
respiratory mucosa. J Laryngol Otol 1961;75:972e7.
[12] Lyons HA, Antonio R. The sensitivity of the respiratory center in pregnancy and after
administration of progesterone. Trans Assoc Am Phys 1959;72:173e80.
[13] McAuliffe F, Kametas N, Costello J, et al. Respiratory function in singleton and twin
pregnancy. BJOG 2002;109:765e8.
[14] Elkus R, Popovich J. Respiratory physiology in pregnancy. Clin Chest Med 1992;13:
555e65.
[15] Baldwin GR, Moorthi DS, Whelton JA, et al. New lung functions in pregnancy. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 1977;127:235e9.
[16] Hankins GD, Harvey CJ, Clark SL, et al. The effects of maternal position and cardiac
output on intrapulmonary shunt in normal third-trimester pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
1996;88(3):327e30.
[17] LoMauro A, Aliverti A. Respiratory physiology of pregnancy. Breathe 2015;11(4):
297e301.
[18] Cheung KL, Lafayette RA. Renal physiology of pregnancy. Adv Chronic Kidney Dis
2013;20(3):209e14. https://doi.org/10.1053/j.ackd.2013.01.012.
[19] Schneider DH, Eichner E, Gordon MB. An attempt at production of hydronephrosis of
pregnancy, artiﬁcially induced. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1953;65(3):660e5.
References
15
[20] Davison JM, Dunlop W. Changes in renal hemodynamics and tubular function induced
by normal human pregnancy. Semin Nephrol 1984;4:198e207.
[21] Barron WM, Lindheimer MD. Renal sodium and water handling in pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol Annu 1984;13:35e69.
[22] Thornton SM1, Fitzsimons JT. The effects of centrally administered porcine relaxin on
drinking behaviour in male and female rats. J Neuroendocrinol 1995;7(3):165e9.
[23] Davison JM, Vallotton MB, Lindheimer MD. Plasma osmolality and urinary concentra-
tion and dilution during and after pregnancy. BJOG 1981;88:472e9.
[24] Schou M, Amdisen A, Steenstrup OR. Lithium and pregnancy: hazards to women given
lithium during pregnancy and delivery. Br Med J 1973;2(5859):137e8.
[25] Parry E, Shields R, Turnbull AC. Transit time in the small intestine in pregnancy.
J Obstet Gynaecol Br Commonw 1970;77:900e1.
[26] Cappell M, Garcia A. Gastric and duodenal ulcers during pregnancy. Gastroenterol Clin
North Am 1998;27:169e95.
[27] Milev N, Todorov G, Pumpalov A, Ignatov A. The serum gastrin level in pregnancy
running a normal course. Probl Rentgenol Radiobiol 1982;3:106e11.
[28] Singer AJ1, Brandt LJ. Pathophysiology of the gastrointestinal tract during pregnancy.
Am J Gastroenterol 1991;86(12):1695e712.
[29] Nakai A, Sekiya I, Oya A, et al. Assessment of the hepatic arterial and portal venous
blood ﬂows during pregnancy with Doppler ultrasonography. Arch Obstet Gynecol
2002;266(1):25e9.
[30] Lockitch G. Clinical biochemistry of pregnancy. Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci 1997;34:
67e139.
[31] Wilby KJ, Ensom MH. Pharmacokinetics of antimalarials in pregnancy: a systematic
review. Clin Pharmacokinet 2011;50(11):705e23.
[32] Chandra S, Tripathi A, Mishra A, Amzarul M, Vaish A. Physiological changes in hema-
tological parameters during pregnancy. Indian J Hematol Blood Transfus 2012;28(3):
144e6.
[33] Pritchard JA. Changes in the blood volume during pregnancy and delivery. Anesthesi-
ology 1965;26:393e9.
[34] Peck TM, Arias F. Hematologic changes associated with pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gyne-
col 1979;22:785e98.
[35] Letsky EA. Erythropoiesis in pregnancy. J Perinat Med 1995;23:39e45.
[36] Koller O. The clinical signiﬁcance of hemodilution during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
Surv 1982;37:649e52.
[37] Hehhgren M. Hemostasis during pregnancy and puerperium. Hemostasis 1996;26:
244e7.
[38] Boden G. Fuel metabolism in pregnancy and in gestational diabetes mellitus. Obstet
Gynecol Clin North Am 1996;23:1e10.
[39] Phelps R, Metzger B, Freinkel N. Carbohydrate metabolism in pregnancy. XVII.
Diurnal proﬁles of plasma glucose, insulin, free fatty acids, triglycerides, cholesterol,
and individual amino acids in late normal pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1981;
140:730e6.
[40] Glinoer D. The regulation of thyroid function in pregnancy: pathways of endocrine
adaptation from physiology to pathology. Endocr Rev 1997;18:404e33.
16
CHAPTER 2 Physiologic changes during pregnancy
[41] Glinoer D. What happens to the normal thyroid during pregnancy? Thyroid 1999;9(7):
631e5.
[42] Tal R, Taylor HS, Burney RO, Mooney SB, Giudice LC. Endocrinology of pregnancy.
2021.
[43] Laway B, Mir A. Pregnancy and pituitary disorders: challenges in diagnosis and
management. Indian J Endocrinol Metab 2013;17(6):996e1004.
References
17
         
This page intentionally left blank
Impact of pregnancy on
maternal
pharmacokinetics of
medications
3
Rachel Ryu1, Mary F. Hebert2
1Department of Pharmacy, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States; 2Departments of
Pharmacy and Obstetrics & Gynecology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States
3.1 Introduction
Variability in drug efﬁcacy and safety is multifactorial. Both the pharmacokinetics
(how the body handles the drug) and the pharmacodynamics (how the body responds
to the drug) play signiﬁcant roles in drug efﬁcacy and safety. This chapter will
discuss the effects of pregnancy on medication pharmacokinetics.
The physiologic changes that occur during pregnancy result in marked changes
in the pharmacokinetics for some medications. Whether or not the physiologic
changes will result in clinically signiﬁcant pharmacokinetic changes for an individ-
ual medication depends on many factors. The discussion of these factors will be the
focus of this chapter. Generally speaking, pharmacokinetic changes are most impor-
tant clinically for medications with narrow therapeutic ranges. The therapeutic range
includes all the concentrations above the minimum effective concentration, but less
than the maximum tolerated concentration (Fig. 3.1A and B). Medications such as
cyclosporine,
tacrolimus,
lithium,
warfarin,
carbamazepine,
valproic
acid,
phenytoin, digoxin, vancomycin, and the aminoglycosides are examples of narrow
therapeutic range drugs. These are medications for which the concentrations needed
for therapeutic beneﬁt are very close to those that result in toxicity. For these agents,
small changes in drug concentrations can lead to inefﬁcacy if the concentrations
decrease or intolerable toxicity if the concentrations increase. Typically, when
drug interactions, disease states or conditions alter the concentration-time proﬁle
for a medication, if no changes have occurred in the pharmacodynamics, the
patient’s dosage is adjusted to keep the concentrations similar to those prior to the
altered state or similar to those for the population in which the drug has been
approved. This dosage adjustment is done to maintain concentrations within the
therapeutic range. For narrow therapeutic range medications, even a 25% change
in drug concentration can be considered clinically signiﬁcant. In contrast, for
most medications, which have wide therapeutic ranges, small changes in
CHAPTER
19
Clinical Pharmacology During Pregnancy. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818902-3.00015-4
Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
pharmacokinetics have little to no clinical effect. However, given the magnitude of
some of the pharmacokinetic changes that occur during pregnancy in which there
can be 2e6-fold changes in drug exposure (Fig. 3.2A), even medications that
have wide therapeutic ranges can be clinically affected.
3.2 Effects of pregnancy on pharmacokinetic parameters
A change in pharmacokinetics for a medication can result in the need to change
dosage. As described above, altered concentrations during pregnancy can result in
the need for higher (Fig. 3.2A) or lower (Fig. 3.2B) drug dosage to maintain concen-
trations within the therapeutic range. The changes in medication pharmacokinetics
during pregnancy in some cases are so great that altered medication selection should
be considered. For example, oral metoprolol concentrations are 2e4-fold lower
during pregnancy than in the nonpregnant state [1,2]. Given the magnitude and vari-
ability in metoprolol concentrations during pregnancy, for those patients that require
a beta blocker (e.g., cardiac rate control), selecting another agent such as atenolol,
which is renally eliminated, should be considered. Even with the changes in renal
function that are expected during pregnancy, atenolol will give much more consis-
tent and reliable drug concentrations in pregnant patients than metoprolol [1e3].
Although there are fetal risks with the utilization of beta blockers during pregnancy,
such as intrauterine growth restriction, if a beta blocker is required during preg-
nancy, selecting an agent that will consistently and reliably achieve the desirable
therapeutic effect requires consideration of pharmacokinetic changes in medication
selection.
FIGURE 3.1
(A) is a stereotypic oral concentration-time curve. The upper horizontal solid line
represents the maximum tolerated concentration, and the lower horizontal solid line
represents the minimum effective concentration. The therapeutic range for this drug,
represented by the vertical double-sided arrow, includes all the concentrations between
the minimum effective concentration and the maximum tolerated concentration.
(B) illustrates a stereotypic oral concentration-time curve with the shaded area depicting
the area under the concentration-time curve, which is a measure of total drug exposure.
20
CHAPTER 3 Pharmacokinetics in pregnancy
The following sections will discuss the commonly estimated pharmacokinetic
parameters, their application, and how they might be altered during pregnancy.
The actual calculation of these parameters will not be discussed in this chapter.
However, the reader is referred to the many publications that discuss in detail the
mathematical equations used to determine the pharmacokinetic parameters [4,5].
3.2.1 Extraction ratio
Extraction ratio (ER) is the fraction of drug that is removed from the blood or plasma
as it crosses the eliminating organ (e.g., liver or kidney). Knowing whether a drug
has a high (ER > 0.7; e.g., morphine, metoprolol, verapamil), intermediate (ER
0.3e0.7; e.g., codeine, midazolam, nifedipine, metformin, cimetidine), or low
(ER < 0.3; e.g., phenytoin, indomethacin, cyclosporine, amoxicillin, digoxin, aten-
olol) ER is important in predicting which factors such as intrinsic clearance, protein
binding, and/or blood ﬂow will alter the pharmacokinetic parameters for the drug.
3.2.2 Area under the concentration-time curve
The area under the concentration-time curve is a measure of the overall systemic
drug exposure (Fig. 3.1B). Since we rarely can measure the drug concentration at
the site of action (e.g., brain, lung, or heart); blood, plasma, or serum concentrations
FIGURE 3.2
(A) depicts concentration-time curves for a CYP2D6 substrate during pregnancy
represented by the solid line and in the same subject three months postpartum
represented by the dotted line. The increase in metabolism that occurs during pregnancy
results in 2e6-fold lower area under the concentration-time curve (AUC) for CYP2D6
substrates during pregnancy than in the nonpregnant state in patients given the same
dose. (B) depicts concentration-time curves for a CYP1A2 substrate during pregnancy
represented by the solid line and in the same subject 10 days postpartum represented by
the dotted line. The inhibition of metabolism that occurs during pregnancy results in a
higher AUC for CYP1A2 substrates during pregnancy than in the nonpregnant state.
3.2 Effects of pregnancy on pharmacokinetic parameters
21
are typically used to determine systemic drug exposure. The area under the
concentration-time curve (AUC) is dependent on the dose, clearance, and bioavail-
ability of the drug. For some medications, AUC is the key determinant of medication
efﬁcacy and safety; while for other medications, either the maximum concentration
and/or minimum concentration are better correlated with outcomes. For low ER
drugs (both oral and intravenous administration), an increase in enzyme activity
and/or a decrease in plasma protein binding will lead to a lower total drug AUC
with changes in blood ﬂow having no effect. For high hepatic ER, intravenously
administered drugs, a decrease in blood ﬂow will increase the total AUC; whereas,
enzyme activity and protein binding have no effect on the total AUC. For high
hepatic ER, orally administered drugs, the decrease in clearance caused by a
decrease in blood ﬂow is equal to the decrease in bioavailability such that changes
in blood ﬂow have no effect on oral AUC. However, increased enzyme activity or
decreased plasma protein binding will decrease the total AUC through their effect
on oral bioavailability.
3.2.3 Bioavailability
Bioavailability is the fraction of the dose administered that reaches the systemic
circulation unchanged. Sometimes, the bioavailability term is used to encompass
both the rate and extent of absorption from the site of administration to the systemic
circulation. For orally administered drugs, the bioavailability is affected by the
amount of drug that is absorbed from the gut as well as ﬁrst pass metabolism as
the drug crosses the intestine and liver on it’s way to the systemic circulation. An
increase or decrease in bioavailability directly impacts the oral AUC or total drug
exposure. For low hepatic ER drugs, bioavailability is not affected by enzyme activ-
ity, hepatic blood ﬂow, or protein binding. In contrast, for high hepatic ER drugs,
bioavailability is decreased by an increase in enzyme activity, decreased hepatic
blood ﬂow, and/or a decrease in plasma protein binding. In addition to the above-
described changes in enzyme activity, protein binding and blood ﬂow which can
alter medication pharmacokinetics, other physiologic changes that occur during
pregnancy which might inﬂuence the bioavailability of drugs include: gastric acidity,
gastrointestinal transit time, and hypertrophy of duodenal villi, which can alter drug
absorption [6e9].
3.2.4 Clearance
Clearance is a parameter used to describe how well the body can metabolize or elim-
inate drugs. The clearance directly affects total drug exposure as well as average
steady state drug concentrations and is utilized to determine maintenance dosage.
There are three major determinants of hepatic drug clearance: hepatic blood ﬂow,
protein binding, and the intrinsic activity of hepatic drug metabolizing enzymes.
Hepatic blood ﬂow plays an important role in determining the hepatic clearance of
drugs, particularly those with high ERs. Physiologic, pathologic, and drug-induced
22
CHAPTER 3 Pharmacokinetics in pregnancy
changes in hepatic blood ﬂow can alter the systemic clearance and oral bioavail-
ability of many important therapeutic agents, resulting in changes in patient response.
For high hepatic ER drugs, clearance is directly affected by hepatic blood ﬂow such
that an increase in blood ﬂow will increase clearance. The rate-limiting step for meta-
bolism of high hepatic ER drugs is the delivery of the drug to the liver. Visualizing
this process in which everything that is delivered to the eliminating organ, such as the
liver, will be cleared from the body can be helpful. This process will proceed so that
the faster the drug is delivered to the eliminating organ, the faster the drug is
eliminated from the body.
In contrast, for low ER drugs, the rate-limiting step is not blood ﬂow; therefore, a
change in organ blood ﬂow does not alter clearance. Instead, clearance is affected by
the enzyme activity and protein binding, such that an increase in enzyme activity or a
decrease in protein binding will increase the drugs total clearance. For intermediate
ER drugs, clearance will be dependent on changes in enzyme activity, protein
binding, and organ blood ﬂow.
3.2.5 Protein binding
As described above, plasma protein binding can affect the pharmacokinetics of med-
ications. There are multiple issues to consider with regards to protein binding of
medications. Some of the plasma proteins are known to be altered both in normal
pregnancy as well as pathologic conditions [10]. In normal pregnancy, albumin
concentrations decrease by approximately 1% at 8 weeks, 10% at 20 weeks, and
13% at 32 weeks [11]. In pregnant patients with pathologic conditions, albumin con-
centrations can be substantially lower. Changes in albumin concentrations are
important for many medications (e.g., phenytoin, valproic acid, carbamazepine).
Other plasma proteins such as a-1-acid glycoprotein are involved in binding of drugs
like betamethasone, bupivacaine, lopinavir, and lidocaine. Plasma a-1-acid glyco-
protein has been reported to be 52% lower in late pregnancy (30e36 weeks gesta-
tion) than postpartum (2e13 weeks) [12]. In addition, some agents (e.g.,
cyclosporine, tacrolimus) concentrate within the red blood cells. For these agents,
binding might be altered as a result of anemia during pregnancy. Hematocrits are
known to fall during normal pregnancy by 2% at 8 weeks and 4% at 20e32 weeks
[11]. For some medications, disease states or conditions during pregnancy can lead
to severe anemia, which would be expected to have a much greater effect on binding
of these medications. In contrast, there are plasma proteins which increase during
pregnancy. For example, corticosteroid-binding globulin (CBG or transcortin) binds
glucocorticoids such as cortisol and progesterone in the plasma/serum [13] and is
increased by 2e3-fold during pregnancy [14]. The increase in CBG impacts the
binding of drugs such as prednisone and prednisolone.
Drug binding is important for many reasons. The ﬁrst reason is that the unbound
drug is in equilibrium with the site of action and is therefore considered the active
moiety as well as being able to cross membranes including the placenta. Unbound
drug not only will cause beneﬁcial effects but also potentially toxic effects.
3.2 Effects of pregnancy on pharmacokinetic parameters
23
For drugs that are highly bound to albumin such as phenytoin, changes in albumin
concentrations during pregnancy can be associated with alterations in protein bind-
ing. Yerby et al. reported a signiﬁcant increase in the percent of unbound phenytoin
during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy as well as labor and delivery as
compared to the prepregnancy state [15]. This is particularly important clinically
because phenytoin is a highly protein bound drug with a narrow therapeutic range.
The second reason is that understanding protein binding is critical in the interpreta-
tion of total drug concentrations. For phenytoin, when interpreting total drug
concentrations, knowing whether protein binding has been altered is important.
Changes in phenytoin protein binding would require either measuring unbound
phenytoin concentrations or accounting for protein binding changes in the interpre-
tation of total phenytoin concentrations.
Fig. 3.3A illustrates the total concentration for the drug in plasma measured to be
10, and the unbound concentration measured to be 1. In contrast, in Fig. 3.3B, the
total drug concentration is 5, but the unbound concentration is still 1. In this
example, although the total concentration is reduced in half, since the unbound
concentration is still the same, no dosage adjustment should be made clinically
because the active form of the drug (unbound) is the same. This would be expected
to occur if there was a change in protein binding and no change in enzyme activity,
leading to a change in total clearance, but no change in unbound clearance.
For prednisone and prednisolone, both are highly bound to albumin and CBG.
The protein binding of prednisone and prednisolone has been shown to increase
with the increase in CBG during pregnancy [16]. The total prednisolone clearance
FIGURE 3.3
(A) illustrates a drug with a total plasma concentration of 10, unbound concentration of 1
and bound concentration of 9. It is the unbound drug that is in equilibrium with the bound
drug and is available to cross membranes and get to the site of action. (B) illustrates a
drug with a total plasma concentration of 5, unbound concentration of 1 and bound
concentration of 4. Although the total drug concentrations are 50% in (B) compared to
the example in (A), in both cases, the unbound or active form of the drug is the same.
(A) and (B) are adapted with permission from ﬁgures included in Beringer P, Winter’s Basic Clinical Pharma-
cokinetics, 6th Ed. Wolters Kluwer, 2017.
24
CHAPTER 3 Pharmacokinetics in pregnancy
is lower during pregnancy compared to postpartum; however, unbound prednisolone
clearance did not change [16]. Since there is no change in unbound prednisolone
concentrations, then no dosage adjustment is required based on pharmacokinetics
alone. However, this does not take into account changes in immune response during
pregnancy. Prednisone and prednisolone binding is a saturable process both during
pregnancy and in the nonpregnant state resulting in increased fraction unbound at
higher concentrations along with increased variability [16].
An alternate situation could occur in which there is no change in total concentra-
tions, but a change in protein binding, leading to an increase in unbound drug
concentration and toxicity. It is essential that in the case of a highly bound drug
with a narrow therapeutic range to either measure the unbound concentration or
to mathematically account for the changes in protein binding when total concentra-
tions are measured, such as in pregnant patients with low-albumin concentrations.
Tacrolimus binds to red blood cells, albumin, and a1-acid glycoprotein, all of which
signiﬁcantly decrease during pregnancy [17,18]. Mean tacrolimus oral clearance
was 39% higher during mid- and late-pregnancy compared to postpartum [17]. Since
tacrolimus has a narrow therapeutic index and dosage is adjusted based on whole
blood trough concentrations, the increase in oral clearance might suggest a need
for a dosage increase. However, the estimated unbound tacrolimus oral clearance
did not change, and the unbound percent of tacrolimus in plasma was reported to
be approximately two-fold higher in mid- and late-pregnancy compared to post-
partum [17]. If drug binding is not accounted for and the total drug concentration
is measured in a patient with an increase in fraction unbound and no change in
unbound clearance, the total concentration will be lower, but the dosage should
not be adjusted. If the clinician does not account for the altered binding and
increases the dosage, the patient might develop drug toxicity.
The physiologic changes that occur during pregnancy can translate into changes
in multiple pharmacokinetic parameters that can alter the interpretation of drug
concentrations. For example, you often have changes in both protein binding and
unbound clearance during pregnancy, as is the case with phenytoin. These patients
require consideration of both factors in interpreting total phenytoin concentrations.
It is important to note that not all highly protein bound drugs have increased percent
unbound during pregnancy. Some highly protein bound drugs such as midazolam
and glyburide have little to no change in protein binding during pregnancy, but
signiﬁcant changes in their clearances [10,19].
3.2.6 Organ blood ﬂow
Changes in hepatic and renal blood ﬂows can alter drug clearance. As described
above, changes in organ blood ﬂow are particularly important for high ER drugs.
During pregnancy, cardiac output is markedly increased. On average, during normal
pregnancy, cardiac output has been reported to be 35% higher in the second trimester
and 40% higher in the third trimester as compared to postpartum [20]. In nonseptic
critically ill patients, there is a good correlation (r ¼ 0.92) between cardiac output
3.2 Effects of pregnancy on pharmacokinetic parameters
25
and effective hepatic blood ﬂow [21]. In an animal model of reduced cardiac output,
there was an associated decrease in portal venous ﬂow [22]. Unfortunately, there is
limited information available evaluating the effects of pregnancy on hepatic blood
ﬂow. Nakai et al. [23] studied the effects of pregnancy on hepatic arterial and portal
venous blood ﬂows during the ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy (n ¼ 13), second trimester
(n ¼ 25), third trimester (n ¼ 29), and in nonpregnant women (n ¼ 22). They found
an increase in total liver blood ﬂow (2.98  1.13 L/min, P < .05) and portal vein
blood ﬂow (1.92  0.83 L/min, P <.05) during the third trimester of pregnancy
as compared to the nonpregnant women (1.82  0.63 L/min and 1.25  0.46 L/
min respectively). Rudolf et al. [24] reported indocyanine-green clearance in 16
women with hyperemesis gravidarum with all but one subject within the upper limit
of normal. Robson et al. [25] found no change in hepatic blood ﬂow in 12 women
12e14 weeks, 24e26 weeks, and 36e38 weeks gestation as compared to 10e
12 weeks after delivery. Probst et al. [26] conducted a study in seven healthy preg-
nant women during labor and delivery and compared them to nonpregnant controls.
They found that hepatic blood ﬂow was decreased to 70% of the control value during
labor. In a cross-sectional study of 210 pregnant women between 6 and 40 weeks
gestation and 40 healthy nonpregnant women, Doppler resistance indices [hepatic
artery pulsatility (PI) and resistive index (RI)] were measured to evaluate hepatic
liver blood ﬂow [27]. Mandic-Markovic et al. [27] found PI and RI in hepatic artery
was decreased during the third trimester compared to nonpregnant state and the ﬁrst
two trimesters. This is likely a result of systemic arterial vasodilation during the
third trimester of pregnancy [27]. All of the studies were underpowered and in
most cases did not have the pregnant women serve as their own control. At this point,
it is unclear whether hepatic blood ﬂow is increased or unchanged during pregnancy.
Pregnancy is associated with increased renal ﬁltration, increased creatinine clear-
ance, and increased renal clearance of drugs [3,10,28,29]. During normal pregnancy,
effective renal plasma ﬂow increases on average 50%e85%, with a corresponding
50% increase in glomerular ﬁltration rate [30,31]. Because the estimated tubular
ER for metformin is moderately high, the gestational changes in the metformin’s
renal clearance and net secretory clearance can in part be explained by enhanced
renal plasma ﬂow [32].
3.2.7 Intrinsic clearance
The intrinsic clearance generally refers to the liver’s inherent ability to metabolize
drug. It is a term used to describe enzyme activity and is independent of protein
binding and hepatic blood ﬂow.
3.2.8 Metabolism
Drug metabolism is the conversion of one chemical structure to another. The forma-
tion of metabolites often occurs via drug metabolizing enzymes. There are many
drug metabolizing enzymes involved in both phase I [e.g., CYP3A4, CYP3A5,
26
CHAPTER 3 Pharmacokinetics in pregnancy
CYP2D6, CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP2C8 CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2E1, CYP2A6,
CYP2B6, esterases, epoxide hydrolase, dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase, alcohol
dehydrogenase (ADH), carbonyl reductase 1 (CBR1)] and phase II (e.g., uridine
diphosphate glucuronyltransferase (UGT), sulfotransferase, methyltransferase,
N-acetyltransferase, catechol-O-methyl transferase, thiopurine S-methyltransferase,
histamine methyltransferase, glutathione S-transferase) metabolism. Phase I meta-
bolism usually precedes phase II metabolism, but not always. Phase I reactions typi-
cally include: oxidation, reduction, hydrolysis, cyclization, and decyclization
reactions. Phase II reactions involve conjugation with glucuronic acid, sulfate, gluta-
thione, or amino acids. Occasionally, there is back conversion of metabolites to the
parent compound. For some medications that are administered as inactive com-
pounds (prodrugs), metabolism is necessary to convert the drug to active compound.
As described above, many different drug metabolizing enzymes exist. The
enzyme involved in the metabolism of a drug is dependent on the chemical structure
of the agent. For some medications, only one enzyme is involved in the metabolism.
For other drugs, multiple enzymes with differing afﬁnities are involved in the forma-
tion of the metabolites. One method that has been used to evaluate the effects of
pregnancy on drug metabolizing enzymes is to use probe substrates as markers
for enzyme activity. A probe substrate is a drug that is primarily metabolized by a
single enzyme. The drug is administered and a pharmacokinetic study is completed.
From this, drug clearance, urinary excretion of metabolite, metabolite formation
clearance, area under the concentration-time curve, or metabolite to parent concen-
tration ratio are used as surrogate markers for enzyme activity. The discussion below
will describe the effects of pregnancy on key drug metabolizing enzyme activities
(Table 3.1).
3.2.8.1 CYP3A
CYP3A is responsible for the metabolism of more drugs than any other P450
enzyme. Examples of CYP3A substrates can be found in Table 3.2. Midazolam is
one of the “gold standard” probes for CYP3A activity. We conducted a study eval-
uating the effect of pregnancy on CYP3A activity utilizing midazolam as the probe
drug. Mean midazolam area under the concentration time curve and maximum con-
centration were markedly lower during pregnancy than postpartum. This corre-
sponded to an average of 108% increase in midazolam apparent oral clearance
and 123% increase in 10-hydroxymidazolam formation clearance during pregnancy
as compared to postpartum. Apparent oral unbound midazolam clearance and
unbound 10-hydroxymidazolam formation clearance were on average 86% and
99% higher, respectively, in pregnancy than postpartum [10]. Other CYP3A sub-
strates (dextromethorphan N-demethylation, nelﬁnavir, indinavir, rilpivirine, nifed-
ipine, atazanavir, darunavir, elvitegravir) have also been studied during pregnancy.
N-demethylation of oral dextromethorphan was increased by 35%e38% during
pregnancy [33]. Similarly, nelﬁnavir was reported to have a 25%e33% increase
in apparent oral clearance in pregnancy [34,35]. Indinavir has an approximately
threefold lower average AUC in pregnancy than postpartum [36]. Rilpivirine AUC
3.2 Effects of pregnancy on pharmacokinetic parameters
27
was also decreased by 23% during the second trimester [37] and 45% during the
third trimester of pregnancy compared to postpartum [38]. These data are consistent
with increased CYP3A activity during pregnancy as compared to the nonpregnant
state.
Because CYP3A is involved in the metabolism of many medications, this ﬁnding
has clinical implications for medication dosages during pregnancy. In particular,
CYP3A substrates with narrow therapeutic ranges may fall below effective concen-
trations during pregnancy if dosage adjustments are not made. Many antiretroviral
medications are CYP3A substrates, in which therapeutic concentrations are critical
in providing adequate viral suppression and minimizing risk of HIV resistance and
transmission to the infant [38]. Such medications might need their dosage increased
during pregnancy to achieve adequate plasma concentrations. When CYP3A
substrates are initiated during pregnancy and titrated to response, subsequent dosage
reductions might be needed postpartum to avoid toxicity.
Table 3.1 The effects of pregnancy on enzymes and renal transporters.
Pregnancy effect
Substrates
Enzymes
ADH
Unchanged (83)
Abacavir
CBR1
Decreased (87)
Doxorubicin
CYP1A2
Decreased (33, 56)
Caffeine, dacarbazine
CYP2B6
Unchanged (63), increased
(62)
Efavirenz
CYP2C9
Increased (19, 60)
Glyburide, phenytoin
CYP2C19
Unchanged (58),
decreased (54,57)
Proguanil, etravirine
CYP2D6
Increased (1, 2, 43)
Metoprolol, clonidine
CYP2E1
Increased (55, 64)
Acetaminophen, caffeine, theophylline
CYP3A4
Increased (10, 33e38)
Dextromethorphan, indinavir, nelﬁnavir,
midazolam, rilpivirine
UGT1A1
Increased (75)
Labetalol
UGT1A4
Increased (71)
Lamotrigine
UGT2B7
Unchanged (78), increased
(79)
Morphine, zidovudine
Renal transporters
OATP
Increased (10)
Digoxin
OAT1
Increased (97)
Amoxicillin
OCT2
Increased (32)
Metformin
P-gp
Increased (10)
Digoxin
ADH, alcohol dehydrogenase; CBR1, carbonyl reductase; CYP, cytochrome P450; OAT1, organic
anion transporter 1; OATPs, organic anion transporter polypeptides; OCT2, organic cation transporter
2; P-gp, P-glycoprotein; UGT, uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyltransferase.
28
CHAPTER 3 Pharmacokinetics in pregnancy
Table 3.2 Cytochrome P450 substrate examples.
CYP3A
CYP2D6
CYP2C9
CYP2C19
CYP1A2
CYP2B6
Alfentanil
Alprazolam
Amlodipine
Amprenavir
Buspirone
Chlorpheniramine
Citalopram
Cyclosporine
Dapsone
Diltiazem
Erythromycin
Felodipine
Fentanyl
Indinavir
Isradipine
Itraconazole
Lidocaine
Loratidine
Methadone
Midazolam
Nelﬁnavir
Nicardipine
Nifedipine
Oxycodone
Simvastatin
Sirolimus
Tacrolimus
Zolpidem
Alprenolol
Amitriptyline
Clomipramine
Codeine
Debrisoquine
Dextromethorphan
Doxepin
Flecainide
Fluoxetine
Fluvoxamine
Haloperidol
Hydrocodone
Imipramine
Metoprolol
Mexiletine
Nortriptyline
Paroxetine
Promethazine
Propafenone
Propranolol
Resperidone
Thioridazine
Tolterodine
Venlafaxine
Diclofenac
Flubiprofen
Glipizide
Glyburide
Ibuprofen
Losartan
Naproxen
Omeprazole
Phenytoin
Piroxicam
Sulfamethoxazole
Tolbutamide
Voriconazole
Warfarin
Citalopram
Clopidogrel
Escitalopram
Esomeprazole
Etravirine
Lansoprazole
Mephenytoin
Omeprazole
Pantoprazole
Proguanil
Rabeprazole
Sertraline
Caffeine
Clozapine
Duloxetine
Lidocaine
Melatonin
Ondansetron
Ramelteon
Ropivacaine
Theophylline
Triamterene
Bupropion
Efavirenzy
Methadone
Propofol
3.2 Effects of pregnancy on pharmacokinetic parameters
29
3.2.8.2 CYP2D6
CYP2D6 is responsible for the metabolism of the second highest number of drugs
metabolized by P450 enzymes. Substrates for CYP2D6 can be found in Table 3.2.
CYP2D6 is a particularly challenging enzyme to understand and study because of
its genetic polymorphism. Genetic variation for this enzyme can result in some
patients having no enzyme, some having a low amount of enzyme activity with
only one active allele, some having two active alleles, and some having duplicate
genes. Clinically, these genetic differences result in poor, intermediate, normal
(extensive), and ultrarapid metabolizers of CYP2D6 substrates. Historically,
CYP2D6 was thought to be a noninducible enzyme by classic pathways for enzyme
induction. However, more recently, data suggest that changes in transcription
regulation play a role in CYP2D6 induction during pregnancy [39,40].
Metoprolol is the “gold standard” probe for CYP2D6 activity. In a small study,
oral metoprolol AUC was reported to be 2e4-fold lower during pregnancy than in
the nonpregnant population [1,2]. In a recent study, metoprolol apparent oral clear-
ance was higher during mid- and late-pregnancy compared to postpartum in interme-
diate and extensive metabolizers [41]. Other CYP2D6 substrates have been studied
during pregnancy. For example, dextromethorphan is primarily a CYP2D6 substrate
(although its N-demethylation occurs via CYP3A as described above). Utilizing
dextromethorphan as a CYP2D6 probe, Tracy et al. [33] reported an increase in
CYP2D6 activity by w25% at 14e18 weeks gestation, w35% at 24e28 weeks
gestation, and w50% at 36e40 weeks gestation. In addition, we have found cloni-
dine to primarily be a CYP2D6 substrate [42]. The mean apparent oral clearance of
clonidine is approximately 80% higher in pregnant women compared with the
nonpregnant population. Of note, in the nonpregnant population, clonidine is primar-
ily renally eliminated. However, only 36% of the clonidine was excreted unchanged
in the urine in pregnant women compared with 59% in the nonpregnant population
[43e46]. Interestingly, the increase in CYP2D6 activity during pregnancy is so great
that the major pathway for elimination for clonidine switched from primarily renal
to primarily metabolic.
3.2.8.3 CYP2C9
CYP2C9 is involved in the elimination of approximately 10% of the metabolized
drugs from the list of top 100 drugs by US sales. Substrates for CYP2C9 can be
found in Table 3.2. CYP2C9 is the primary metabolic pathway for phenytoin elim-
ination. Because of the high-protein binding for phenytoin, when considering
phenytoin as a probe for CYP2C9, utilizing free phenytoin clearance is important
given the known changes in phenytoin protein binding during pregnancy.
CYP2C9 activity as measured by free phenytoin clearance is increased w1.5-fold
during all three trimesters of pregnancy as compare to the prepregnant state [15].
Glyburide is another agent that is metabolized by CYP2C9, although CYP3A
and CYP2C19 are also involved in its metabolism in vitro [47e49]. In vivo, glybur-
ide appears to be a CYP2C9 substrate in the nonpregnant population [50e53]. At
equivalent doses, glyburide plasma concentrations were w50% lower in pregnant
30
CHAPTER 3 Pharmacokinetics in pregnancy
women compared to nonpregnant women [19]. The large gestational increase in
unbound glyburide CL/F and unbound formation clearance of the primary metabo-
lite 4-trans OH-glyburide (>two-fold increase) suggest that higher dosages might be
needed during pregnancy. The gestational increase in unbound glyburide CL/F most
likely reﬂects induction of CYP2C9 and CYP3A, since these activities have been
previously shown to be increased (and CYP2C19 activity decreased) during
pregnancy [10,15,54].
3.2.8.4 CYP1A2
CYP1A2 is involved in the metabolism of fewer drugs than the enzymes previously
discussed. However, some agents that are substrates for CYP1A2 are being used
more and more frequently during pregnancy, such as ondansetron (Table 3.2).
A commonly used probe substrate for CYP1A2 activity is caffeine. The activity
of CYP1A2 as determined by caffeine clearance is reported to be decreased by
approximately 30% at 14e18 weeks gestation, 50% at 24e28 weeks gestation,
and 70% at 36e40 weeks gestation [33]. Dose normalized caffeine serum and urine
concentrations were signiﬁcantly increased between ﬁrst and third trimesters of
pregnancy [55]. Caffeine’s metabolite theophylline concentrations increased over
the course of pregnancy, primarily during the third trimester [55]. CYP1A2 is also
involved in the metabolism of dacarbazine. In a case report, a subject who received
the prodrug dacarbazine was found to have a 7% increase in dacarbazine AUC dur-
ing pregnancy compared to postpartum, whereas the active metabolite of dacarba-
zine, 5-[3-hydroxy-methyl-3-methyl-triazen-1-yl]-imidazole-4-carboxamide, AUC
was 27% lower compared to postpartum [56]. The apparent decrease in CYP1A2
activity potentially could result in increased toxicity for CYP1A2 substrates. This
is in contrast to the effect seen with CYP3A, CYP2D6, and CYP2C9, which all
have markedly increased activities during pregnancy and potentially will result in
decreased drug efﬁcacy.
3.2.8.5 CYP2C19
Substrates for CYP2C19 can be found in Table 3.2. Medications that are metabo-
lized by CYP2C19 include omeprazole, pantoprazole, citalopram, sertraline, and
etravirine. CYP2C19 is a polymorphic enzyme leading to extensive and poor metab-
olizers. Similar to CYP1A2, CYP2C19 activity appears to be inhibited during preg-
nancy in extensive metabolizers [54]. The ratio of proguanil to cycloguanil has been
utilized as a probe for CYP2C19 activity. Although no signiﬁcant changes are seen
in CYP2C19 activity during pregnancy in poor metabolizers, in extensive metabo-
lizers there is a doubling in the plasma ratio of proguanil to cycloguanil 6 h after
dosing when comparing women in their third trimester of pregnancy to women
two months postpartum, suggesting a decrease in CYP2C19 activity in late preg-
nancy [54]. Etravirine, a second generation nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitor, is primarily metabolized by CYP2C19 [57]. It is also metabolized by
CYP2C9 and CYP3A4 to minor metabolites [57]. Studies have shown mixed results
on the pharmacokinetics of etravirine in pregnancy. When compared to nonpregnant
3.2 Effects of pregnancy on pharmacokinetic parameters
31
adults, etravirine pharmacokinetics during late pregnancy were not signiﬁcantly
different [58]. However, a recent study found a 52% lower etravirine apparent
oral clearance and 36%e39% higher plasma concentrations during late pregnancy
compared to postpartum [59], which is consistent with the reported decrease in
CYP2C19 activity during pregnancy [60]. Despite the higher etravirine concentra-
tions seen during pregnancy, there has not been an increase in the reported frequency
or severity of adverse events in this population [61]. In light of these data, moni-
toring for medication toxicity and in some cases consideration of altered dosage
might be warranted.
3.2.8.6 CYP2B6
CYP2B6 is involved in metabolism of drugs such as efavirenz, bupropion, metha-
done, and propofol. Efavirenz is a non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor
used for the treatment of HIV/AIDS. CYP2B6 is responsible for metabolizing
90% of efavirenz [62]. CYP2B6 genotype contributes to efavirenz pharmacokinetic
variability [62]. In one study, pregnancy appeared to have the greatest effect on
efavirenz apparent oral clearance in women with CYP2B6 516GG genotype. This
study reported a doubling of efavirenz apparent oral clearance during pregnancy
in women with CYP2B6 516GG genotype and no signiﬁcant change in efavirenz
apparent oral clearance in women with CYP2B6 516GT and CYP2B6 516TT geno-
types [62]. In another study that did not include genotyping for CYP2B6, the
apparent oral clearance of efavirenz during pregnancy, although reported to be
signiﬁcantly higher than postpartum, was only slightly higher and not sufﬁcient to
warrant dosage adjustment [63]. Future studies are needed to determine if alternate
dosage strategies are needed and the role of CYP2B6 genotype in this determination.
3.2.8.7 CYP2E1
CYP2E1 metabolizes endogenous and exogenous substrates, but is better known to
be involved in metabolizing toxins and procarcinogens. CYP2E1 metabolizes a rela-
tively small number of medications with acetaminophen (paracetamol) being one of
the most important. In pregnant mice, placental lactogen induced CYP2E1
expression in human hepatocytes [64]. Acetaminophen is primarily metabolized
by glucuronidation and sulfation, but is also metabolized by CYP2E1 producing
3-hydroxy-paracetamol and a reactive metabolite, N-acetyl-p-benzoquinone imine
(NAPQI) [65]. Miners et al. reported acetaminophen apparent oral clearance was
58% higher in pregnancy compared to nonpregnant women [66]. In another study,
acetaminophen clearance was 1.8-fold higher at the time of delivery compared to
nonpregnant adults [67]. Although decreased exposure to acetaminophen is likely
in pregnancy, dose adjustments are not advised since there is potential for increased
NAPQI formation that may lead to hepatotoxicity [67]. More studies are needed to
determine how pregnancy affects the toxicodynamics of NAPQI. The implications
of increased CYP2E1 activity in pregnancy remain to be determined.
32
CHAPTER 3 Pharmacokinetics in pregnancy
3.2.8.8 Uridine diphosphate glucuronyltransferase
UGT is a non-P450 enzyme involved in phase 2 metabolism. UGT metabolizes
agents to glucuronide conjugates. There are two families found in humans, UGT1
and UGT2, where UGT1A and UGT2B subfamilies are primarily involved in hepat-
ic glucuronidation [68]. There are many substrates for UGT1A4 such as amitripty-
line, doxepin, imipramine, lamotrigine, and promethazine [69,70]. The increase in
UGT1A4 activity starts in the ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy and is reported to return
to prepregnancy baseline by twoethree weeks postpartum. The clearance of lamo-
trigine has been reported to increase by 65% during pregnancy [71]. While the initial
decrease in lamotrigine concentrations during early pregnancy may largely be attrib-
uted to the increased blood ﬂow, estradiol’s induction of glucuronidation appears to
have a greater impact during the remainder of pregnancy. A strong correlation
between increased estradiol serum concentrations and increased lamotrigine- N2-
glucuronide/lamotrigine ratio has been reported [72]. This suggests that increased
estradiol, a UGT inducer, during pregnancy may contribute to the decreased lamo-
trigine serum concentrations and potentially decreased efﬁcacy [72]. Consistent with
this, an increase in seizure frequency during pregnancy along with a decrease in
lamotrigine concentration to dose ratio by w50% between 11 weeks gestation
and term has been reported [73].
UGT1A1 and UGT2B7 were found to be the major enzymes that metabolize
labetalol to glucuronides [74]. In vitro, progesterone enhanced UGT1A1 activity
mediated by pregnane X receptor [74]. Considering that labetalol oral clearance is
increased during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy compared to post-
partum women, induction of UGT1A1 may largely be responsible for the increased
clearance [75]. Protein binding and oral absorptions are not likely the cause, since
protein binding of labetalol does not change during pregnancy [76] and labetalol
show complete oral absorption. Acetaminophen is another common medication
used during pregnancy that is metabolized by UGT1A1 and CYP2E1. Acetamino-
phen also undergoes faster elimination in pregnant women and has a 20% shorter
half-life in the ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy compared to nonpregnant adults [77].
Mixed results have been reported on the effects of pregnancy on UGT2B7 activity.
UGT2B7 metabolizes medications such as zidovudine and morphine. In one study,
zidovudine pharmacokinetics were not altered during pregnancy compared to
nonpregnant adults [78]. In contrast, morphine plasma clearance was increased by
70% in pregnant women compared to nonpregnant adults [79]. More research is
needed to assess the effects of pregnancy on UGT2B7 activity.
3.2.8.9 Alcohol dehydrogenase
ADH is a polymorphic enzyme which metabolizes variety of substances such as
ethanol, vitamin A, simple alcohols, and hydroxysteroids [80]. ADH is predomi-
nantly present in the liver, but also in many other tissues in lower amounts [81].
In pregnant rats, alcohol clearance was higher compared to weight matched
nonpregnant rats. Interestingly, liver ADH activity did not change during pregnancy;
however, gastric ADH activity was 177% greater in pregnant rats compared to the
3.2 Effects of pregnancy on pharmacokinetic parameters
33
nonpregnant group [80]. Abacavir, a nucleoside analog reverse transcriptase inhib-
itor, is metabolized in the liver to inactive metabolites by ADH and UGT [82].
Abacavir is used as one of the ﬁrst line combination agent to treat HIV/AIDs in preg-
nancy [83]. In a study of 14 pregnant women, abacavir AUC, T1/2, and Cmax were not
different between the third trimester of pregnancy and twoesix weeks postpartum
[83]. Therefore, dosage adjustments do not appear to be needed.
3.2.8.10 Carbonyl reductase 1
Oxidative drug metabolism pathways of cytochrome P450 enzymes have been
extensively studied; however, information on reductive pathways of drug meta-
bolism is still limited. CBR1 is a class of short-chain dehydrogenases/reductases pri-
marily expressed in the intestine, liver, and kidney [84]. However, its ubiquitous
distribution in other human tissues makes it particularly challenging to predict
hepatic clearance through in vitro studies [85]. In preclinical studies, CBR1 has
been shown to decrease protein expression in presence of 17b-estradiol [86], and
its activity was reported to decrease during pregnancy [87]. CBR1 metabolizes med-
ications such as doxorubicin, daunorubicin, dolasteron, nabumetone, haloperidol,
loxoprofen, and bupropion [88,89]. In pregnancy, doxorubicin appears to have
30%e39% decrease in clearance during pregnancy [90].
3.2.9 Renal
Almost one-third of the medication in the top 100 drugs list by US sales is primarily
eliminated by the kidneys. During normal pregnancy, creatinine clearance increases
by 45% at nine weeks gestation, and peaks in the mid-second trimester at 150%
e160% of nonpregnant values. In some women, clearances will decline over the
last six weeks of pregnancy. Occasionally, creatinine clearance will return to the
nonpregnant state over the last three weeks of pregnancy [28,29]. Pregnancy has
been reported to increase tubular secretion of endogenous compounds such as
glucose and amino acids [30]. Understanding and accounting for changes in kidney
function during pregnancy is important for optimizing dosage for renally eliminated
medications.
3.2.9.1 Filtration
Changes in renal ﬁltration as measured by creatinine clearance during pregnancy
have been associated with changes in the renal clearance of many medications
[3,10,32,91]. In some, but not all cases, these changes will require dosage adjust-
ments during pregnancy. For example, changes in digoxin concentrations during
pregnancy often require dosage adjustments to maintain therapeutic concentrations.
On average, digoxin renal clearance increases 61% during pregnancy compared to
6e10 weeks postpartum [10]. There is a good correlation (r ¼ 0.8) between creati-
nine clearance and digoxin renal clearance [10]. Even though digoxin also has an
active transport component to its renal elimination, the change in creatinine clear-
ance appears to be a good surrogate marker for the expected change in digoxin renal
34
CHAPTER 3 Pharmacokinetics in pregnancy
clearance during pregnancy due to the large fraction of digoxin renal clearance
accounted for by ﬁltration compared to net secretion [10].
Metformin is eliminated almost entirely unchanged in the urine. In mid- and late-
pregnancy, metformin renal clearance increases on average by 49% and 29%,
respectively, compared to threeefour months postpartum. The change in renal clear-
ance parallels the 29% and 21% increase in creatinine clearance during mid- and
late-pregnancy reported in the same study [32]. There are currently not enough
data to determine if dosage increases for metformin are needed during pregnancy.
Atenolol is another drug that is primarily eliminated unchanged in the urine.
Pregnancy as compared to three months postpartum results in signiﬁcant increases
in creatinine clearance, 42% and 50% in the second and third trimesters, respec-
tively, and in atenolol renal clearance, 38% and 36% in the second and third trimes-
ters, respectively. There is a very good correlation (r ¼ 0.7) between creatinine
clearance and atenolol renal clearance [3]. However, changes in atenolol renal clear-
ance during pregnancy do not translate into clinically signiﬁcant changes in apparent
oral clearance, and therefore dosage adjustments are not necessary based on pharma-
cokinetic changes. However, changes in hemodynamics and pharmacodynamics
over the course of gestation might result in the need for dosage adjustments for
atenolol during pregnancy.
3.2.9.2 Secretion/reabsorption
3.2.9.2.1 P-glycoprotein and organic anion transporter polypeptides
Examples of renal transporters can be found in Table 3.3. Digoxin has been consid-
ered the “gold standard” probe for p-glycoprotein activity because it mediates secre-
tion of digoxin across the apical membrane of the renal tubular epithelium [92,93].
However, other renal transporters are also involved in the net secretion of digoxin.
There is evidence that digoxin is a substrate for organic anion transporter
Table 3.3 Active renal transporters examples.
OATP
OAT1
OCT2
P-gp
Atorvastatin
Enalapril
Caspofungin
Digoxin
Fexofenadine
Levoﬂoxacin
Acyclovir
Adefovir
Amoxicillin
Cidofovir
Didanosine
Lamivudine
Stavudine
Tenofovir
Zalcitabine
Zidovudine
Amantadine
Amiloride
Cimetidine
Cisplastin
D-Tubocurarine
Debrisoquine
Guanidine
Metformin
Oxaliplatin
Pindolol
Procainamide
Ranitidine
Amlodipine
Amprenavir
Atazanavir
Budesonide
Carvedilol
Cetirizine
Clopidogrel
Cyclosporine
Digoxin
Diltiazem
Erythromycin
Fexofenadine, Loperamide,
Sirolimus, Tacrolimus, Quinidine
OAT1, organic anion transporter 1; OATPs, organic anion transporter polypeptides; OCT2, organic
cation transporter 2; P-gp, P-glycoprotein.
3.2 Effects of pregnancy on pharmacokinetic parameters
35
polypeptides (OATPs) [94,95]. Human OATP4C1 (SLCO4C1) plays a primary role
in the transport of digoxin on the basolateral membrane of the kidney [96]. Thus,
digoxin renal tubular secretion appears to be a serial transport process mediated
by p-glycoprotein and OATP. Although, glomerular ﬁltration rate increases during
pregnancy, this increase does not completely explain the increased renal clearance
of digoxin. Digoxin net secretion clearance was 120% higher during pregnancy as
compared to postpartum. Unbound digoxin net secretion clearance was higher (on
average 107%) during pregnancy than postpartum [10]. The doubling of digoxin
net renal secretion clearance is consistent with an increase in renal p-glycoprotein
activity, but might also be explained by an increase in renal OATP activity during
pregnancy.
3.2.9.2.2 Organic anion transporter, oligopeptide transporters
The transporters involved in renal transport of amoxicillin are still being worked out.
In vivo studies with amoxicillin and probenecid (inhibitor of the renal organic anion
transport system) have shown that the renal clearance of amoxicillin is signiﬁcantly
reduced by probenecid, suggesting that amoxicillin is a substrate for an organic
anion transporter [97]. The oligopeptide transporters, hPepT1 and hPepT2, are
located on the apical membrane of the proximal tubule and are involved in reabsorp-
tion of endogenous peptides [98]. Amoxicillin is an inhibitor and substrate for
hPepT2 transport with a lower afﬁnity for hPepT1 [99]. In both the second and third
trimesters of pregnancy, the renal clearance and net renal secretion of amoxicillin are
increased by more than 60% and 50%, respectively [91]. Renal secretion makes up
more than half of the renal clearance for amoxicillin. The change in net renal secre-
tion clearance may be a result of increased renal secretion, inhibition of reabsorp-
tion, or both.
3.2.9.2.3 Organic cation transporters, multidrug and extrusion
transporters, and plasma monoamine transporter
Metformin is a substrate for OCTs, including OCT1, OCT2, the multidrug and toxin
extrusion (MATE) transporters [100], and the plasma membrane monoamine trans-
porter [101]. In humans, OCT2 plays an important role in metformin renal clearance
[102e104]. Several studies in vitro and in animal species suggest that OCT2 expres-
sion and activity in the kidney can be regulated by the steroid hormones [105e107].
Metformin net secretion clearance was on average 45% and 38% higher in mid- and
late-pregnancy than postpartum [32]. Metformin renal clearance correlates well with
creatinine clearance (r ¼ 0.8), but even better with its net tubular secretion clearance
(r ¼ 0.97), which is not surprising given metformin’s high secretory clearance [32].
The increase in metformin net secretory clearance could in part be a result of upre-
gulation in the renal tubular transport (i.e., OCT2 activity). N1-methylnicotinamide
(1-NMN), an endogenous probe for OCT2 and MATE (speciﬁcally MATE1 and
MATE2-K), was found to have increased renal clearance and net renal secretion
during both mid- and late-pregnancy compared to postpartum [108]. 1-NMN renal
clearance was positively correlated with metformin renal clearance [108]. Increased
36
CHAPTER 3 Pharmacokinetics in pregnancy
glomerular ﬁltration and increased OCT2, MATE1, and MATE2-K activities during
pregnancy are likely the reasons for the increase in renal clearance of 1-NMN and
metformin. Further research is necessary to determine the mechanism underlying
these changes.
3.2.9.2.4 pH-dependent changes in secretion and reabsorption
The tendency is to assume that all drugs that are predominantly eliminated by the
kidneys in the nonpregnant population will remain as such in the pregnant popula-
tion. However, this is not always the case. For example, clonidine is a drug that is
w65% eliminated unchanged in the urine in the nonpregnant population with
dosage adjustment recommendations for patients with renal disease. Therefore, it
is reasonable to assume that the increase in creatinine clearance expected during
pregnancy would increase the renal clearance of clonidine. However, even though
the patients in our study had an increase in creatinine clearance during pregnancy,
there was no change in clonidine renal clearance and a poor correlation (r ¼ 0.26)
between clonidine renal clearance and creatinine clearance. In fact, the primary
pathway for elimination of clonidine during pregnancy switches from renal to meta-
bolic. The explanation for the discrepancy between changes in creatinine clearance
being observed, but no change in clonidine renal clearance during pregnancy is
related to the chemical properties of clonidine. Clonidine’s pKa is 8.05, which
resulted in a strong correlation (r ¼ 0.82, P < .001) between clonidine renal clear-
ance, corrected for GFR, and urine pH (range 5.8e7.5) [43]. This example is a
reminder that it is difﬁcult to predict the effects of pregnancy on the pharmacoki-
netics of medications.
3.2.10 Volume of distribution
Volume of distribution is not a physical space, but rather an apparent one. Volume of
distribution is the apparent volume needed to account for the total amount of drug in
the body if the drug was evenly distributed throughout the body and in the same con-
centration as the site of sample collection such as peripheral venous plasma. Some
drugs (e.g., tolbutamide, phenytoin, gentamicin, warfarin) are known to have small
volumes of distribution (0.1e1 L/kg) while others (e.g., meperidine, propranolol,
digoxin) are known to have large volumes of distribution (1e10 L/kg). The volume
of distribution for a drug affects the difference between peak and trough concentra-
tions at steady state or maximum concentrations for single intravenous bolus dosing.
The volume of distribution can be used to determine the loading dose needed to
achieve a certain concentration.
There are many physiologic changes that occur during pregnancy that can result
in altered volume of distribution for medications. For example, the recommended
total weight gain during a singleton pregnancy depends on the BMI and stature of
the pregnant woman, but ranges from 6 to 18 kg. Despite the recommendations,
many women will exceed these weight gain guidelines. Of the weight gained,
approximately 62% will be water, 30% will be fat, and 8% will be protein. Blood
3.2 Effects of pregnancy on pharmacokinetic parameters
37
volume typically increases 30%e45% and peaks between 28 and 34 weeks gesta-
tion. Total body water increases 6e8 L during pregnancy and peaks at term [109].
Increases in the volume of distribution for a medication will not alter the average
steady state concentration, but will result in lower peak and higher trough concen-
trations. Apparent volume of distribution is dependent on the drug’s lipid or water
solubility, plasma protein binding as well as tissue binding. Metformin has a larger
apparent oral volume of distribution during pregnancy than in women threeefour
months postpartum [32].
3.2.11 Half-life
Half-life is the time it takes for the drug concentration to be reduced in half and is
useful in determining dosing frequency. Half-life is dependent on both clearance and
volume of distribution, such that a decrease in clearance, as might be seen with a
CYP1A2 or CYP2C19 substrate, or an increase in volume of distribution will pro-
long the half-life and lead to a longer dosage interval. For medications with
increased clearance (e.g., CYP3A, CYP2D6, or CYP2C9 substrates or those elimi-
nated by the kidneys) or decreased volume of distribution will have shorter half-lives
and require more frequent dosing. Since half-life is dependent on both clearance and
volume of distribution, if there is a similar increase in both clearance and volume,
there will be no change in the half-life for the drug as is the case for midazolam
and metoprolol [1,2,10]. Although the changes in renal function during pregnancy
are small relative to the magnitude of changes seen with some of the hepatic
enzymes, altered renal function can change the pharmacokinetics of some medica-
tions. We found that both renally eliminated drugs, atenolol and amoxicillin, have
shorter half-lives during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy compared to
the same women three months postpartum, although these changes were relatively
small [3,91]. In contrast, metformin, which is also eliminated by the kidneys, has
a longer half-life in the second trimester of pregnancy than women threeefour
months postpartum, reﬂecting the increase in volume of distribution seen during
pregnancy [32].
3.3 Summary
There is a tremendous amount of variability in patient response to medications
during pregnancy. In part, this variability can be explained by changes in pharmaco-
kinetics. The medication’s chemical and pharmacokinetic characteristics inﬂuence
the type of effect pregnancy can have on drug handling and response. Changes in
protein binding are most important for highly protein bound drugs and should be
taken into account when interpreting total drug concentrations. Changes in hepatic
blood ﬂow during pregnancy might affect the hepatic clearance of high ER drugs.
Medications that are eliminated by the kidneys as well as those metabolized by
CYP3A, CYP2D6, CYP2C9, CYP2E1, and UGT1A4 are likely to undergo
38
CHAPTER 3 Pharmacokinetics in pregnancy
increased clearance during pregnancy. Those metabolized by CYP1A2, CYP2C19,
and CBR1 might have decreased clearance during pregnancy. For those medications
that are metabolized by CYP2B6, changes in clearance might be genotype depen-
dent. Lastly, ADH does not appear to change during gestation. Most medications
that are cleared renally will undergo increased clearance as renal ﬁltration increases
during gestation. For some medications, the physiologic changes that occur during
pregnancy have a signiﬁcant impact on pharmacokinetics and dosage. For medica-
tions with unpredictable pharmacokinetic changes during pregnancy, altered
medication selection should be considered. Taking into account the pharmacokinetic
changes that occur during pregnancy will help to minimize the variability in patient
response. This approach is particularly important for medications with narrow
therapeutic ranges. Pharmacokinetics should be considered to be only one compo-
nent in determining optimum medication selection and dosage.
References
[1] Ho¨gstedt S, Lindberg B, Peng DR, Rega˚rdh CG, Rane A. Pregnancy-induced increase
in metoprolol metabolism. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1985;37:688e92.
[2] Ho¨gstedt S, Lindberg B, Rane A. Increased oral clearance of metoprolol in pregnancy.
Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1983;24:217e20.
[3] Hebert MF, Carr DB, Anderson GD, Blough D, Green GE, Brateng DA, Kantor E,
Benedetti TJ, Easterling TR. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of atenolol
during pregnancy and postpartum. J Clin Pharmacol 2005;45:25e33.
[4] Beringer PM. Winter’s basic clinical pharmacokinetics. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Walters
Kluwer; 2018.
[5] Rowland M, Tozer TN. Clinical pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics concepts
and applications. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2011.
[6] Everson GT. Gastrointestinal motility in pregnancy. Gastroenterol Clin N Am 1992;21:
751e76.
[7] Kelly TF, Savides TJ. Gastrointestinal disease in pregnancy. In: Creasy RK, Resnik R,
Iams JD, editors. Maternal-fetal medicine: principles and practices. 6th ed. Philadel-
phia: Saunders; 2009. p. 1041e58.
[8] Steinlauf AF, Chang PK, Traube M. Gastrointestinal complications. In: Burrow GN,
Duffy TP, Copel JA, editors. Medical complications during pregnancy. 6th ed. Phila-
delphia: Saunders; 2004. p. 259e78.
[9] Van Thiel DH, Schade RR. Pregnancy: its physiologic course, nutrient cost, and effects
on gastrointestinal function. In: Rustgi VK, Cooper JN, editors. Gastrointestinal and
hepatic complications in pregnancy. New York: John Wiley & Sons; 1986. p. 1e292.
[10] Hebert MF, Easterling TR, Kirby B, Carr DB, Buchanan ML, Rutherford T,
Thummel KE, Fishbein DP, Unadkat JD. Effects of pregnancy on CYP3A and P-
glycoprotein activities as measured by disposition of midazolam and digoxin: a Uni-
versity of Washington specialized center of research study. Clin Pharmacol Ther
2008;84:248e53.
References
39
[11] Murphy MM, Scott JM, McParlin JM, Fernandez-Ballart JD. The pregnancy-related
decrease in fasting plasma homocysteine is not explained by folic acid supplementa-
tion, hemodilution, or a decrease in albumin in a longitudinal study. Am J Clin Nutr
2002;76:614e9.
[12] Aweeka FT, Stek A, Best BM, Hu C, Holland D, Hermes A, Burchett SK, Read J,
Mirochnick M, Capparelli EV, International Maternal Pediatric Adolescent AIDS
Clinical Trials Group (IMPAACT) P1026s Protocol Team. Lopinavir protein binding
in HIV-1-infected pregnant women. HIV Med 2010;11:232e8.
[13] Gardill BR, Vogl MR, Lin HY, Hammond GL, Muller YA. Corticosteroid-binding
globulin: structure-function implications from species differences. PLoS One 2012;
7(12):e52759.
[14] Potter JM, Mueller UW, Hickman PE, Michael CA. Corticosteroid binding globulin in
normotensive and hypertensive human pregnancy. Clin Sci 1987;72:725e35.
[15] Yerby MS, Friel PN, McCormick K, Koerner M, Van Allen M, Leavitt AM, Sells CJ,
Yerby JA. Pharmacokinetics of anticonvulsants in pregnancy: alterations in plasma
protein binding. Epilepsy Res 1990;5:223e8.
[16] Ryu RJ, Easterling TR, Caritis SN, Venkataramanan R, Umans JG, Ahmed MS,
Clark S, Kantrowitz-Gordon I, Hays K, Bennett B, Honaker MT, Thummel KE,
Shen DD, Hebert MF. Prednisone pharmacokinetics during pregnancy and lactation.
J Clin Pharmacol 2018;58(9):1223e32.
[17] Zheng S, Easterling TR, Umans JG, Miodovnik M, Calamia JC, Thummel KE,
Shen DD, Davis CL, Hebert MF. Pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus during pregnancy.
Ther Drug Monit 2012;34(6):660e70.
[18] Feghali MN, Mattison DR. Clinical therapeutics in pregnancy. J Biomed Biotechnol
2011;2011:783528.
[19] Hebert MF, Ma X, Naraharisetti SB, Krudys KM, Umans JG, Hankins GD, Caritis SN,
Miodovnik M, Mattison DR, Unadkat JD, Kelly EJ, Blough D, Cobelli C, Ahmed MS,
Snodgrass WR, Carr DB, Easterling TR, Vicini P, Obstetric-Fetal Pharmacology
Research Unit Network. Are we optimizing gestational diabetes treatment with glybur-
ide? The pharmacologic basis for better clinical practice. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2009;
85:607e14.
[20] Easterling TR, Benedetti TJ, Schmucker BC, Millard SP. Maternal hemodynamics in
normal and preeclamptic pregnancies: a longitudinal study. Obstet Gynecol 1990;76:
1061e9.
[21] Mizushima Y, Tohira H, Mizobata Y, Matsuoka T, Yokota J. Assessment of effective
hepatic blood ﬂow in critically ill patients by noninvasive pulse dye-densitometry.
Surg Today 2003;33:101e5.
[22] Bracht H, Takala J, Tenhunen JJ, Brander L, Knuesel R, Merasto-Minkkinen M,
Jakob SM. Hepatosplanchnic blood ﬂow control and oxygen extraction are modiﬁed
by the underlying mechanism of impaired perfusion. Crit Care Med 2005;33:645e53.
[23] Nakai A, Sekiya I, Oya A, Koshino T, Araki T. Assessment of the hepatic arterial and
portal venous blood ﬂows during pregnancy with Doppler ultrasonography. Arch
Gynecol Obstet 2002;266:25e9.
[24] Rudolf VK, Rudolf H, Towe J. Indocyaningrun (Ujoviridin)-Test bei Patientinnen
mit Hyperemesis gravidarum. Zbl Hynakol 1982;104:748e52.
[25] Robson SC, Mutch E, Boys RJ, Woodhouse KW. Apparent liver blood ﬂow during
pregnancy: a serial study using indocyanine green clearance. Br J Obstet Gynaecol
1990;97:720e4.
40
CHAPTER 3 Pharmacokinetics in pregnancy
[26] Probst P, Paumgartner G, Caucig H, Frohlich H, Grabner G. Studies on clearance and
placental transfer of indocyanine green during labor. Clin Chim Acta 1970;29:157e60.
[27] Mandic-Markovic VD, Mikovic ZM, Djukic MK, Vasiljevic MD, Jankovic GL.
Doppler parameters of the maternal hepatic artery blood ﬂow in normal pregnancy:
maternal hepatic artery blood ﬂow in normal pregnancy. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod
Biol 2014;181:275e9.
[28] Davison JM, Dunlop W, Ezimokhai M. 24-hour creatinine clearance during the third
trimester of normal pregnancy. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1980;87:106e9.
[29] Davison JM, Noble MC. Serial changes in 24 hour creatinine clearance during normal
menstrual cycles and the ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1981;88:
10e7.
[30] Davison JM, Dunlop W. Renal hemodynamics and tubular function normal human
pregnancy. Kidney Int 1980;18:152e61.
[31] Sturgiss SN, Dunlop W, Davison JM. Renal haemodynamics and tubular function in
human pregnancy. Baillieres Clin Obstet Gynaecol 1994;8:209e34.
[32] Eyal S, Easterling TR, Carr D, Umans JG, Miodovnik M, Hankins GD, Clark SM,
Risler L, Wang J, Kelly EJ, Shen DD, Hebert MF. Pharmacokinetics of metformin dur-
ing pregnancy. Drug Metab Dispos 2010;38:833e40.
[33] Tracy TS, Venkataramanan R, Glover DD, Caritis SN, National Institute for Child
Health and Human Development Network of Maternal-Fetal-Medicine Units. Tempo-
ral changes in drug metabolism (CYP1A2, CYP2D6 and CYP3A activity) during
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2005;192:633e9.
[34] van Heeswijk RP, Khaliq Y, Gallicano KD, Bourbeau M, Seguin I, Phillips EJ,
Cameron DW. The pharmacokinetics of nelﬁnavir and M8 during pregnancy and
post partum. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2004;76(6):588e97.
[35] Hirt D, Treluyer JM, Jullien V, Firtion G, Chappuy H, Rey E, et al. Pregnancy-related
effects on nelﬁnavir-M8 pharmacokinetics: a population study with 133 women. Anti-
microb Agents Chemother 2006;50(6):2079e86.
[36] Unadkat JD, Wara DW, Hughes MD, Maathias AA, Holland DT, Paul ME, Connor J,
Huang S, Nguyen B-Y, Watts DH, Mofenson LM, Smith E, Deutsch P, Kaiser KA,
Tuomala RE. Pharmacokinetics and safety of indinavir in human immunodeﬁciency
virus-infected pregnant women. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2007;51:783e6.
[37] Tran AH, Best BM, Stek A, Wang J, Capparelli EV, Burchett SK, Kreitchmann R,
Rungruengthanakit K, George K, Cressey TR, Chakhtoura N, Smith E, Shapiro DE,
Mirochnick M, IMPAACT P1026s Protocol Team. Pharmacokinetics of rilpivirine in
HIV-infected pregnant women. J Acquir Immune Deﬁc Syndr 2016;72(3):289e96.
[38] Schalkwijk S, Colbers A, Konopnicki D, Gingelmaier A, Lambert J, van der Ende M,
Molto´ J, Burger D, Pharmacokinetics of Newly Developed Antiretroviral Agents in
HIV-Infected Pregnant Women (PANNA) Network. Lowered rilpivirine exposure dur-
ing the third trimester of pregnancy in human immunodeﬁciency virus type 1einfected
women. Clin Infect Dis 2017;65(8):1335e41.
[39] Koh KH, Pan X, Shen HW, Arnold SL, Yu AM, Gonzalez FJ, Isoherranen N, Jeong H.
Altered expression of small heterodimer partner governs cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2D6
induction during pregnancy in CYP2D6-humanized mice. J Biol Chem 2014;289(6):
3105e13.
[40] Koh KH, Pan X, Zhang W, McLachlan A, Urrutia R, Jeong H. Kru¨ppel-like factor 9
promotes hepatic cytochrome P450 2D6 expression during pregnancy in CYP2D6-
humanized mice. Mol Pharmacol 2014;86(6):727e35.
References
41
[41] Ryu RJ, Eyal S, Easterling TR, Caritis SN, Venkataraman R, Hankins G, Rytting E,
Thummel K, Kelly EJ, Risler L, Phillips B, Honaker MT, Shen DD, Hebert MF. Phar-
macokinetics of metoprolol during pregnancy and lactation. J Clin Pharmacol 2016;
56(5):581e9.
[42] Claessens AJ, Risler LJ, Eyal S, Shen DD, Easterling TR, Hebert MF. CYP2D6 medi-
ates 4-hydroxylation of clonidine in vitro: implication for pregnancy-induced changes
in clonidine clearance. Drug Metab Dispos 2010;38:1393e6.
[43] Buchanan ML, Easterling TR, Carr DB, Shen DD, Risler LJ, Nelson WL,
Mattison DR, Hebert MF. Clonidine pharmacokinetics in pregnancy. Drug Metab Dis-
pos 2009;37:702e5.
[44] Cunningham FE, Baughman VL, Peters J, Laurito CE. Comparative pharmacokinetics
of oral versus sublingual clonidine. J Clin Anesth 1994;6:430e3.
[45] Porchet HC, Piletta P, Dayer P. Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic modeling of the
effects of clonidine on pain threshold, blood pressure, and salivary ﬂow. Eur J Clin
Pharmacol 1992;42:655e62.
[46] Arndts D. New aspects of clinical pharmacology of clonidine. Chest 1983;83:
397e400.
[47] Naritomi Y, Terashita S, Kagayama A. Identiﬁcation and relative contributions of hu-
man cytochrome P450 isoforms involved in the metabolism of glibenclamide and lan-
soprazole: evaluation of an approach based on the in vitro substrate disappearance rate.
Xenobiotica 2004;34:415e7.
[48] Van Giersbergen PL, Treiber A, Clozel M, Bodin F, Dingemanse J. In vivo and in vitro
studies exploring the pharmacokinetic interaction between bosentan, a dual endothelin
receptor antagonist and glyburide. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2002;71:253e62.
[49] Zhou L, Naraharisetti SB, Liu L, Wang H, Lin YS, Isoherranen N, Unadkat JD,
Hebert MF, Mao Q. Contributions of human cytochrome P450 enzymes to glyburide
metabolism. Biopharm Drug Dispos 2010;31:228e42.
[50] Kirchheiner J, Brockmo¨ller J, Meineke I, Bauer S, Rohde W, Meisel C, Roots I. Impact
of CYP2C9 amino acid polymorphisms on glyburide kinetics and on the insulin and
glucose response in healthy volunteers. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2002;71:286e96.
[51] Yin OQ, Tomlinson B, Chow MS. CYP2C9 but not CYP2C19 polymorphisms affect
the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of glyburide in Chinese subjects. Clin
Pharmacol Ther 2005;78:370e7.
[52] Niemi M, Cascorbi I, Timm R, Kroemer HK, Neuvonen PJ, Kivisto KT. Glyburide and
glimepiride pharmacokinetics in subjects with different CYP2C9 genotypes. Clin
Pharmacol Ther 2005;78:90e2.
[53] Zhang YF, Chen XY, Guo YJ, Si DY, Zhou H, Zhong DF. Impact of cytochrome P450
CYP2C9 variant allele CYP2C9*3 on the pharmacokinetics of glibenclamide and lor-
noxicam in Chinese subjects. Yao Xue Xue Bao 2005;40:796e9.
[54] McGready R, Stepniewska K, Seaton E, Cho T, Cho D, Ginsberg A, Edstein MD,
Ashley E, Looareesuwan S, White NJ, Nosten F. Pregnancy and use of oral contracep-
tives reduces the biotransformation of proguanil to cycloguanil. Eur J Clin Pharmacol
2003;59:553e7.
[55] Yu T, Campbell SC, Stockmann C, Tak C, Schoen K, Clark EA, Varner MW,
Spigarelli MG, Sherwin CM. Pregnancy-induced changes in the pharmacokinetics
of caffeine and its metabolites. J Clin Pharmacol 2016;56(5):590e6.
42
CHAPTER 3 Pharmacokinetics in pregnancy
[56] Kantrowitz-Gordon I, Hays K, Kayode O, Kumar AR, Kaplan HG, Reid JM,
Safgren SL, Ames MM, Easterling TR, Hebert MF. Pharmacokinetics of dacarbazine
(DTIC) in pregnancy. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 2018;81(3):455e60.
[57] Yanakakis LJ, Bumpus NN. Biotransformation of the antiretroviral drug etravirine:
metabolite identiﬁcation, reaction phenotyping, and characterization of autoinduction
of cytochrome P450-dependent metabolism. Drug Metab Dispos 2012;40(4):803e14.
[58] Izurieta P, Kakuda TN, Feys C, Witek J. Safety and pharmacokinetics of etravirine in
pregnant HIV-1-infected women. HIV Med 2011;12(4):257e8.
[59] Mulligan N, Schalkwijk S, Best BM, Colbers A, Wang J, Capparelli EV, Molto´ J,
Stek AM, Taylor G, Smith E, Hidalgo Tenorio C, Chakhtoura N, van Kasteren M,
Fletcher CV, Mirochnick M, Burger D. Etravirine pharmacokinetics in HIV-infected
pregnant women. Front Pharmacol 2016;4(7):239.
[60] Ke AB, Nallani SC, Zhao P, Rostami-Hodjegan A, Unadkat JD. Expansion of a PBPK
model to predict disposition in pregnant women of drugs cleared via multiple CYP en-
zymes, including CYP2B6, CYP2C9 and CYP2C19. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2014;77(3):
554e70.
[61] Montaner J, Yeni P, Clumeck NN, Fa¨tkenheuer G, Gatell J, Hay P, Seminari E,
Peeters MP, Scho¨ller-Gyu¨re M, Simonts M, Woodfall B, TMC125-C203 Study
Group. Safety, tolerability, and preliminary efﬁcacy of 48 weeks of etravirine therapy
in a phase IIb dose-ranging study involving treatment-experienced patients with HIV-1
infection. Clin Infect Dis 2008;47(7):969e78.
[62] Olagunju A, Bolaji O, Amara A, Else L, Okafor O, Adejuyigbe E, Oyigboja J, Back D,
Khoo S, Owen A. Pharmacogenetics of pregnancy-induced changes in efavirenz
pharmacokinetics. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2015;97(3):298e306.
[63] Cressey TR, Stek A, Capparelli E, Bowonwatanuwong C, Prommas S, Sirivatanapa P,
Yuthavisuthi P, Neungton C, Huo Y, Smith E, Best BM, Mirochnick M, IMPAACT
P1026s Team. Efavirenz pharmacokinetics during the third trimester of pregnancy
and postpartum. J Acquir Immune Deﬁc Syndr 2012;59:245e52.
[64] Lee JK, Chung HJ, Fischer L, Fischer J, Gonzalez FJ, Jeong H. Human placental lac-
togen induces CYP2E1 expression via PI 3-kinase pathway in female human
hepatocytes. Drug Metab Dispos 2014;42(4):492e9.
[65] Prescott LF. Kinetics and metabolism of paracetamol and phenacetin. Br J Clin Phar-
macol 1980;10(Suppl. 2):291Se8S.
[66] Miners JO, Robson RA, Birkett DJ. Paracetamol metabolism in pregnancy. Br J Clin
Pharmacol 1986;22(3):359e62.
[67] Kulo A, Peeters MY, Allegaert K, Smits A, de Hoon J, Verbesselt R, Lewi L, van de
Velde M, Knibbe CA. Pharmacokinetics of paracetamol and its metabolites in women
at delivery and post-partum. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2013;75(3):850e60.
[68] King CD, Rios GR, Green MD, Tephly TR. UDP-glucuronosyltransferases. Curr Drug
Metabol 2000;1(2):143e61.
[69] Zhou J, Tracy TS, Remmel RP. Glucuronidation of dihydrotestosterone and trans-
androsterone by recombinant UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A4: evidence
for multiple UGT1A4 aglycone binding sites. Drug Metab Dispos 2010;38:431e40.
[70] Green MD, Bishop WP, Tephly TR. Expressed human UGT1.4 protein catalyzes the
formation of quaternary ammonium-linked glucuronides. Drug Metab Dispos 1995;
23:299e302.
[71] Tran TA, Leppik IE, Blesi K, Sathanandan ST, Remmel R. Lamotrigine clearance dur-
ing pregnancy. Neurology 2002;59:251e5.
References
43
[72] Reimers A, Helde G, Bra˚then G, Brodtkorb E. Lamotrigine and its N2-glucuronide
during pregnancy: the signiﬁcance of renal clearance and estradiol. Epilepsy Res
2011;94(3):198e205.
[73] de Haan GJ, Edelbroek P, Segers J, Engelsman M, Lindhout D, De´vile´-Notschaele M,
Augustijn P. Gestation-induced changes in lamotrigine pharmacokinetics: a monother-
apy study. Neurology 2004;63:571e3.
[74] Jeong
H,
Choi
S,
Song
JW,
Chen
H,
Fischer
JH.
Regulation
of
UDP-
glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A1 by progesterone and its impact on labetalol
elimination. Xenobiotica 2008;38(1):62e75.
[75] Hardman J, Endres L, Fischer P, Fischer J. Pharmacokinetics of labetalol in pregnancy.
Pharmacotherapy 2005;25(10):1493.
[76] Choi S, Jeong H, Deyo K, Fischer J. Protein binding of labetalol in pregnancy. Clin
Pharmacol Therapeut 2007;81(S1):S79.
[77] Beaulac-Baillargeon L, Rocheleau S. Paracetamol pharmacokinetics during the ﬁrst
trimester of human pregnancy. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1994;46(5):451e4.
[78] O’Sullivan MJ, Boyer PJ, Scott GB, Parks WP, Weller S, Blum MR, Balsley J,
Bryson YJ. The pharmacokinetics and safety of zidovudine in the third trimester of
pregnancy for women infected with human immunodeﬁciency virus and their infants:
phase I acquired predictions resulted in the lowest Css,avg in the third trimester (median
[interquartile range]: 4.5 [3.8-5.1] mg/L), while Cs immunodeﬁciency syndrome clin-
ical trials group study (protocol 082). Zidovudine Collaborative Working Group. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 1993;168(5):1510e6.
[79] Gerdin E, Salmonson T, Lindberg B, Rane A. Maternal kinetics of morphine during
labour. J Perinat Med 1990;18(6):479e87.
[80] Shankar OK, Ronis MJJ, Badger TM. Effects of pregnancy and nutritional status on
alcohol metabolism. Alcohol Res Health 2007;30(1):55e9.
[81] Crabb DW, Matsumoto M, Chang D, You M. Overview of the role of alcohol dehydro-
genase and aldehyde dehydrogenase and their variants in the genesis of alcohol-related
pathology. Proc Nutr Soc 2004;63(1):49e63.
[82] Yuen GJ, Weller S, Pakes GE. A review of the pharmacokinetics of abacavir. Clin
Pharmacokinet 2008;47:351e71.
[83] Vannappagari V, Koram N, Albano J, Tilson H, Gee C. Abacavir and lamivudine ex-
posures during pregnancy and non-defect adverse pregnancy outcomes: data from the
antiretroviral pregnancy registry. J Acquir Immune Deﬁc Syndr 2015;68(3):359e64.
[84] Hua W, Zhang H, Ryu S, Yang X, Di L. Human Tissue distribution of carbonyl reduc-
tase 1 using proteomic approach with LC-MS/MS. J Pharmaceut Sci 2017;106:
1405e11.
[85] Shi SM, Di L. The role of carbonyl reductase 1 in drug discovery and development.
Expet Opin Drug Metabol Toxicol 2017;13(8):859e70.
[86] Waclawik A, Jabbour HN, Blitek A, Ziecik AJ. Estradiol-17beta, prostaglandin E2
(PGE2), and the PGE2 receptor are involved in PGE2 positive feedback loop in the
porcine endometrium. Endocrinology 2009;150(8):3823e32.
[87] Iwata N, Inazu N, Satoh T. Changes and localization of ovarian carbonyl reductase dur-
ing pseudopregnancy and pregnancy in rats. Biol Reprod 1990;43(3):397e403.
[88] Malatkova P, Wsol V. Carbonyl reduction pathways in drug metabolism. Drug Metab
Rev 2014;46:96e123.
[89] Rosemond MJ, Walsh JS. Human carbonyl reduction pathways and a strategy for their
study in vitro. Drug Metab Rev 2004;36:335e61.
44
CHAPTER 3 Pharmacokinetics in pregnancy
[90] Ryu RJ, Eyal S, Kaplan HG, Akbarzadeh A, Hays K, Puhl K, Easterling TR, Berg SL,
Scorsone KA, Feldman EM, Umans JG, Miodovnik M, Hebert MF. Pharmacokinetics
of doxorubicin in pregnant women. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 2014;73(4):
789e97.
[91] Andrew MA, Easterling TR, Carr DB, Shen D, Buchanan ML, Rutherford T,
Bennett R, Vicini P, Hebert MF. Amoxicillin pharmacokinetics in pregnant women:
modeling and simulations of dosage strategies. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2007;81:547e56.
[92] Tanigawara Y, Okamura N, Hirai M, Yasuhara M, Ueda K, Kioka N, Komano T,
Hori R. Transport of digoxin by human P-glycoprotein expressed in a porcine kidney
epithelial cell line (LLC-PK1). J Pharmacol Exp Therapeut 1992;263:840e5.
[93] Ernest S, Rajaraman S, Megyesi J, Bello-Reuss EN. Expression of MDR1 (multidrug
resistance) gene and its protein in normal human kidney. Nephron 1997;77:284e9.
[94] Kullak-Ublick GA, Ismair MG, Stieger B, Landmann L, Huber R, Pizzagalli F,
Fattinger K, Meier PJ, Hagenbuch B. Organic anion-transporting polypeptide B
(OATP-B) and its functional comparison with three other OATPs of human liver.
Gastroenterology 2001;120:525e33.
[95] Lau YY, Wu C-Y, Okochi H, Benet LZ. Ex situ inhibition of hepatic uptake and efﬂux
signiﬁcantly changes metabolism: hepatic enzyme-transporter interplay. J Pharmacol
Exp Therapeut 2004;308:1040e5.
[96] Lowes S, Cavet ME, Simmons NL. Evidence for a non-MDR1 component in digoxin
secretion by intestinal Caco-2 epithelial layers. Eur J Pharmacol 2003;458:49e56.
[97] Shanson DC, McNabb R, Hijipieris P. The effect of probenecid on serum amoxicillin
concentrations up to 18 hours after a single 3 g oral dose of amoxicillin: possible im-
plications for preventing endocarditis. J Antimicrob Chemother 1984;13:629e32.
[98] Daniel H, Kottra G. The proton oligopeptide cotransporter family SLC15 in physi-
ology and pharmacology. Pﬂueg Arch Eur J Physiol 2004;447:610e8.
[99] Li M, Anderson GD, Phillips BR, Kong W, Shen DD, Wang J. Interactions of amox-
icillin and cefaclor with human renal organic anion and peptide transporters. Drug
Metab Dispos 2006;34:547e55.
[100] Becker ML, Visser LE, van Schaik RH, Hofman A, Uitterlinden AG, Stricker BH. Ge-
netic variation in the multidrug and toxin extrusion 1 transporter protein inﬂuences the
glucose-lowering effect of metformin in patients with diabetes: a preliminary study.
Diabetes 2009;58:745e9.
[101] Zhou M, Xia L, Wang J. Metformin transport by a newly cloned proton-stimulated
organic cation transporter (plasma membrane monoamine transporter) expressed in
human intestine. Drug Metab Dispos 2007;35:1956e62.
[102] Song IS, Shin HJ, Shim EJ, Jung IS, Kim WY, Shon JH, Shin JG. Genetic variants of
the organic cation transporter 2 inﬂuence the disposition of metformin. Clin Pharmacol
Ther 2008;84:559e62.
[103] Wang ZJ, Yin OQ, Tomlinson B, Chow MS. OCT2 polymorphisms and in-vivo renal
functional consequence: studies with metformin and cimetidine. Pharmacogenetics
Genom 2008;18:637e45.
[104] Chen Y, Li S, Brown C, Cheatham S, Castro RA, Leabman MK, Urban TJ, Chen L,
Yee SW, Choi JH, Huang Y, Brett CM, Burchard EG, Giacomini KM. Effect of genetic
variation in the organic cation transporter 2 on the renal elimination of metformin.
Pharmacogenetics Genom 2009;19:497e504.
References
45
[105] Urakami Y, Nakamura N, Takahashi K, Okuda M, Saito H, Hashimoto Y, Inui K.
Gender differences in expression of organic cation transporter OCT2 in rat kidney.
FEBS Lett 1999;461:339e42.
[106] Shu Y, Bello CL, Mangravite LM, Feng B, Giacomini KM. Functional characteristics
and steroid hormone-mediated regulation of an organic cation transporter in Madin-
Darby canine kidney cells. J Pharmacol Exp Therapeut 2001;299:392e8.
[107] Alnouti Y, Petrick JS, Klaassen CD. Tissue distribution and ontogeny of organic cation
transporters in mice. Drug Metab Dispos 2006;34:477e82.
[108] Bergagnini-Kolev MC, Hebert MF, Easterling TR, Lin YS. Pregnancy increases the
renal secretion of N1-methylnicotinamide, an endogenous probe for renal cation trans-
porters, in patients prescribed metformin. Drug Metab Dispos 2017;45(3):325e9.
[109] Blackburn ST. Maternal, fetal & neonatal physiology. A clinical perspective. 3rd ed. St
Louis: Saunders Elsevier; 2007.
46
CHAPTER 3 Pharmacokinetics in pregnancy
Medications and the
breastfeeding mother
4
Cheston M. Berlin, Jr.
Department of Pediatrics/Division of Academic General Pediatrics, Penn State College of
Medicine, Penn Statae Children’s Hospital, Hershey, PA, United States
4.1 Medication use by the breastfeeding mother
Mothers may need medication both during and after pregnancy. In both cases, it is
important not only to protect the infant but also to provide the mother with necessary
drug treatment. The infant may be born having been exposed to maternal medication
during gestation. It is important to remember, in addition to drug exposure of the in-
fant during breastfeeding, that previous exposure during pregnancy may potentiate
any adverse effects during lactation. This would especially be true in the immediate
postnatal period, but for some drugs, the window of adverse reactions in the infant
may be longer (e.g., antidepressants).
4.2 Clinical pharmacology of drug transfer into breast milk
The determining factors for the transport of drugs from maternal circulation to the
alveolar lumen in the mammary cell are as follows [1]: molecular weight [2], binding
to maternal plasma proteins [3], lipid solubility, and [4] degree of ionization. Drugs
which are transferred most rapidly and/or in the highest amount are those with high
lipid solubility, no electrical charge, low molecular weight, and low or no binding to
maternal plasma proteins. There are four diffusion mechanisms for drug transfer into
the mammary cell alveolar lumen: transcellular, intercellular, passive, and ionophore
(transfer of polar compounds bound to carrier proteins) [1]. Transcellular diffusion
probably accounts for most drug transfer. The intercellular diffusion route, which
avoids the interior of the cell, may account for the appearance in milk of high-
molecular weight compounds such as immunoglobulins (from maternal plasma)
and monoclonal antibody drugs such as etanercept (Enbrel, molecular weight
52,000). High-molecular weight compounds do appear in milk. Most obvious are an-
tibodies from maternal plasma. Many of the newer pharmacological agents are high-
molecular weight entities such as monoclonal antibodies. For drugs like etanercept,
the amount appearing in milk is extremely small (2e5 ng/mL) compared to the
maternal serum level of 1450e2000 ng/mL [2]. Such a small amount of a protein
is most likely pharmacologically inactive both because of the extremely small dose
CHAPTER
47
Clinical Pharmacology During Pregnancy. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818902-3.00004-X
Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
and also because of lack of absorption from the infant’s gastrointestinal tract.
Because virtually all drugs of a molecular weight below 200 or 300 Da will cross
into milk, the dose that the child receives (concentration  volume) is usually phar-
macologically insigniﬁcant. For most drugs, less than 1%e2% of the maternal dose is
potentially available to be excreted into breast milk [3e5].
4.3 During delivery
The obvious concern in this period of time is the type and anesthesia/analgesia that
the mother may have received. This drug exposure may delay the onset of lactogen-
esis, may affect the mother’s mentation and ability to nurse, and the infant may show
effects from transplacental transfer that interfere with latch and ingestion. An impor-
tant concept is that regardless of the type of anesthesia and/or analgesia used after
delivery, the amount of any agent potentially transferred to the infant would be
less than the amount transferred during labor and delivery via the placenta.
4.4 General anesthesia
4.4.1 Volatile anesthetic agents
There are very little data on the concentration of these compounds in human milk.
This is due to rapid washout after administration, and by the time the mother wakens
to nurse her infant, her plasma levels are very low or absent.
4.4.1.1 Halothane
There are no published reports measuring the amount of halothane in milk after gen-
eral anesthesia to the mother. It has been reported that patients can exhale measur-
able amounts of halothane for 11e20 days after anesthesia [6]. A female
anesthesiologist had levels of 2 ppm of halothane in her milk after working in an
operating room for up to 5 h [7]. Because of this observation, it is reasonable to as-
sume that it would appear in the milk of a mother administered halothane for a ce-
sarean section or any postdelivery complication.
4.4.1.2 Desﬂurane and sevoﬂurane
These two inhalation anesthetic agents are highly ﬂuorinated and not very soluble in
fat and other peripheral tissues. Thus, induction and recovery are rapid. Although
there are no reports of measurement of these two compounds in milk, the levels
are very likely to be low or absent because of very low fat solubility.
4.4.2 Intravenous anesthetic agents
4.4.2.1 Ketamine
There are no reports of the measurement of ketamine in the milk of postpartum
women. The half-life of ketamine is about 3 h, so that permitting a mother to
48
CHAPTER 4 Medications and the breastfeeding mother
breastfeed several hours after delivery would expose the infant to extremely small
amounts of this drug.
4.4.2.2 Propofol
This drug is a lipid and must be administered to the mother via a lipid emulsion. The
half-life of the drug is about 2 h. The amounts found in milks are very lowdusually
1 mg/L of milk or less [8]. Such low amounts would be unlikely to be absorbed by
the nursing infant.
4.4.2.3 Etomidate
Concentrations of etomidate in milk are very low (less than 1 mg/L) and absent 4 h
after administration. Maternal half-life is about 3 h [9].
4.4.2.4 Thiopental
Concentrations of thiopental in milk are usually 2 mg/dL or less depending on the
time of sampling after intravenous administration to the mother. Serum concentra-
tions usually decline to less than 1 mg/dL after 4 h from the last dose [9]. One study
compared the excretion of thiopental in both breast-fed and nonbreast-fed infants
and found no difference in the amount excreted [10]. It is unlikely that the breast-
fed infant would receive a signiﬁcant amount of thiopental by the time lactation
is established. This drug has been the subject of much debate because of its use
as a component in lethal injection for capital punishment. It has not been manufac-
tured in the United States of America since 2009, and its importation from foreign
suppliers is a source of litigation.
4.4.3 A general statement
It is interesting to speculate on whether initial difﬁculty in breastfeeding (especially
poor latch) may be due to residual general anesthetics (either inhalation or intrave-
nous) in breast milk. It is safe for mother (and infant) to start or resume breastfeeding
as soon as she emerges from a general anesthetic agent [11e14].
4.5 Epidural anesthesia
The usual anesthetic agents employed in epidural anesthesia are bupivacaine or ropi-
vacaine. The opioid fentanyl is frequently added to the injection ﬂuid. These local
anesthetic agents provide rapid onset of pain relief and when used in the usual con-
centrations do not cause signiﬁcant loss of muscle power. They are both highly
bound to maternal plasma protein and hence transfer to milk is limited. Two recent,
prospective, random allocated studies did not show any appreciable difference in
breastfeeding between groups receiving epidural anesthesia with a local anesthetic
and/or with fentanyl [15,16]. There was a suggestion that women receiving only
meperidine did have a lower rate of successful breastfeeding. Chang and Heaman
reported on 53 women receiving either ropivacaine or bupivacaine for an average
infusion time of 3.5 h. There was no effect on neurobehavior including breastfeeding
4.5 Epidural anesthesia
49
when compared to a group that received no anesthesia [17]. Both of these local anes-
thetic agents are poorly, if at all, absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, so that even
if a small amount was present in milk, the infant should not be affected. Rosen and
Lawrence studied 83 motherechild pairs and found no difference between breast-
fed and bottle-fed infants on the ability to feed or initial weight loss [18].
4.6 Galactogogues including dietary supplements
(including herbs)
Several drugs and many dietary supplements have been tried to improve lactation
both in initiation of milk formation and increase in milk supply. The Dietary Supple-
ment Health and Education Act of 1994 removed dietary supplements from review
by the USA FDA. They are not subject to the scrutiny for safety and effectiveness as
are drugs. Many dietary supplements may be imported with no guarantee of purity
[19]. There are no studies which can conﬁrm that any of these substances are effec-
tive [20]. Mothers should be advised not to use dietary supplements as both their
purity and efﬁcacy are not established. Adverse reactions to herbal products have
been reported and frequently may be associated with impurities including legumes
and tree nuts [21]. There is no substitute for lactation support and evaluation by the
physician, the hospital, and a lactation consultant [22].
4.7 Immediate postpartum period
During the immediate postpartum period, the major concerns for drug administra-
tion to the mother are the following [1]: pain relief [2], resumption of medications
for chronic conditions that may have been interrupted by pregnancy, and [3] treat-
ment of newly diagnosed conditions.
4.8 Pain
For immediate postpartum pain relief (cesarean section and episiotomy), acetamin-
ophen or a nonsteroidal antiinﬂammatory drug (NSAID) may be sufﬁcient if appro-
priate dosing is used. There have been recent concerns over the use of higher doses
of acetaminophen for chronic therapy particularly when associated with the use of
alcoholic beverages. Should acetaminophen or NSAIDs provide insufﬁcient pain
control, a switch to a narcotic would be appropriate.
4.8.1 Morphine
Regardless of the route of administration to the mother (oral, intravenous, epidural,
and intrathecal), the amount of morphine and its active metabolite, morphine-6-
glucuronide, transferred in milk is very small and unlikely to cause symptoms in
50
CHAPTER 4 Medications and the breastfeeding mother
the infant except possibly in the very young term or premature infant. As an
example, mothers given 4 mg of morphine epidurally had peak milk levels of 82
mcg/L. If the morphine was given parenterally (5e15 mg), the peak level was
500 mcg/L [23]. The half-life of morphine is about 3 h (adult), so if the mother
waited 3 h after any dose of morphine, the level in milk would be quite low and
most likely have no clinical effect.
4.8.2 Codeine
The active metabolites of codeine are morphine and the morphine metabolite
morphine-6-glucuronide. The enzyme systems responsible for this metabolism are
as
follows:
CYP2D
for
codeine
and
UGT2B7
for
morphine,
codeine-6-
glucuronide, and morphine-6-glucuronide. Both of these systems are subject to ge-
netic variation. Some patients are ultrarapid metabolizers of codeine and produce
higher levels of morphine and active metabolites in a very short period of time after
administration. These increased levels will produce increased side effects, especially
drowsiness and central nervous system depression in both the mother and nursing
child [24,25]. One death has been reported from morphine poisoning [24]. It would
be prudent to avoid using codeine in the immediate postpartum period and perhaps
never in breastfeeding mothers regardless of the infant’s age. Older infants, espe-
cially those receiving solid foods in addition to breast milk, may not have signiﬁcant
symptoms even though their mothers are ultrafast metabolizers [25].
4.8.3 Meperidine
Meperidine does appear in milk and in infant plasma after the administration of the
drug for cesarean section and also for postpartum pain management [26,27]. The in-
fant’s plasma level was found to be 1.4% of the maternal plasma level [26]. Meper-
idine given postpartum for pain control does produce decreased alertness in 3- to
4-day-old infants compared to equivalent doses of morphine [27,28]. Hodgkinson
et al. using the Early Neonatal Neurobehavioral Scale showed a suppression of
most of the 13 items (including alertness, rooting, and sucking) on the ﬁrst and sec-
ond postpartum days. The effects were dose related [29]. Morphine appears to be the
preferred opioid for intra- and postpartum pain.
4.8.4 Hydrocodone
Hydrocodone is metabolized to the more active metabolite hydromorphone and both
are excreted into breast milk. If the daily dosage is limited to 30 mg per day, it is
unlikely to affect the established nursing infant [30,31]. The estimated median
opiate dose to which the infant might be exposed is 0.7% of the therapeutic dosage
for older infants.
There has been much concern expressed over the potential toxicity of opioids
delivered to the infant through breastfeeding. Adverse events are usually associated
with high maternal dose in very young infants.
4.8 Pain
51
4.9 Methadone
Women who have been on methadone during pregnancy for narcotic addiction
should be encouraged to breastfeed and continue to take methadone [32]. Babies
who nurse from mothers on methadone have both a slower onset and less severe
neonatal abstinence syndrome. They also have less need for pharmacological treat-
ment of the abstinence syndrome [33]. Concentrations of methadone are low in
breast milk: 21e314 ng/mL [34]. Only about 1%e3% of the maternal dose is
excreted into milk [35]. These infants will still require very close observation in
the hospital and after discharge to monitor possible withdrawal symptoms.
4.10 Resumption of prepregnancy medications
With the possible exception of psychotropic drugs, almost all medications for acute
and chronic maternal conditions are safe for the breastfeeding infant. Adverse reac-
tions in the infant to maternal drug administration are very rare and usually conﬁned
to infants under the age of 2 months [36,37]. Anderson et al. found 100 reports of
adverse reactions in several database searches from 1966 to 2002 [36]. None were
considered deﬁnitely related to the drug used, 53 were possibly related, and 47
were probably related. There were 3 deaths among the 100 infants; one was a sudden
infant death syndrome. These reports were before the concern about the use of co-
deine in mothers of very young infants. Only 4% of the reports were in infants older
than 6 months of age. Information on over 1000 drugs is on the LactMed website
[38] (see below).
4.11 Psycho- and neurotropic drugs
4.11.1 Antidepressants, antipsychotics, anxiolytics,
antiepileptics, and drugs for attention deﬁcit hyperactivity
disorder
These drugs are grouped together because they target the brain; the pharmacody-
namic action of these compounds involves alterations of neurotransmitters within
the central nervous system. These alterations may be in the amount of neurotrans-
mitter, sensitivity of the receptor on the neuron, or number of active receptors. These
drugs include antidepressants, antipsychotics, tranquilizers, antiepilepsy drugs, and
drugs to treat attention deﬁcient hyperactivity disorder. These compounds may be
transmitted during both pregnancy and lactation. This group of drugs is perhaps
the most signiﬁcant challenge to the physician caring for the mother; she needs the
drug or drugs, but what of the effect or effects on the infant? Since they all act by
inﬂuencing transmitter function and since central nervous system receptors are
developing in the fetus and young infant, will there be permanent effects on
52
CHAPTER 4 Medications and the breastfeeding mother
neurodevelopment? The evidence is far from complete; long-term studies are not
available. Limited information suggests that the effect of these compounds on
long-term development may not be signiﬁcant or at the most difﬁcult to measure
because of so many variables such as genetic background and social and economic
status [39]. It is impossible to separate drug effect during breastfeeding from effect
due to exposure during pregnancy. The important information to be given to the
mother is the following [1]: all of these drugs if measured in breast milk do appear
[2], the amount in milk is very small and frequently the drug does not appear in infant
plasma, and [3] long-term studies (over childhood and adolescence) are not available.
It appears that the sensitive period for exposure and adverse effects may be
within the ﬁrst weeks and months.
The antidepressants are of special interest for obstetricians because of the well-
known incidence of depression during pregnancy as well as in the postpartum
period, as many as 18%e20% of women may experience depression either during
pregnancy or during the ﬁrst 3 months after delivery [40,41]. Most of the antidepres-
sants currently in use are members of the selective serotonin uptake inhibitors
(SSRIs) class. They all have prolonged half-lives of 15e36 h [42]. Several of the
SSRIs also have active metabolites (ﬂuoxetine and sertraline) which may extend
pharmacological action for a further 4e16 days. There is a neonatal withdrawal syn-
drome associated with the use of SSRIs. These symptoms can vary from infant to
infant and usually consist of difﬁculty feeding, jitteriness, tremor, sneezing, and
sleep difﬁculties [43]. Symptoms are usually mild and subside within 2 weeks [44].
4.12 Drugs not to give to the nursing mother postpartum
This list is quite small and would include the following:
•
drugs of abuse (cocaine and heroin);
•
several of the beta-blocking agents such as atenolol and sotalol. These have a
high percentage of maternal dose excreted and symptoms have been reported in
the nursing infant [45];
•
lithiumdsigniﬁcant blood levels (from 11% to 56% of maternal levels) reported
in nursing infants [46]. 24 infants reported nursed without difﬁculty; 4 infants
reported with symptoms (all under 2 months of age) [47];
•
amiodaroned3.5%e45% of the maternal dose may be excreted in milk [48].
This drug contains 39% iodine and may interrupt thyroid function. The half-life
in adults is 100 days [49]. Infant serum levels can be 25% of maternal serum
levels [50].
4.13 Oral contraceptives
There have been two concerns with the use of oral contraceptives (OCPs) in the
breastfeeding woman: quality and quantity of milk produced.
4.13 Oral contraceptives
53
The quality of milk does not seem to vary between mothers not taking OCPs and
mothers taking a variety of OCPs. There have been many studies showing decreased
milk supply especially with the older high-dose estrogen compounds and especially
with starting in the ﬁrst few weeks after delivery. Progestins seem not to inhibit
lactation as much as the estrogen compounds do. A recent study compared immedi-
ate postpartum placement of two progestin contraceptives: etonogestrel (ENG,
3-year protection) or levonorgestrel (LNG, 5-year protection). Exclusivity of breast-
feeding at 6 months was high for both compounds (71% for ENG and 72% for
LNG). Continuation of breastfeeding at 21 months was 100% (ENG) and 93.2%
(LNG). There was no difference in exclusivity and continuation between women us-
ing the two progestin compounds and the general population of breastfeeding
women [51]. The Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine places progestin-only com-
pounds as a second choice for contraception and estrogen contraceptives as the third
choice [52]. The ﬁrst choices are the following: LAM (Lactational Amenorrhea
Method), natural family planning, barrier contraception, and intrauterine devices.
Mothers wishing to use LAM should be referred to a physician or lactation consul-
tant for advice on how to use LAM. When used correctly, it is 98% effective [53].
4.13.1 Biologics and biopharmaceuticals (e.g., monoclonal
antibodies)
A large number of biopharmaceutical drugs have been introduced in to medicine in
recent years. They are usually large molecular weight compounds given by injection
to the mother in order to modify many diseases. In rheumatology therapy, they are
known as Disease Modifying Antirheumatic Drugs. Because they are of high molec-
ular weight, transfer into milk is either low or absent. If transfer does occur, the com-
pounds most likely would be broken down in the infant’s intestinal tract. Rarely are
detectable levels seen in the infant’s plasma [54,55].
4.13.2 Marijuana
With increasing legalization of marijuana for recreational use, its consumption will
continue to increase. One study reports 36% of women use it during pregnancy and
18% report using it duration lactation [56]. The cannabis plant is a very complex bio-
logical system. There is a ﬁeld of chemistry called natural product chemistry which
has provided several important pharmacology compounds. Some of these com-
pounds may also have with signiﬁcant capacity for biologic damage of all human
organs. Like tobacco, the cannabis plant has over 400 identiﬁed compounds
[57,58]. The most prominent of the cannabinoids that provide changes in mood
and mentation is D-9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Another cannabinoid is cannabidiol
which has found some efﬁcacy in treatment certain types of seizures. Like coffee
and tobacco, there are hundreds of other compounds without signiﬁcant biological
and toxicity studies. The cannabinoid receptor system not only is in the central ner-
vous system but also in peripheral organs. A most important pharmacological
54
CHAPTER 4 Medications and the breastfeeding mother
property of this class of compounds is the very long half-life in humans (Sharma,
Atakan). Because these compounds may affect receptors in the central nervous sys-
tem, there is concern over possible long-term effects on the infant as discussed above
in the section of central nervous system compounds. There is also concern over the
exposure to the infant from cannabis smoke in the environment [59e63]. It would be
prudent for the nursing mother to avoid the use of cannabis products.
4.14 Summary
Important lessons for any drug that may be transferred in breast milk to the infant are
as follows: neonates up to 2 weeks of age are particularly susceptible to toxicity;
most adverse reports are in infants less than 2 months of age; there is a dose
(maternal) response (infant) relationship; there are signiﬁcant interindividual varia-
tions in drug response; and both maternal and infant pharmacogenetics play a critical
response in drug toxicity [64].
Finally, precise analytic methods have identiﬁed compounds in such extremely
small (e.g., nanograms per liter of milk) amounts that it will be difﬁcult to correlate
with biological measures.
4.15 Where to ﬁnd information
The most up-to-date, comprehensive, and authoritative information is to be found in
LactMed [38]. This is a website of the National Library of Medicine, TOXNET
(Toxicology Data Network). Over 1000 drugs, including herbal preparations, are
referenced; the information is peer reviewed, evidence based, and updated
frequently during each year. LactMed can be accessed with a mobile device. The
LactMed app for iPhone/iPod Touch and Android can be downloaded at http://
toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/help/lactmedapp.htm. Another source is Briggs et al. which
also offers detailed information about the use of drugs during pregnancy [65]. In
2015, the US Food and Drug Administration published the Pregnancy and Lactation
Labeling Rule. This Rule removed the pregnancy letter categories of A, B, C, D, and
X and requires publishing known clinical pharmacology date including risks for any
compound used in pregnancy and lactation [66,67].
References
[1] Berlin CM. Neonatal and pediatric pharmacology. In: Yaffe SJ, Aranda JV, editors.
Neonatal and pediatric pharmacology: therapeutic principles in practice. 4th ed. Phila-
delphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2011. p. 210e20.
[2] Berthelsen BG, Fjeldsoe-Nielsen H, Nielsen CT, Hellmuth E. Etanercept concentrations
in maternal serum, umbilical cord serum, breast milk and child serum during
breastfeeding. Rheumatology 2010;49:2225e7.
References
55
[3] Bennett PH, Notarianni LJ. Risk from drugs in breast milk; an analysis by relative dose.
Br J Clin Pharmacol 1996;42:673e4.
[4] Anderson PO. Drugs in lactation. Pharm Res 2018;35:1e13. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11095-017-2287-z.
[5] Anderson PO, Sauberan JB. Modeling drug passage into human milk. Clin Pharmacol
Ther 2016;100:42e52.
[6] Corbett TH, Ball GL. Respiratory excretion of halothane after clinical and occupational
exposure. Anesthesiology 1973;39:342e5.
[7] Cote CJ, Kenepp NB, Reed SB, Strobel GE. Trace concentrations of halothane in hu-
man breast milk. Br J Anaesth 1976;48:541e3.
[8] http://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/cgi-bin/sis/search/f?/temp/wSrnBRA:1 [propofol].
[9] Esener Z, Sarihasan B, Guven H, Ustun E. Thiopentone and etomidate concentrations in
maternal and umbilical plasma, and in colostrum. Br J Anaesth 1992;69:586e8.
[10] Morgan DJ, Beamiss CG, Blackman GL, Paull JD. Urinary excretion of placentally
transferred thiopentone by the human neonate. Dev Pharmacol Ther 1982;5:136e42.
[11] Hale TW. Anesthetic medications in breastfeeding mothers. J Hum Lactat 1999;15:
185e94.
[12] Montgomery A, Hale TW, Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine Protocol Committee.
ABM Clinical Protocol #15: analgesia and anesthesia for the breastfeeding mother.
Breastfeed Med 2006;1:271e7.
[13] Dalal PG, Bosak J, Berlin CM. Safety of the breast-feeding infant after maternal
anesthesia. Paediatr Anaesth 2014;24:359e71.
[14] Martin E, Vickers B, Landau R, Reece-Stremtan S, Academy of Breastfeeding Medi-
cine. ABM clinical protocol #28. Peripart Analges Anaesthes Breastfeed Mother
2018;13:164e71.
[15] Beilin Y, Bodian CA, Weiser J, Hossain S, Arnold I, Feierman DE, et al. Effect of labor
epidural analgesia with and without fentanyl on infant breast- feeding: a prospective,
randomized, double-blind study. Anesthesiology 2005;103:1211e7.
[16] Wilson MJ, MacArthur C, Cooper GM, Bick D, Moore PA, Shennan A, et al. Epidural
analgesia and breastfeeding: a randomised controlled trial of epidural techniques with
and without fentanyl and a non-epidural comparison group. Anaesthesia 2010;65:
145e53.
[17] Chang ZM, Heaman MI. Epidural analgesia during labor and delivery: effects on the
initiation and continuation of effective breastfeeding. J Hum Lactat 2005;21:305e14.
[18] Rosen AR, Lawrence RA. The effect of epidural anesthesia on infant feeding. J Univ
Roch Med Ctr 1994;6:3e7.
[19] Anderson PO. Herbal use during breastfeeding. Breastfeed Med 2017;12:507e9.
[20] Anderson PO, Valdes V. A critical review of pharmaceutical galactagogues. Breastfeed
Med 2007;2:229e42.
[21] Posadzki P, Watson L, Ernst E. Contamination and adulteration of herbal medicinal
products (HMPs): an overview of systemic reviews. Eur I Clin Pharmacol 2013;69:
295e307.
[22] Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine Protocol Committee. ABM Clinical Protocol #9:
use of galactogogues in initiating or augmenting maternal milk production. Breastfeed
Med 2018;13:307e14 [second revision 2018].
[23] Feilberg VL, Rosenborg D, Broen Christensen C, Mogensen JV. Excretion of morphine
in human breast milk. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1989;33:426e8.
56
CHAPTER 4 Medications and the breastfeeding mother
[24] Koren G, Cairns J, Chitayat D, Gaedigk A, Leeder SJ. Pharmacogenetics of morphine
poisoning in a breastfed neonate of a codeine-prescribed mother. Lancet 2006;368:
33e5.
[25] Madadi P, Ross CJD, Hayden MR, Carleton BC, Gaedigk A, Leeder SJ, et al. Pharma-
cogenetics of neonatal opioid toxicity following maternal use of codeine during breast-
feeding: a caseecontrol study. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2009;85:31e5.
[26] Al-Tamimi Y, Ilett KF, Paech MJ, O’Halloran SJ, Hartman PE. Estimation of infant
dose and exposure to pethidine and norpethidine via breast milk following patient-
controlled epidural pethidine for analgesia post caesarean delivery. Int J Obstet Anesth
2011;20:28e34.
[27] Wittels B, Scott DT, Sinatra RS. Exogenous opioids in human breast milk and acute
neonatal neurobehavior: a preliminary study. Anesthesiology 1990;73:864e9.
[28] Wittels B, Glosten BT, Faure EA, Moawad AH, Ismail M, Hibbard J, et al. Postcesarean
analgesia with both epidural morphine and intravenous patient-controlled analgesia:
neurobehavioral outcomes among nursing neonates. Anesth Analg 1997;85:600e6.
[29] Hodgkinson R, Bhatt M, Wang CN. Double-blind comparison of the neurobehavior of
neonates following the administration of different doses of meperidine to the mother.
Can Anaesth Soc J 1978;25:405e41.
[30] Sauberan JB, Anderson PO, Lane JR, Raﬁe S, Nguyen N, Rossi SS, et al. Breast milk
hydrocodone and hydromorphone levels in mothers using hydrocodone for postpartum
pain. Obstet Gynecol 2011;117:611e7.
[31] Anderson PO, Sauberan JB, Lane JR, Rossi SS. Hydrocodone excretion into breast
milk: the ﬁrst two reported cases. Breastfeed Med 2007;2:10e4.
[32] Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine Protocol Committee. ABM Clinical Protocol #21:
guidelines for breastfeeding and the drug-dependent woman. Breastfeed Med 2009;4:
225e8.
[33] Abdel-Latif ME, Pinner J, Clews S, Cooke F, Lui K, Oei J. Effects of breast milk on the
severity and outcome of neonatal abstinence syndrome among infants of drug-
dependent mothers. Pediatrics 2007;117:e1163e9.
[34] Jansson LM, Choo R, Harrow C, Velez M, Schroeder JR, Lowe R, et al. Methadone
maintenance and long-term lactation. J Hum Lactat 2007;23:184e90.
[35] http://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/cgi-bin/sis/search/f?/temp/wnMXQon:1 [methadone].
[36] Anderson PO, Pochop SL, Manoguerra AS. Adverse drug reactions in breastfed infants:
less than imagined. Clin Pediatr 2003;42:325e40.
[37] Ito S, Blajchman A, Stephenson M, Eliopoulos C, Koren G. Prospective follow-up of
adverse reactions in breastfed infants exposed to maternal medication. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 1993;168:1393e9.
[38] LactMed (drugs and lactation database). http://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/cgi-bin/sis/htmlgen?
LACT.
[39] Nulman I, Rovet J, Stewart DE, Wolpin J, Pace-Asciak P, Shuhaiber S, et al. Child
development following exposure to tricyclic antidepressants or ﬂuoxetine throughout
fetal life: a prospective, controlled study. Am J Psychiatr 2002;159:1889e95.
[40] Marcus SM. Depression during pregnancy: rates, risks, and consequences e motherisk
update 2008. Can J Clin Pharmacol 2009;16:e15e22.
[41] Gavin NI, Gaynes BN, Lohr KN, Meltzer-Brody S, Gartlehner G, Swinson T. Perinatal
depression: a systematic review of prevalence and incidence. Obstet Gynecol 2005;106:
1071e83.
References
57
[42] Davanzo R, Copertino M, De Cunto A, Minen F, Amaddeo A. Antidepressant drugs and
breastfeeding: a review of the literature. Breastfeed Med 2011;6:89e98.
[43] Monk C, Fitelson EM, Werner E. Mood disorders and their pharmacological treatment
during pregnancy: is the future child affected? Pediatr Res 2011;69:3Re10R.
[44] Moses-Kolko EL, Bogen D, Bregar A, Uhl K, Levin B, Wisner KL. Neonatal signs after
late in utero exposure to serotonin reuptake inhibitors: literature review and implica-
tions for clinical applications. J Am Med Assoc 2005;293:2372e83.
[45] Atkinson H, Begg EJ. Concentrations of beta-blocking drugs in human milk. J Pediatr
1990;116:156.
[46] Viguera AC, Newport DJ, Ritchie J, Stowe Z, Whitﬁeld T, Mogielnicki J, et al. Lithium
in breast milk and nursing infants: clinical implications. Am J Psychiatr 2007;164:
342e5.
[47] http://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/cgi-bin/sis/search/f?/temp/wr7lQ4W:1 [lithium].
[48] http://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/cgi-bin/sis/search/f?/temp/wyGm4ch:1 [amiodarone].
[49] Basaria S, Cooper DS. Amiodarone and the thyroid. Am J Med 2005;118:706e14.
[50] McKenna WJ, Harris L, Rowland E, Storey G, Holt D. Amiodarone therapy during
pregnancy. Am J Cardiol 1983;51:1231e3.
[51] Krashin JW, Lemani C, Nkambule J, Talama G, Chiunula L, Flax VL, Stuebe AM,
Tang JH. A comparison of breastfeeding exclusivity and duration rates between imme-
diate postpartum levonorgestrel versus etonogestrel implant users: a prospective cohort
study. Breastfeed Med 2019;14:69e76.
[52] Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine Protocol Committee. ABM Clinical Protocol #13:
contraception during breastfeeding. Breastfeed Med 2006;1:43e50.
[53] Labbok MH, Hight-Laukaran V, Peterson AE, Fletcher V, von Hertzen H, Van
Look PFA. Multicultural study of the lactational amenorrhea method (LAM): I. efﬁ-
cacy, duration, and implications for clinical application. Contraception 1997;55:
327e36.
[54] Krause ML, Amin S, Makol A. Use of DMARDS and biologics during pregnancy and
lactation in rheumatoid arthritis: what the rheumatologist needs to know. Ther Adv
Musculoskelet Dis 2014;6:169e84.
[55] Witzel SJ. Lactation and the use of biologic immunosuppressive medications. Breast-
feed Med 2014:543e6.
[56] Wang GS. Pediatric concerns due to expanded cannabis use: unintended consequences
of legalization. J Med Toxicol 2017;13:99e105.
[57] Sharma P, Murthy P, Bharath MMS. Chemistry, metabolism and toxicology of cannabis:
clinical implications. Iran J Psychiatry 2012;7:149e56.
[58] Atakan Z. Cannabis: a complex plant: different compounds and different effects on
individuals. Ther Adv Psychopharmacol 2012;2:241e54. https://doi.org/10.1177/
2045125312457586.
[59] Ryan S. A modern conundrum for the paediatrician: the safety of breast milk and the
cannabis-using mother. Pediatrics 2018;142:21e2. e20181921.
[60] Ryan SA, Ammerman SD, O’Connor ME. Committee of Substance Use and Prevention,
Section on Breastfeeding. Marijuana use during pregnancy and breastfeeding: implica-
tions for neonatal and childhood outcomes. Pediatrics 2018;142:117e31. e20181889.
[61] Bertrand KA, Hanan NJ, Honerkamp-Smith G, Best BM, Chambers CD. Marijuana use
by breastfeeding mothers and cannabinoid concentrations in breast milk. Pediatrics
2018;142:1e8. e20181076.
58
CHAPTER 4 Medications and the breastfeeding mother
[62] Mourh J, Rowe H. Marijuana and breastfeeding: applicability of the current literature to
clinical practice. Breastfeed Med 2017;12:582e96.
[63] Anderson PO. Cannabis and breastfeeding. Breastfeed Med 2017;12:580e1.
[64] Berlin Jr CM, Paul IM, Vesell ES. Safety issues of maternal drug therapy during
breastfeeding. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2009;85:20e2.
[65] Briggs GG, Freeman RK, Yaffe SJ. Drugs in pregnancy and lactation. 9th ed. Philadel-
phia: Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2011.
[66] Sahin L, Nallani SC, Tassinari MS. Medical Use in pregnancy and the pregnancy and
lactation labeling rule. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2016;100:23e5.
[67] Anderson PO. Medication information sources for breastfeeding mothers. Breastfeed
Med 2017;12:396e7.
References
59
         
This page intentionally left blank
Fetal drug therapy
5
Erik Rytting1, Jennifer Waltz2, Mahmoud S. Ahmed1
1Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX,
United States; 2School of Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX,
United States
5.1 Introduction
The intention of most drugs prescribed during pregnancy is to treat a condition
affecting maternal health. Careful attention is placed on the appropriate selection
of the medication and its dose that would reduce transplacental drug transport and
minimize consequences of fetal drug exposure. However, this chapter will focus
on the administration of drugs intended to treat medical conditions afﬂicting the
fetus, rather than the mother. In order to achieve therapeutic drug concentrations
in the fetus, efforts are made to circumvent the placenta’s function as a barrier. In
this case, it is imperative to reduce maternal exposure to a medication that she
does not need and consequently might adversely affect her well-being.
The ﬁrst section of this chapter will discuss a number of medical indications for
which fetal drug therapy might be warranted. As the focus is on pharmacological
therapy, the reader is referred to other sources for details regarding fetal medical in-
terventions such as prenatal repair of myelomeningocele [1], blood transfusions to
treat fetal anemia [2], and others [3].
The second part of this chapter will describe strategies for fetal drug delivery,
including transplacental transfer following maternal administration, direct fetal in-
jection, gene therapy, stem cell transplantation, and nanomedicine. This chapter
will conclude with a brief discussion of the ethics associated with this challenging
subject (see also Chapter 8 which discusses the ethics of clinical pharmacology in
pregnancy).
5.2 Indications for fetal therapy
Table 5.1 lists some common indications for fetal therapy and details regarding these
conditions are provided below (see also Table 5.2). Nevertheless, as this table is not
comprehensive, this section will identify a number of additional settings where fetal
drug therapy may be beneﬁcial.
CHAPTER
61
Clinical Pharmacology During Pregnancy. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818902-3.00007-5
Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Table 5.1 Examples of indications for fetal drug therapy and medications
used.
Indication for fetal drug therapy
Medications
Cardiac arrhythmias
Digoxin, ﬂecainide, and sotalol
Endocrinological disorders
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Fetal thyroid disorders
Dexamethasone
Levothyroxine
Hematological disorders
Alloimmune thrombocytopenia
Erythrocyte alloimmunization
Gamma globulin
anti-D immunoglobulin
Lung maturation
Neuroprotection
Dexamethasone, betamethasone
Magnesium sulfate
Please note that this is not a comprehensive list of indications or medications.
Table 5.2 Pharmacokinetic considerations for some medications used in
fetal drug therapy (see Table 5.1).
Drug
Typical dosing
Notes
References
Digoxin
0.5 mg bid for 2 days,
then 0.25e0.75 mg/day
Therapeutic
concentration 1.0e
2.5 ng/mL; fetal/
maternal ratio: 0.3e1.3;
hydrops reduces
placental transfer; and
substrate for P-
glycoprotein
[4e12]
Flecainide
100 mg tid or qid
Therapeutic
concentration 0.2e
1.0 mg/mL; fetal/
maternal ratio: 0.5e1.0;
and crosses placenta
even in the presence of
hydrops
[4,11,13e17]
Sotalol
80e160 mg bid or tid
Therapeutic
concentration 2e7 mg/
mL (atrial ﬂutter); fetal/
maternal ratio 1.0  0.5
[4,16,18e25]
Dexamethasone
(for lung
maturation)
6 mg, four intramuscular
doses, 12 h apart
Fetal/maternal ratio
ranged from 0.20
(50 min after dose) to
0.44 (after 265 min); a
fraction is metabolized in
the placenta to the
inactive 11-ketosteroid
[26e30]
62
CHAPTER 5 Fetal drug therapy
Among the most common pharmacological interventions for fetal therapy is the
administration of antenatal corticosteroids in anticipation of preterm delivery to pro-
mote fetal lung maturation. Dexamethasone and betamethasone are the most com-
mon drugs prescribed for this purpose and have demonstrated clinically signiﬁcant
reductions in respiratory distress syndrome, neonatal mortality, cerebroventricular
hemorrhage, necrotizing enterocolitis, intensive care admission, and systemic infec-
tions in the ﬁrst 48 h of life [49,50].
Magnesium sulfate is commonly used in obstetric practice for seizure prophy-
laxis in preeclampsia, but growing evidence supports its role of neuroprotection
Table 5.2 Pharmacokinetic considerations for some medications used in fetal drug
therapy (see Table 5.1).dcont’d
Drug
Typical dosing
Notes
References
Betamethasone
12 mg, two
intramuscular doses,
24 h apart
Fetal/maternal ratio:
0.28  0.04; a fraction is
metabolized in the
placenta to the inactive
11-ketosteroid
[31e35]
Levothyroxine
Case studies report
intraamniotic doses
ranging from 50 to
800 mg (median dose
250 mg), every 1
e4 weeks
Concurrent dose
reduction of maternal
antithyroid drugs may be
necessary; it may be
advisable to start with a
low dose (150 mg), then
increase if necessary;
and cordocentesis
should be limited
[36e40]
Gamma globulin
1e2 g/kg/week i.v.,
depending on risk
Prednisone is often used
in combination
[41]
Anti-D
immunoglobulin
1500 IU as a single
intramuscular injection
at 28 weeks of gestation
A two-dose regimen
consisting of either 500
or 1250 IU each at 28
and 34 weeks may be
more effective in
maintaining sufﬁcient
anti-D levels at term
[42e44]
Dexamethasone
(for congenital
adrenal
hyperplasia)
20 mg/kg/day based on
prepregnancy body
weight, divided in three
doses
See notes on
dexamethasone above
[45]
Magnesium
sulfate
4 g over 20 min, then
1 g/h for a maximum of
24 h
Fetal/maternal ratio:
0.94  0.15; maternal
and fetal concentrations
are dependent on
maternal BMI
[46e48]
5.2 Indications for fetal therapy
63
in low birth weight children [46]. Randomized placebo-controlled trials of antenatal
administration of magnesium sulfate have consistently demonstrated a decreased
risk of cerebral palsy and severe motor dysfunction in preterm infants [51e53].
Long-term cognitive, behavioral, growth, and functional advantages were not
observed at school age [54].
Fetal cardiac arrhythmias affect at least 2% of low-risk pregnancies and as much
as 16.6% of high-risk pregnancies [55,56]. Although intermittent extrasystoles can
be common and may not require treatment, sustained fetal arrhythmias demand
vigorous attention because this can lead to hydrops within 48 h, a condition with
poor prognosis [57e60]. Hydrops can impair transplacental transport, thereby
necessitating fetal injection of a medication [60]. The most common fetal arrhyth-
mias are supraventricular tachycardia, atrial ﬂutter, and severe bradyarrhythmia
associated with complete heart block [58]. Drugs used to treat fetal tachycardia
include digoxin, ﬂecainide, sotalol, procainamide, propranolol, amiodarone, and
adenosine; questions remain regarding the use of steroids and sympathomimetics
for bradycardia caused by heart block [58]. Attentive monitoring of response to
most antiarrhythmic drugs is needed due to narrow therapeutic margins, and certain
drugedrug interactions, as in the case of verapamil and digoxin, could lead to sig-
niﬁcant maternal toxicity and even fetal death [61,62]. Maternal side effects to fetal
antiarrhythmic therapy include palpitations, second-degree atrioventricular block,
Wenckebach phenomenon, and hypotension [61].
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia is most often due to a 21-hydroxylase deﬁciency
(CYP21A2) [59]. Decreased cortisol production results in excess androgen synthe-
sis, which causes virilization of female genitalia. In the future, genetic testing could
play a stronger role in the prenatal counseling of this condition, as the extent of viri-
lization may be linked to fetal genotype [63]. In utero treatment with dexamethasone
reduces the abnormal levels of androgens, and this therapy prevents the devastating
consequences of wrong sex assignment in affected females. Differentiation of
external genitalia occurs between 7 and 12 weeks of gestation, so therapy in at-
risk pregnancies must begin earlier, preferably by the ﬁfth week [45]. Cell-free
DNA testing can provide noninvasive determination of fetal sex at as early as 5 weeks
of gestation, thereby enabling rapid discontinuation of dexamethasone for male
fetuses [64,65]. Chorionic villus sampling (CVS) can be performed at 10e12 weeks,
at which point therapy can be halted for unaffected females [45]. Dexamethasone
treatment (three times daily) will continue throughout pregnancy for an affected
female fetus. Maternal side effects of fetal dexamethasone therapy include edema,
striae, excess weight gain, Cushingoid facial features, facial hair, glucose intoler-
ance, hypertension, gastrointestinal problems, and emotional irritability [45,59,66].
Congenital hypothyroidism, which affects approximately 1 out of every 4500
pregnancies, is usually a secondary condition caused by treatment of maternal
hyperthyroidism, such as Graves’ disease [59]. Fetal goiter can interfere with fetal
swallowing and lead to polyhydramnios and premature rupture of membranes.
Furthermore, fetal goiter can cause tracheal compression and asphyxia at birth
64
CHAPTER 5 Fetal drug therapy
[36,59]. Fetal hypothyroidism can be successfully treated with levothyroxine. Lev-
othyroxine is administered via intraamniotic injection due to its low transplacental
transfer [36,59].
Fetal hematological disorders that can be treated include alloimmune thrombo-
cytopenia and erythrocyte alloimmunization. Fetal and neonatal alloimmune throm-
bocytopenia (FNAIT) has an incidence rate of 1 in 1500 and is caused by a maternal
antibody-mediated response against a fetal plateletespeciﬁc antigen; this may lead
to in utero intracranial hemorrhage [67]. Women at risk for a pregnancy with FNAIT
are usually only identiﬁed after having a previous child with the disorder, but
maternal administration of intravenous gamma globulin can successfully increase
fetal platelet counts [59,67]. Erythrocyte alloimmunizationdthe reaction of
maternal antibodies with fetal erythrocyte antigensdcan lead to hemolysis, fetal
anemia, and hydrops fetalis [59]. Antepartum anti-D immunoglobulin given to
Rh-negative women carrying an Rh-positive fetus reduced the incidence of Rh im-
munization during pregnancy from 1.8 to 0.14% [68]. Intravenous immunoglobulin
treatment in pregnant women with a fetus at risk for hemolytic disease may lower the
demand for intrauterine transfusions [69]. It should be noted that there are other
types of red-cell alloimmunization besides anti-RhD without prophylactic immune
globulins yet available [70].
In addition to the aforementioned indications, there are a number of fetal condi-
tions for which experimental therapeutics are in various stages of testing. Polyhy-
dramnios (excess amniotic ﬂuid) affects approximately 1% of pregnancies, of
which 55% are idiopathic and 25% are related to fetal diabetes [57,71]. Amniore-
duction and betamethasone are used in the management of severe polyhydramnios
[72]. Although indomethacin likely decreases fetal urine production in mothers
with severe refractory symptoms, it is not recommended for reducing amniotic ﬂuid
because of its associated neonatal risks [72,73]. Randomized controlled trials are
essential to evaluate the safety and efﬁcacy of novel treatments. For example, pre-
liminary studies had suggested some advantages of sildenaﬁl as an option for intra-
uterine growth restriction [74], but larger trials failed to show improved outcomes
and the studies were terminated early due to increased mortality in the treatment
arm [75]. On the other hand, it is clear that smoking cessation lowers rates of low
birth weight and preterm birth [76]. Injection of picibanil into the pleural cavity
for pleurodesis appears promising for the treatment of early second trimester, non-
hydropic fetal chylothorax [77,78]. Digoxin and furosemide have been injected into
fetal intravascular space to treat idiopathic nonimmune hydrops fetalis [79], and
infection-induced nonimmune hydrops fetalis has been treated with transplacental
antiviral or antibiotic therapy [80]. Fetal malignancies are rarely diagnosed in utero
[81], but this may represent a future area of potential fetal chemotherapy. There are
also several examples of maternal prescriptions with direct or indirect fetal beneﬁt,
including tocolytics preventing preterm birth, penicillin to treat syphilis [57], spira-
mycin for toxoplasmosis [57], antibiotics before delivery to reduce neonatal sepsis
[82], and the reduction of maternalefetal HIV transmission rates by the use of high-
ly active antiretroviral therapy [83].
5.2 Indications for fetal therapy
65
5.3 Strategies to achieve fetal drug therapy
5.3.1 Transplacental drug transfer
Many medications intended for the fetus are administered to the mother, with a
portion of the dose crossing the placenta and reaching the fetal circulation. Although
this method of drug delivery can cause maternal side effects, it is often preferred
over the invasiveness and risks associated with direct fetal injection. To understand
this process, it is important to provide a brief introduction to the role of human
placenta as a functional barrier (see Fig. 5.1).
Human placenta is a tissue of fetal origin localized at the interface between the
maternal and fetal circulations. During gestation, placental functions include those
of several organs in the newborn/adult. For example, the placenta is responsible for
exchange of gases, uptake of nutrients from the maternal circulation, elimination of
waste products, and the biosynthesis of speciﬁc hormones (steroids and proteins)
that regulate autocrine and/or paracrine functions. Taken together, placental func-
tions begin by ensuring implantation, supporting normal fetal organogenesis and
development, and maintaining a healthy pregnancy until parturition.
In the early 20th century, the human placenta had been viewed as a barrier similar
to the bloodebrain barrier but with the role to “protect” the fetus from exposure to
xenobiotics and environmental toxins. The thalidomide-induced birth defects of the
1960s shattered that concept and provided evidence for differences in transplacental
transfer of compounds between placentas of human and other mammals. Currently,
it is assumed that small molecules (<1000 Da, which includes most current medica-
tions) can freely cross the placenta between the maternal and fetal circulations by
simple diffusion. However, the bidirectional transfer of compounds between the
maternal and fetal circulations across the placenta by simple diffusion does not pre-
clude the simultaneous involvement of two other transport processes, namely facil-
itated diffusion and active transport [91,92]. Endocytosis is another transport
mechanism relevant to fetal drug therapy with the use of drug-loaded nanoparticles
designed to alter the transplacental passage of therapeutics [93].
The transfer of a drug by both facilitated diffusion and active transport is mediated
by proteins that are usually selective for a particular compound or group of com-
pounds. Facilitated diffusion does not require metabolic energy because the transfer
of the compound occurs down a concentration gradient until steady state equilibrium
is reached. Active transport is unidirectional, requires metabolic energy, and can trans-
port compounds against a concentration gradient. For example, uptake transporters in
the apical membrane are responsible for the transfer of many nutrients from the
maternal to fetal circulation [94]. On the other hand, efﬂux transporters (such as
P-glycoprotein, breast cancer resistance protein, and multidrug resistanceeassociated
proteins) are responsible for the extrusion of compounds from the fetal to maternal
circulation [95]. Efﬂux transporters are crucial for decreasing fetal exposure to
xenobiotics and each one of them is responsible for the extrusion of a diverse number
of drugs. For example, dexamethasone and digoxin, two of the medications listed in
Table 5.2, are both susceptible to reduced passage due to P-glycoprotein [93,96].
66
CHAPTER 5 Fetal drug therapy
A
B
C
FIGURE 5.1
Mechanisms of maternalefetal transfer: (A) Overview of human placental morphology
showing fetal vessels from the umbilical cord branching into villous trees, which are
bathed by maternal blood entering the placenta via spiral arteries. Trophoblast cells on the
surface of the villous structures separate the maternal blood in the intervillous space from
5.3 Strategies to achieve fetal drug therapy
67
Several trophoblast tissue metabolic enzymes are responsible for placental
biotransformation of drugs [97,98]. Placental enzymes are occasionally identical
to those in the liver, but in most cases, their activity is  10% of the hepatic en-
zymes. One placental enzyme, CYP19/aromatase, has a role in steroidogenesis,
but is also involved in the placental biotransformation of xenobiotics [98], thus cata-
lyzing reactions which are usually performed by other hepatic enzymes that have not
been identiﬁed in the placenta, or do not have detectable activity (e.g., CYP3A4)
[99,100].
Thus, placental metabolic enzymes and efﬂux transporters deﬁne the human
placenta as a functional barrier that regulates transplacental transport of drugs.
The activities of these proteins are subject to regulation at the transcription and
translational levels. Their activities vary widely between individuals and in the
same individual with gestational age [101e104]. In terms of maximizing the trans-
placental transfer of maternally administered medications intended for fetal drug
therapy, substrates of uptake transporters are more likely to reach therapeutic levels
in the fetal circulation. Drugs which are substrates for efﬂux transporters and/or
metabolizing enzymes, on the other hand, are more likely to result in maternal
side effects, as higher doses will be necessary to reach therapeutic drug levels in
the fetal circulation.
5.3.2 Direct fetal injection
Ultrasound-guided injections can be introduced into the umbilical cord, amniotic
ﬂuid, intravenously, or into speciﬁc fetal tissues [2]. This approach may be advan-
tageous when transplacental transfer is limited due to hydropic conditions or the
chemical nature of the therapeutic agent [2,49]. Nevertheless, there are important
disadvantages to consider. Not only can fetal movement make the initial injection
challenging but it may also cause the needle to dislodge [82,105]. In one extreme
example of an attempted fetal intracardiac injection, the needle overshot its target,
passed through to the other side of the fetal heart, and resulted in a severe adverse
effect for the mother [106]. The weighted procedure-related risk of fetal loss by
CVS or amniocentesis is 0.2%e0.3% [107]. Repeated injections will increase the
risks of infection or death [2,49].
=
the fetal circulation, as highlighted in (B). (B) Cellular components of a placental villus,
wherein multinucleated syncytiotrophoblast cells are formed by fusion of the precursor
cytotrophoblast cells. The trophoblast cells and the fetal vascular endothelial cells are
separated by basal lamina. Several transport mechanisms within the trophoblast cell layer
are highlighted in (C). (C) Transport mechanisms in trophoblast cells, with different
molecules represented by different shapes. Passive diffusion is governed by the
concentration gradient of any compound (xenobiotic or intermediary metabolite). Two types
of carrier-mediated transport (uptake and efﬂux) involve transport proteins that span the
phospholipid bilayer of the cell membrane. The biotransformation of molecules by
metabolizing enzymes is also represented [84e90].
68
CHAPTER 5 Fetal drug therapy
5.3.3 Gene therapy
Fetal gene therapy has the potential to beneﬁt severe genetic diseases that lack effec-
tive postnatal therapy, including cystic ﬁbrosis, hemophilia, thalassemia, and others
[108]. The fetal period may present a unique window of opportunity for gene ther-
apy. Access to an expanding population of stem cells, a higher vector to target cell
ratio, the comparative immaturity of the immune system, and the possible induction
of immune tolerance in the fetus are all considered advantages to initiating gene
therapy during this period [109,110]. Nevertheless, current utility is hampered by
the selection of an appropriate vector and a series of unknown risks, such as
increased chance of fetal loss upon injection during the ﬁrst trimester, induction
of preterm labor, infection, immune reaction, interference with normal fetal devel-
opment, insertional mutagenesis, germline integration, and the chance that maternal
harm may affect future pregnancies [109,110].
5.3.4 Stem cell transplantation
Diseases where in utero stem cell transplantation might prove beneﬁcial include he-
moglobinopathies, immunodeﬁciencies, and inborn errors of metabolism [111]. As
proposed for gene therapy, it has been anticipated that a naive fetal immune system
would readily accept stem cell transplantation, but to date, such therapy has only
been realized in fetuses with immunodeﬁciencies that might facilitate engraftment
[111,112]. The most common sources of stem cells include maternal bone marrow,
paternal bone marrow, fetal liver, and amniotic ﬂuid [112,113]. An advantage of us-
ing stem cells from amniotic ﬂuid is eliminating the need for a donor source. Intra-
peritoneal injection of transduced amniotic ﬂuid stem cells appears to be a promising
strategy [113,114]. Another strategy gaining attention is generating immune toler-
ance through fetal stem cell transplantation, followed by repeated postnatal trans-
plantation to achieve phenotypic correction [115].
5.3.5 Nanoparticles
Nanoparticles present a number of advantages for drug delivery, including sustained
drug release promoting reduced dosing frequency and improved patient compliance,
the potential for efﬁcient drug targeting by passive and/or active targeting ap-
proaches, protection of therapeutic payload, and improved bioavailability for certain
compounds. Besides traditional small-molecule drugs, nanoparticles can also be
used to deliver peptides, proteins, genes, siRNA, and vaccines [116]. Examples of
nanoparticles developed for drug delivery include liposomes, solid lipid nanopar-
ticles, polymeric nanoparticles, polymeric micelles, and dendrimers. Multifunc-
tional
nanoparticlesdcombining
drug
delivery
and
biomedical
diagnostic
imagingdmay have the potential to evaluate toxicity during fetal development in
real time, but as yet have not been fully realized [117]. Targeted nanoparticle-
based drug delivery systems offer the potential to increase the amount of drug reach-
ing the fetus, thereby reducing the side effects associated with unnecessary maternal
5.3 Strategies to achieve fetal drug therapy
69
drug exposure. Ex vivo dual perfusion of the term human placental lobule is a repre-
sentative model of in vivo placental transport and metabolism. To date, this model
has been used with a few sets of nanoparticles to elucidate the effects of particle
composition,
size,
and
charge
on
the
placental
transfer
of
nanoparticles
[118e121]. These studies have shown that particle size is not the only determinant
for transfer. This should not be surprising because macromolecules such as IgG and
vitamin B12 can cross the placenta by carrier-mediated mechanisms, but the trans-
port of other macromolecules such as heparin is negligible [120,122]. Some nano-
particles for fetal therapy may take advantage of receptors in the placenta, such as
megalin, for receptor-mediated cellular entry [123]. Nanotoxicology is a signiﬁcant
area of research in order to ensure improved drug delivery without adverse effects to
the fetus or mother [124,125].
5.4 Special considerations
Maternal drug therapy during pregnancy requires balancing maternal beneﬁt versus
fetal risk, and in the case of drug therapy intended for the fetus, we must weigh
maternal risks against potential fetal beneﬁts. Despite the potential of a fetal medi-
cation causing maternal side effects, transplacental delivery is often preferred to
avoid the risks associated with fetal injections.
Although it is anticipated that targeted therapies would require lower doses and
potentially lessen the resultant maternal side effects, the appropriate dose will need
to be identiﬁed. Fetal drug therapy is associated with different pharmacokinetics
than would be expected in adults or children. Compared to an adult, the fetus has
more extracellular water, less fat, less metabolic enzyme activity, a lower renal
secretion rate, less gastrointestinal absorption, and the fetal brain receives a higher
percentage of cardiac output [2,61]. Furthermore, drug elimination is altered due to
amniotic recycling [2].
5.5 Ethical considerations
Finally, the ethics of fetal drug therapy must be considered. Depending on gesta-
tional age, lung maturity, the availability of neonatal facilities, and maternal prefer-
ence, in some instances, early delivery may be seen as an alternative to fetal
therapies carrying high risk [58]. The risks and potential beneﬁts of each disease
are unique, and the recommendations of Moaddah et al. serve as excellent guidelines
[126]. It is important that the mother can give informed consent, meaning that she
understands all the possible outcomes of each intervention. Protocols for fetal
drug therapy must be approved by a research ethics committee. Invasive therapy
must have a high probability of saving life or preventing disease; risks to fetal health
70
CHAPTER 5 Fetal drug therapy
must be minimized; and risks to maternal health must be negligible. Alongside the
mother’s right to consent is her right to refuse, and supportive counseling should be
made available to the family [126]. As if pregnancy and childbirth were not chal-
lenging enough, it is inspiring to see the sacriﬁces of pregnant women participating
in clinical trials, enduring undeserved side effects, and undergoing invasive proced-
ures in order to offer their children more hope for a better future.
Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank Sanaalarab Al-Enazy for her assistance with Fig. 5.1 and Wayne
Snodgrass for helpful suggestions. E.R. and M.S.A. are grateful for research support from
NIH grants HD083003 and HD047891.
References
[1] Adzick NS, Thom EA, Spong CY, Brock JW, Burrows PK, Johnson MP, et al.
A randomized trial of prenatal versus postnatal repair of myelomeningocele. N Engl
J Med 2011;364:993e1004.
[2] Miller RK. Fetal drug therapy: principles and issues. Clin Obstet Gynecol 1991;34:
241e50.
[3] Kohl T. Minimally invasive fetoscopic interventions: an overview in 2010. Surg
Endosc 2010;24:2056e67.
[4] Jaeggi E, Tulzer G. Pharmacological and interventional fetal cardiovascular treatment.
Paediatr Cardiol 2010:199e218.
[5] Nagashima M, Asai T, Suzuki C, Matsushima M, Ogawa A. Intrauterine supraventric-
ular tachyarrhythmias and transplacental digitalisation. Arch Dis Child 1986;61:
996e1000.
[6] Azancot-Benisty A, Jacqz-Aigrain E, Guirgis NM, Decrepy A, Oury JF, Blot P. Clin-
ical and pharmacologic study of fetal supraventricular tachyarrhythmias. J Pediatr
1992;121:608e13.
[7] Younis JS, Granat M. Insufﬁcient transplacental digoxin transfer in severe hydrops
fetalis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1987;157:1268e9.
[8] Weiner CP, Thompson MI. Direct treatment of fetal supraventricular tachycardia after
failed transplacental therapy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1988;158:570e3.
[9] Wiggins Jr JW, Bowes W, Clewell W, Manco-Johnson M, Manchester D, Johnson R,
et al. Echocardiographic diagnosis and intravenous digoxin management of fetal
tachyarrhythmias and congestive heart failure. Am J Dis Child 1986;140:202e4.
[10] Spinnato JA, Shaver DC, Flinn GS, Sibai BM, Watson DL, Marin-Garcia J. Fetal sup-
raventricular tachycardia: in utero therapy with digoxin and quinidine. Obstet Gynecol
1984;64:730e5.
[11] Koﬁnas AD, Simon NV, Sagel H, Lyttle E, Smith N, King K. Treatment of fetal sup-
raventricular tachycardia with ﬂecainide acetate after digoxin failure. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 1991;165:630e1.
References
71
[12] Hunter J, Hirst BH. Intestinal secretion of drugs. The role of P-glycoprotein and related
drug efﬂux systems in limiting oral drug absorption. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 1997;25:
129e57.
[13] Amano K, Harada Y, Shoda T, Nishijima M, Hiraishi S. Successful treatment of sup-
raventricular tachycardia with ﬂecainide acetate: a case report. Fetal Diagn Ther 1997;
12:328e31.
[14] Palmer CM, Norris MC. Placental transfer of ﬂecainide. Am J Dis Child 1990;144:144.
[15] Barjot P, Hamel P, Calmelet P, Maragnes P, Herlicoviez M. Flecainide against fetal
supraventricular tachycardia complicated by hydrops fetalis. Acta Obstet Gynecol
Scand 1998;77:353e8.
[16] Wagner X, Jouglard J, Moulin M, Miller AM, Petitjean J, Pisapia A. Coadministration
of ﬂecainide acetate and sotalol during pregnancy: lack of teratogenic effects, passage
across the placenta, and excretion in human breast milk. Am Heart J 1990;119:700e2.
[17] Bourget P, Pons JC, Delouis C, Fermont L, Frydman R. Flecainide distribution, trans-
placental passage, and accumulation in the amniotic ﬂuid during the third trimester of
pregnancy. Ann Pharmacother 1994;28:1031e4.
[18] O’Hare MF, Murnaghan GA, Russell CJ, Leahey WJ, Varma MP, McDevitt DG. Sota-
lol as a hypotensive agent in pregnancy. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1980;87:814e20.
[19] Erkkola R, Lammintausta R, Liukko P, Anttila M. Transfer of propranolol and sotalol
across the human placenta. Their effect on maternal and fetal plasma renin activity.
Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 1982;61:31e4.
[20] Hackett LP, Wojnar-Horton RE, Dusci LJ, Ilett KF, Roberts MJ. Excretion of sotalol in
breast milk. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1990;29:277e8.
[21] Darwiche A, Vanlieferinghen P, Lemery D, Paire M, Lusson JR. Amiodarone and fetal
supraventricular tachycardia. Apropos of a case with neonatal hypothyroidism. Arch
Fr Pediatr 1992;49:729e31.
[22] Oudijk MA, Ruskamp JM, Ververs FF, Ambachtsheer EB, Stoutenbeek P, Visser GH,
et al. Treatment of fetal tachycardia with sotalol: transplacental pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics. J Am Coll Cardiol 2003;42:765e70.
[23] Lisowski LA, Verheijen PM, Benatar AA, Soyeur DJ, Stoutenbeek P, Brenner JI, et al.
Atrial ﬂutter in the perinatal age group: diagnosis, management and outcome. J Am
Coll Cardiol 2000;35:771e7.
[24] Oudijk MA, Michon MM, Kleinman CS, Kapusta L, Stoutenbeek P, Visser GH, et al.
Sotalol in the treatment of fetal dysrhythmias. Circulation 2000;101:2721e6.
[25] Oudijk MA, Ruskamp JM, Ambachtsheer BE, Ververs TF, Stoutenbeek P, Visser GH,
et al. Drug treatment of fetal tachycardias. Paediatr Drugs 2002;4:49e63.
[26] Ballard PL, Ballard RA. Scientiﬁc basis and therapeutic regimens for use of antenatal
glucocorticoids. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1995;173:254e62.
[27] Tsuei SE, Petersen MC, Ashley JJ, McBride WG, Moore RG. Disporition of synthetic
glucocorticoids. II. Dexamethasone in parturient women. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1980;
28:88e98.
[28] Levitz M, Jansen V, Dancis J. The transfer and metabolism of corticosteroids in the
perfused human placenta. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1978;132:363e6.
[29] Dancis J, Jansen V, Levitz M. Placental transfer of steroids: effect of binding to serum
albumin and to placenta. Am J Physiol 1980;238:E208e13.
[30] Smith MA, Thomford PJ, Mattison DR, Slikker Jr W. Transport and metabolism of
dexamethasone in the dually perfused human placenta. Reprod Toxicol 1988;2:37e43.
72
CHAPTER 5 Fetal drug therapy
[31] Della Torre M, Hibbard JU, Jeong H, Fischer JH. Betamethasone in pregnancy: inﬂu-
ence of maternal body weight and multiple gestation on pharmacokinetics. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 2010;203. 254e1e12.
[32] Petersen MC, Nation RL, Ashley JJ, McBride WG. The placental transfer of
betamethasone. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1980;18:245e7.
[33] Anderson AB, Gennser G, Jeremy JY, Ohrlander S, Sayers L, Turnbull AC. Placental
transfer and metabolism of betamethasone in human pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 1977;
49:471e4.
[34] Stark MJ, Wright IM, Clifton VL. Sex-speciﬁc alterations in placental 11beta-
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 2 activity and early postnatal clinical course following
antenatal betamethasone. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2009;297:
R510e4.
[35] Murphy VE, Fittock RJ, Zarzycki PK, Delahunty MM, Smith R, Clifton VL. Meta-
bolism of synthetic steroids by the human placenta. Placenta 2007;28:39e46.
[36] Bliddal S, Rasmussen A˚ K, Sundberg K, Brocks V, Skovbo P, Feldt-Rasmussen U.
Graves’ disease in two pregnancies complicated by fetal goitrous hypothyroidism: suc-
cessful in utero treatment with levothyroxine. Thyroid 2011;21:75e81.
[37] Stoppa-Vaucher S, Van Vliet G, Deladoe¨y J. Discovery of a fetal goiter on prenatal ul-
trasound in women treated for Graves’ disease: ﬁrst, do no harm. Thyroid 2011;21:931.
[38] Hashimoto H, Hashimoto K, Suehara N. Successful in utero treatment of fetal goitrous
hypothyroidism: case report and review of the literature. Fetal Diagn Ther 2006;21:
360e5.
[39] Miyata I, Abe-Gotyo N, Tajima A, Yoshikawa H, Teramoto S, Seo M, et al. Successful
intrauterine therapy for fetal goitrous hypothyroidism during late gestation. Endocr J
2007;54:813e7.
[40] Ribault V, Castanet M, Bertrand AM, Guibourdenche J, Vuillard E, Luton D, et al.
Experience with intraamniotic thyroxine treatment in nonimmune fetal goitrous hypo-
thyroidism in 12 cases. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2009;94:3731e9.
[41] Bussel JB, Berkowitz RL, Hung C, Kolb EA, Wissert M, Primiani A, et al. Intracranial
hemorrhage in alloimmune thrombocytopenia: stratiﬁed management to prevent recur-
rence in the subsequent affected fetus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2010;203. 135e1e14.
[42] Moise Jr KJ. Management of rhesus alloimmunization in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
2008;112:164e76.
[43] Davies J, Chant R, Simpson S, Powell R. Routine antenatal anti-D prophylaxis–is the
protection adequate? Transfus Med 2011;21:421e6.
[44] Turner RM, Lloyd-Jones M, Anumba DO, Smith GC, Spiegelhalter DJ, Squires H,
et al. Routine antenatal anti-D prophylaxis in women who are Rh(D) negative:
meta-analyses adjusted for differences in study design and quality. PLoS One 2012;
7:e30711.
[45] Nimkarn S, New MI. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deﬁ-
ciency: a paradigm for prenatal diagnosis and treatment. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2010;
1192:5e11.
[46] Pryde PG, Mittendorf R. Contemporary usage of obstetric magnesium sulfate: indica-
tion, contraindication, and relevance of dose. Obstet Gynecol 2009;114:669e73.
[47] Brookﬁeld KF, Su F, Elkomy MH, Drover DR, Lyell DJ, Carvalho B. Pharmacoki-
netics and placental transfer of magnesium sulfate in pregnant women. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 2016;214. 737e1e9.
References
73
[48] Vilchez G, Dai J, Lagos M, Sokol RJ. Maternal side effects & fetal neuroprotection
according to body mass index after magnesium sulfate in a multicenter randomized
controlled trial. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 2018;31:178e83.
[49] Evans MI, Pryde PG, Reichler A, Bardicef M, Johnson MP. Fetal drug therapy. West J
Med 1993;159:325e32.
[50] Roberts D, Brown J, Medley N, Dalziel SR. Antenatal corticosteroids for accelerating
fetal lung maturation for women at risk of preterm birth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2017;3:Cd004454.
[51] Crowther CA, Hiller JE, Doyle LW, Haslam RR. Effect of magnesium sulfate given for
neuroprotection before preterm birth: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2003;290:
2669e76.
[52] Rouse DJ, Hirtz DG, Thom E, Varner MW, Spong CY, Mercer BM, et al.
A randomized, controlled trial of magnesium sulfate for the prevention of cerebral
palsy. N Engl J Med 2008;359:895e905.
[53] Marret S, Marpeau L, Zupan-Simunek V, Eurin D, Le´veˆque C, Hellot MF, et al. Mag-
nesium sulphate given before very-preterm birth to protect infant brain: the rando-
mised controlled PREMAG trial. BJOG 2007;114:310e8.
[54] Doyle LW, Anderson PJ, Haslam R, Lee KJ, Crowther C. School-age outcomes of very
preterm infants after antenatal treatment with magnesium sulfate vs placebo. JAMA
2014;312:1105e13.
[55] Weber R, Stambach D, Jaeggi E. Diagnosis and management of common fetal
arrhythmias. J Saudi Heart Assoc 2011;23:61e6.
[56] Silverman NH, Enderlein MA, Stanger P, Teitel DF, Heymann MA, Golbus MS.
Recognition of fetal arrhythmias by echocardiography. J Clin Ultrasound 1985;13:
255e63.
[57] Rosenberg AA, Galan HL. Fetal drug therapy. Pediatr Clin 1997;44:113e35.
[58] Carvalho JS. Fetal dysrhythmias. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 2019;58:
28e41.
[59] Yankowitz J, Weiner C. Medical fetal therapy. Baillieres Clin Obstet Gynaecol 1995;9:
553e70.
[60] Kleinman CS, Nehgme RA. Cardiac arrhythmias in the human fetus. Pediatr Cardiol
2004;25:234e51.
[61] Ward RM. Pharmacology of the maternal-placental-fetal-unit and fetal therapy. Prog
Pediatr Cardiol 1996;5:79e89.
[62] Ledwitch KV, Barnes RW, Roberts AG. Unravelling the complex drug-drug interac-
tions of the cardiovascular drugs, verapamil and digoxin, with P-glycoprotein. Biosci
Rep 2016;36.
[63] Gurgov S, Bernabe´ KJ, Stites J, Cunniff CM, Lin-Su K, Felsen D, et al. Linking the
degree of virilization in females with congenital adrenal hyperplasia to genotype.
Ann N Y Acad Sci 2017;1402:56e63.
[64] Ferna´ndez-Martı´nez FJ, Galindo A, Garcia-Burguillo A, Vargas-Gallego C, Nogue´s N,
Moreno-Garcı´a M, et al. Noninvasive fetal sex determination in maternal plasma: a
prospective feasibility study. Genet Med 2012;14:101e6.
[65] Rijnders RJ, Christiaens GC, Bossers B, van der Smagt JJ, van der Schoot CE, de
Haas M. Clinical applications of cell-free fetal DNA from maternal plasma. Obstet
Gynecol 2004;103:157e64.
74
CHAPTER 5 Fetal drug therapy
[66] Merce` Ferna´ndez-Balsells M, Muthusamy K, Smushkin G, Lampropulos JF,
Elamin MB, Abu Elnour NO, et al. Prenatal dexamethasone use for the prevention
of virilization in pregnancies at risk for classical congenital adrenal hyperplasia
because of 21-hydroxylase (CYP21A2) deﬁciency: a systematic review and meta-
analyses. Clin Endocrinol 2010;73:436e44.
[67] Winkelhorst D, Oepkes D. Foetal and neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia. Best
Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 2019;58:15e27.
[68] Bowman JM, Chown B, Lewis M, Pollock JM. Rh isoimmunization during pregnancy:
antenatal prophylaxis. Can Med Assoc J 1978;118:623e7.
[69] Zwiers C, van der Bom JG, van Kamp IL, van Geloven N, Lopriore E, Smoleniec J,
et al. Postponing Early intrauterine Transfusion with Intravenous immunoglobulin
Treatment; the PETIT study on severe hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 2018;219:291e1e9.
[70] Moise KJ. Fetal anemia due to non-Rhesus-D red-cell alloimmunization. Semin Fetal
Neonatal Med 2008;13:207e14.
[71] Harman CR. Amniotic ﬂuid abnormalities. Semin Perinatol 2008;32:288e94.
[72] Dashe JS, Pressman EK, Hibbard JU. SMFM consult series #46: evaluation and man-
agement of polyhydramnios. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2018;219:B2eb8.
[73] Hammers AL, Sanchez-Ramos L, Kaunitz AM. Antenatal exposure to indomethacin
increases the risk of severe intraventricular hemorrhage, necrotizing enterocolitis,
and periventricular leukomalacia: a systematic review with metaanalysis. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 2015;212. 505e1e13.
[74] Groom KM, David AL. The role of aspirin, heparin, and other interventions in the pre-
vention and treatment of fetal growth restriction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2018;218:
S829e40.
[75] Sharp A, Cornforth C, Jackson R, Harrold J, Turner MA, Kenny L, et al. Mortality in
the UK STRIDER trial of sildenaﬁl therapy for the treatment of severe early-onset fetal
growth restriction. Lancet Child Adolesc Health 2019;3:e2e3.
[76] Hui L, Challis D. Diagnosis and management of fetal growth restriction: the role of
fetal therapy. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 2008;22:139e58.
[77] Nygaard U, Sundberg K, Nielsen HS, Hertel S, Jørgensen C. New treatment of early
fetal chylothorax. Obstet Gynecol 2007;109:1088e92.
[78] Yang YS, Ma GC, Shih JC, Chen CP, Chou CH, Yeh KT, et al. Experimental treatment
of bilateral fetal chylothorax using in-utero pleurodesis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
2012;39:56e62.
[79] Anandakumar C, Biswas A, Wong YC, Chia D, Annapoorna V, Arulkumaran S, et al.
Management of non-immune hydrops: 8 years’ experience. Ultrasound Obstet Gyne-
col 1996;8:196e200.
[80] Randenberg AL. Nonimmune hydrops fetalis part I: etiology and pathophysiology.
Neonatal Network 2010;29:281e95.
[81] Sebire NJ, Jauniaux E. Fetal and placental malignancies: prenatal diagnosis and
management. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2009;33:235e44.
[82] Rayburn WF. Fetal drug therapy: an overview of selected conditions. Obstet Gynecol
Surv 1992;47:1e9.
[83] Siegfried N, van der Merwe L, Brocklehurst P, Sint TT. Antiretrovirals for reducing the
risk of mother-to-child transmission of HIV infection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2011:Cd003510.
References
75
[84] Sastry BV. Techniques to study human placental transport. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 1999;
38:17e39.
[85] Weiss L. Cell and tissue biology: a textbook of histology. 6th ed., vol. 20. Baltimore:
Elsevier Inc; 1989. Urban & Schwartzenberg.
[86] Baergen RN. Overview and microscopic survey of the placenta. In: Baergen RN, ed-
itor. Man. Pathol. Hum. Placenta. Boston, MA: Springer US; 2011. p. 85e108.
[87] Ernst LM. Placenta. In: Ernst LM, Ruchelli ED, Huff DS, editors. Color atlas fetal
neonatal histol. New York, NY: Springer New York; 2011. p. 363e88.
[88] Huppertz B. The anatomy of the normal placenta. J Clin Pathol 2008;61:1296e302.
[89] Benirschke K, Burton GJ, Baergen RN. Basic structure of the villous trees. Pathol.
Hum. Placenta. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2012. p. 55e100.
[90] Moe AJ. Placental amino acid transport. Am J Physiol 1995;268:C1321e31.
[91] Va¨ha¨kangas K, Myllynen P. Drug transporters in the human blood-placental barrier. Br
J Pharmacol 2009;158:665e78.
[92] Prouillac C, Lecoeur S. The role of the placenta in fetal exposure to xenobiotics:
importance of membrane transporters and human models for transfer studies. Drug
Metab Dispos 2010;38:1623e35.
[93] Albekairi NA, Al-Enazy S, Ali S, Rytting E. Transport of digoxin-loaded polymeric
nanoparticles across BeWo cells, an in vitro model of human placental trophoblast.
Ther Deliv 2015;6:1325e34.
[94] Ganapathy V, Prasad PD, Ganapathy ME, Leibach FH. Placental transporters relevant
to drug distribution across the maternal-fetal interface. J Pharmacol Exp Therapeut
2000;294:413e20.
[95] Young AM, Allen CE, Audus KL. Efﬂux transporters of the human placenta. Adv Drug
Deliv Rev 2003;55:125e32.
[96] Mark PJ, Waddell BJ. P-glycoprotein restricts access of cortisol and dexamethasone to
the glucocorticoid receptor in placental BeWo cells. Endocrinology 2006;147:
5147e52.
[97] Pasanen M, Pelkonen O. The expression and environmental regulation of P450 en-
zymes in human placenta. Crit Rev Toxicol 1994;24:211e29.
[98] Nanovskaya TN, Deshmukh SV, Nekhayeva IA, Zharikova OL, Hankins GD,
Ahmed MS. Methadone metabolism by human placenta. Biochem Pharmacol 2004;
68:583e91.
[99] Deshmukh SV, Nanovskaya TN, Hankins GD, Ahmed MS. N-demethylation of levo-
alpha-acetylmethadol by human placental aromatase. Biochem Pharmacol 2004;67:
885e92.
[100] Deshmukh SV, Nanovskaya TN, Ahmed MS. Aromatase is the major enzyme metab-
olizing buprenorphine in human placenta. J Pharmacol Exp Therapeut 2003;306:
1099e105.
[101] Hakkola J, Pasanen M, Hukkanen J, Pelkonen O, Ma¨enpa¨a¨ J, Edwards RJ, et al.
Expression of xenobiotic-metabolizing cytochrome P450 forms in human full-term
placenta. Biochem Pharmacol 1996;51:403e11.
[102] Hakkola J, Raunio H, Purkunen R, Pelkonen O, Saarikoski S, Cresteil T, et al. Detec-
tion of cytochrome P450 gene expression in human placenta in ﬁrst trimester of
pregnancy. Biochem Pharmacol 1996;52:379e83.
[103] Nanovskaya TN, Nekhayeva IA, Hankins GD, Ahmed MS. Transfer of methadone
across the dually perfused preterm human placental lobule. Am J Obstet Gynecol
2008;198. 126e1e4.
76
CHAPTER 5 Fetal drug therapy
[104] Hemauer SJ, Patrikeeva SL, Nanovskaya TN, Hankins GD, Ahmed MS. Opiates
inhibit paclitaxel uptake by P-glycoprotein in preparations of human placental
inside-out vesicles. Biochem Pharmacol 2009;78:1272e8.
[105] Fan SZ, Susetio L, Tsai MC. Neuromuscular blockade of the fetus with pancuronium
or pipecuronium for intra-uterine procedures. Anaesthesia 1994;49:284e6.
[106] Coke GA, Baschat AA, Mighty HE, Malinow AM. Maternal cardiac arrest associated
with attempted fetal injection of potassium chloride. Int J Obstet Anesth 2004;13:
287e90.
[107] Salomon LJ, Sotiriadis A, Wulff CB, Odibo A, Akolekar R. Risk of miscarriage
following amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling: systematic review of literature
and updated meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2019;54:442e51.
[108] David AL, Waddington SN. Candidate diseases for prenatal gene therapy. In:
Coutelle C, Waddington SN, editors. Prenat. Gene ther. Concepts, methods, protoc.
Totowa, NJ: Humana Press; 2012. p. 9e39.
[109] David AL, Peebles D. Gene therapy for the fetus: is there a future? Best Pract Res Clin
Obstet Gynaecol 2008;22:203e18.
[110] Davey MG, Flake AW. Genetic therapy for the fetus: a once in a lifetime opportunity.
Hum Gene Ther 2011;22:383e5.
[111] Pschera H. Current status in intrauterine fetal stem cell therapy. J Obstet Gynaecol Res
1998;24:419e24.
[112] Sagar R, Go¨therstro¨m C, David AL, Westgren M. Fetal stem cell transplantation and
gene therapy. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 2019;58:142e53.
[113] Shaw SW, David AL, De Coppi P. Clinical applications of prenatal and postnatal ther-
apy using stem cells retrieved from amniotic ﬂuid. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 2011;23:
109e16.
[114] Mehta V, Abi Nader K, Waddington S, David AL. Organ targeted prenatal gene ther-
apy–how far are we? Prenat Diagn 2011;31:720e34.
[115] Peranteau WH, Hayashi S, Abdulmalik O, Chen Q, Merchant A, Asakura T, et al.
Correction of murine hemoglobinopathies by prenatal tolerance induction and post-
natal nonmyeloablative allogeneic BM transplants. Blood 2015;126:1245e54.
[116] Rytting E, Nguyen J, Wang X, Kissel T. Biodegradable polymeric nanocarriers for pul-
monary drug delivery. Expet Opin Drug Deliv 2008;5:629e39.
[117] Sweeney S, Adamcakova-Dodd A, Thorne PS, Assouline JG. Multifunctional nano-
particles for real-time evaluation of toxicity during fetal development. PLoS One
2018;13:e0192474.
[118] Bajoria R, Fisk NM, Contractor SF. Liposomal thyroxine: a noninvasive model for
transplacental fetal therapy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1997;82:3271e7.
[119] Myllynen PK, Loughran MJ, Howard CV, Sormunen R, Walsh AA, Va¨ha¨kangas KH.
Kinetics of gold nanoparticles in the human placenta. Reprod Toxicol 2008;26:130e7.
[120] Menjoge AR, Rinderknecht AL, Navath RS, Faridnia M, Kim CJ, Romero R, et al.
Transfer of PAMAM dendrimers across human placenta: prospects of its use as
drug carrier during pregnancy. J Control Release 2011;150:326e38.
[121] Wick P, Malek A, Manser P, Meili D, Maeder-Althaus X, Diener L, et al. Barrier ca-
pacity of human placenta for nanosized materials. Environ Health Perspect 2010;118:
432e6.
[122] Saunders M. Transplacental transport of nanomaterials. Wiley Interdiscip Rev
Nanomed Nanobiotechnol 2009;1:671e84.
References
77
[123] Akour AA, Kennedy MJ, Gerk P. Receptor-mediated endocytosis across human
placenta: emphasis on megalin. Mol Pharm 2013;10:1269e78.
[124] Keelan JA, Leong JW, Ho D, Iyer KS. Therapeutic and safety considerations of
nanoparticle-mediated drug delivery in pregnancy. Nanomedicine 2015;10:2229e47.
[125] Wang R, Song B, Wu J, Zhang Y, Chen A, Shao L. Potential adverse effects of nano-
particles on the reproductive system. Int J Nanomed 2018;13:8487e506.
[126] Moaddab A, Nassr AA, Belfort MA, Shamshirsaz AA. Ethical issues in fetal therapy.
Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 2017;43:58e67.
78
CHAPTER 5 Fetal drug therapy
Treating the placenta: an
evolving therapeutic
concept
6
Michael D. Reed1, Donald R. Mattison2,3,4
1Professor Emeritus of Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, United States; 2University of South Carolina, Arnold School of
Public Health, Columbia, SC, United States; 3Risk Sciences International, Ottawa, ON, Canada;
4School of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada
6.1 Introduction
Generally, from the perspective of clinical pharmacology, one thinks of the placenta
as the route of passage from mother to fetus or the reverse [1e4], with or without
metabolism. With few exceptions, it is generally not thought of as the target for ther-
apy. However, we believe that as our understanding of placental function grows and
as the science and application of obstetric-based clinical pharmacology broadens,
the placenta may become an important therapeutic target for the mother, the fetus,
or both [54]. Clinically important diseases where such a strategy is employed today
include the prevention of vertical HIV-1 virus transmission from mother to fetus and
in the treatment of malaria where the placenta serves as an important reservoir for
the malaria parasite. In this chapter, we critically review what is known about
placental functions and its modulations throughout gestation and how placental pro-
cesses can and might be manipulated for therapeutic gain.
Two recent reviews have explored drug development from the perspective of
placental dysfunction (Sibley, 2017 #4) or from the perspective of prevention of
abnormal fetal brain development from hypoxia [54]. Sibley started his review with
the premise that obstetrical challenges (e.g., fetal growth retardation, preeclampsia,
preterm labor, preterm premature rupture of membranes, late spontaneous abortion,
and placental abruption.) were a consequence of placental dysfunction. From that
perspective, he illustrated how a contemporary drug development program could be
developed for multiple compounds including sildenaﬁl citrate, adenovirus vector
with VEGF, pomegranate juice, tempol, resveratrol, melatonin, sofalcone, proton
pump inhibitors, statins, and metformin. Phillips et al. proposed that placental secre-
tions in response to hypoxia might play a role in brain development resulting in adult
onset diseases. Using a nanoparticle-bound antioxidant, they demonstrated reduced
oxidative stress in the placenta and reduced the reduction in birth weight. The treat-
ment target in the Phillips et al. research was the placenta with an indirect impact
on the pup/fetus. Both studies emphasize the potential beneﬁt of treating the placenta.
CHAPTER
79
Clinical Pharmacology During Pregnancy. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818902-3.00023-3
Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
6.2 The placenta as the therapeutic target: the past
An early example of targeting placental function for therapeutic purposes that was
both unsuccessful as well as resulting in unexpected tragic consequences is the expe-
rience with diethylstilbestrol (DES). The DES experience highlights the importance
of the need for a good understanding of the disease process, drug pharmacokinetics
and pharmacodynamics, and acute, chronic, and generational toxicity before under-
taking widespread drug-based manipulation of the maternal, placental, and/or fetal
compartments [5]. DES is a synthetic estrogen structurally similar to estradiol with
potent estrogen-like activity that is rarely used today. From the 1940s to w1971,
DES was commonly used for prevention of spontaneous abortions. An innovative
randomized controlled clinical trial conducted at the Chicago Lying-In Hospital
demonstrated that DES was unable to prevent pregnancy loss, and may have actually
led to missed abortion [6]. Unknown at the time but recently described, DES bene-
ﬁcial clinical effects are most likely a result of the drug’s positive effects on placen-
tation and trophoblast stem cell differentiation [7] (see also [54]; Sibley, 2017 #4 for
discussion of placental treatments). Unfortunately, maternal use of DES results in a
high incidence of developmental toxicity on the reproductive tracts of males and fe-
males and the subsequent development of vaginal clear cell adenocarcinoma in
women of childbearing age [6e8]. Many environmental chemicals and pollutants
either as the intact compound or metabolite can also have similar or unique devas-
tating adverse consequences on the mother, the placenta, and/or the fetus [5] compli-
cating our assessment of individual compounds during pregnancy. These and many
other tragic experiences underscore the importance of careful study of motherefetal
beneﬁterisk proﬁles of drugs intended to treat the placenta.
6.2.1 Placental function
The placenta provides a link between the mother and fetus, metabolizing and trans-
ferring nutrients for growth and development of the fetus as well as for its own
growth and development. Metabolic waste products generated in the fetus or
placenta are eliminated by transfer into the maternal circulation. A unique function
of the placenta is its role as an endocrine organ producing steroid and protein hor-
mones. These characteristics must be considered in thinking about treating the
placenta to enhance therapeutic success in placental, fetal, or maternal disease. A
detailed description of placental anatomy, physiology, and gestational maturation
is addressed in Chapter 5. However, for completeness, we provide a brief overview
of those anatomic and physiologic functions important to understanding therapeutic
targeting of placental function for maternal and fetal health.
Brieﬂy, fetal and maternal circulations are separated by placental tissue that
changes throughout pregnancy; anatomically, the surface area over which maternale
fetal exchange occurs increases and the distance between maternal and fetal blood
decreases. Morphologically, the syncytiotrophoblast layer is reduced in thickness
and the cytotrophoblast becomes discontinuous as gestation progresses. Changes
80
CHAPTER 6 Treating the placenta: an evolving therapeutic concept
in the villous structure are also observed, with an increasing number of microvilli
facilitating exchange between mother and fetus. These villi and the syncytiotropho-
blast layer permit the maternal and fetal circulations to be close to each
other, without contact while providing a transport barrier between the two circula-
tions [1,9,10].
In human placenta, the syncytiotrophoblast arises from the fusion of cytotropho-
blast, forming a syncytium over the surface of the placenta facing the maternal
blood. The plasma membranes of the syncytiotrophoblast are polarized; the brush
border membrane is in direct contact with maternal blood and the basal membrane
facing the fetal circulation. The brush border membrane possesses a microvillus
structure that effectively ampliﬁes the surface area, whereas the basal membrane
lacks this structure.
Anatomic differences between species in the number of trophoblast layers and
connection between maternal and fetal tissues result in species-speciﬁc variation
in placental function that inﬂuences data gathered during the preclinical stages of
drug development. The human placenta is unique in its villous structure. Factors
such as diffusion, electrical potential across the placenta, magnitude of maternal
and fetal blood ﬂows, and differences in metabolism, transport proteins, and other
mechanisms for exchange between maternal and fetal circulations should be consid-
ered as the placental transfer and metabolism of drugs varies dramatically among
differing species. Discordant results for maternalefetal drug disposition between
humans and many animal species are often noted due to these anatomical differences
in placental morphology and function [9e11]. The thalidomide tragedy was the
most important event to dispel the erroneous belief that the placenta was a barrier
and spawned regulation for controlled, animal-based preclinical teratology studies
[11e13]. These anatomical and physiological differences can also lead to false im-
plications for teratogenic effect(s). The widely used drugs diazepam and salicylates
were shown to induce teratogenic effects in animals with no increased risk of any
such effects in humans.
The previously widely used and therapeutically effective drug Benedictine (dox-
ylamine plus pyridoxine) was shown in animal studies to cause cardiac and limb de-
fects leading to enormous litigation and ultimately withdrawal from the US market
though no increase in human teratogenic effects have been described [13], and this
drug combination remains the most effective intervention for treating pregnancy-
associated nausea and vomiting (see Chapter 12). These misleading and sometimes
erroneous ﬁndings are directly attributable to the interspecies differences that exist
in placental structure and function. Despite these disparities and the need for better
mechanisms for screening possible placental toxins or teratogens, animal screening
remains the best process today [11], although structure activity analysis is rapidly
gaining credence (Wu, 2013 #11).
Drugs for treatment of placental disease should be concentrated within the
placenta with little access to, and toxicity for, mother or fetus. Drugs developed
for treatment of the mother should have minimal transport to fetal circulation and
6.2 The placenta as the therapeutic target: the past
81
minimal impact on placental and fetal health. Drugs for treatment of fetal diseases
should have unhindered access to the fetal circulation with minimal adverse impact
on mother or placenta [1,14].
6.2.2 Placental transport mechanisms
The syncytiotrophoblast, the outermost layer of the human placenta, is the main site
of exchange for drugs and metabolites, nutrients, waste products, and gases between
the maternal and fetal circulations. Efﬁcient transfer of nutrients, gases, electrolytes,
and solutes across the placenta is essential for fetal growth and development. There
are several mechanisms by which transfer occurs, and depending on the mechanism
of transfer, the direction may be toward the maternal or fetal circulation.
As noted in Chapter 5, the placenta performs a multitude of important, complex,
simultaneous functions at a differing functional capacity that changes as gestation
progresses. Drugs may transfer from the maternal to fetal compartments via simple
passive diffusion, facilitated diffusion, active transport, ﬁltration, or pinocytosis. The
physiochemical characteristics of a drug substantially inﬂuence its maternalefetal
disposition proﬁle. Structural modiﬁcations of a proposed drug’s physical and chem-
ical characteristics including molecular weight/size, degree of ionization at physio-
logic and pathophysiologic pH linked to water/lipid solubility, and afﬁnity for
membrane transporters and drug metabolizing enzymes represent just a few of a
multitude of targets for drug therapy. Xenobiotics with a molecular weight
of <600 Da can usually transfer across the placenta via passive diffusion, whereas
compounds of 1000þ daltons, e.g., heparin and insulin, cross very poorly. With a
small, highly lipid soluble, low plasma protein-bound drug, its transfer across the
placenta will primarily be dependent upon maternal and fetal blood ﬂow combined
with involvement, if any, of a membrane transporter. Important to the treatment of
placental-based disorders (see below, e.g., malaria), a drug may have high afﬁnity
for placental tissue and bind to and/or accumulate within the syncytiotrophoblast
[15]. Depending upon the inherent physiochemical characteristics of a drug, it
may be released into the fetal circulation or be released back into maternal circula-
tion without reaching the fetal compartment. The rates of these transfer processes
can be very different than the individual or combined maternal or fetal clearance
rates of the drug [1e5,9,10,15e19].
6.3 The placenta: therapeutic targets
As noted above, the placenta is a multifunctional dynamic organ continuously
evolving throughout gestation with the sole purpose of maintaining maternalefetal
homeostasis up to the time of optimal preprogrammed delivery of the newborn in-
fant. The many perturbations that occur with each of these processes during gesta-
tion heighten the complexity of effectively targeting one or more functions as a
therapeutic target [20]. Nevertheless, as our understanding of maternalefetal
82
CHAPTER 6 Treating the placenta: an evolving therapeutic concept
physiology and pathophysiology increases in concert with advances in digital
technology fostering more sophisticated patient monitoring and safer anatomical
manipulation, therapeutic targeted strategies are a reality now and will continue to
expand. With respect to possible therapeutics, enzymes capable of metabolizing
(CYPs) or conjugating drugs (transferases) as well as uni- and bidirectional trans-
porters facilitating or preventing drug movement from one location to another are
ripe for pharmacologic manipulation to maximize maternal or fetal therapeutics
[3,4,16,19e27]. Similarly, a drug development plan focused on an analog’s structuree
activity relationship linked to speciﬁc manipulations of its physiochemical character-
istics will foster safer and more effective therapy [1e4,16,18]. Moreover, our
increasing understanding of the maternal-fetal environment/communications has
advanced the development of increasingly sophisticated physiologically based phar-
macokinetic modeling methods fostering more accurate predictions of maternal/fetal
drug disposition and action [28].
Tables 6.1e6.3, respectively, outline placental expression of known CYPs, en-
zymes involved in conjugation, and cellular transporters relative to gestational age
that are active in maternalefetal homeostasis. The overall inﬂuence of these
placental-based processes on xenobiotic disposition must be considered in total
with the functional activity of the mother and the fetus. Changes in the functional
capacity and activity of these processes important to drug disposition occur between
the mother, placenta, and fetus throughout gestation. In general, fetal tissue activity
of these processes increases, whereas placental activity decreases with gestation
such that at birth, placental metabolic activity is minimal [4,25e27]. This gesta-
tional ontogeny may be the basis for much of the conﬂicting data regarding placental
drug disposition that exist in current literature. For example, the energy-dependent
Table 6.1 Placental expression of cytochrome P450 enzymes involved in
drug metabolism.
Placental maturity
Speciﬁc enzyme
First trimester
Term
Inducible
CYP1A1
A, P, R
A, P, R
Yes
CYP1A2
A, R
A, P
Yes
CYP2C8/9/19
R
P, R
Yes
CYP2D6
R
ND
Yes
CYP2E1
P, R
A, P,a Ra
Yes
CYP3A4-7
P, R
A, P, R
Yes
A, activity; CYP, cytochrome P450 isozyme; ND, no substantive activity/excesses detected; P, protein;
R, mRNA.
a CYP2E1 has only been detected in the term placenta of heavy ethanol-consuming mothers.
Adapted from Myllynen P, Immonen E, Kummu M, Vahakangas K. Developmental expression of drug
metabolizing enzymes and transporter proteins in human placenta and fetal tissues. Expet Opin Drug
Metabol Toxicol 2009;5(12):1483e99; Blanco-Castaneda R, Galaviz-Hernandez C, Souto PCS, Lima
VV, Giachini FR, et al. The role of xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes in the placenta: a growing research
ﬁeld. Expet Rev Clin Pharmacol 2020;13:247e63.
6.3 The placenta: therapeutic targets
83
efﬂux (placental) transporter P-glycoprotein (Pgp) is of little importance in term
placenta but very important during earlier stages of gestation in preventing xenobi-
otic access to the fetal compartment. This ontogenic pattern through gestation is very
important to the rate and extent of digoxin placental transfer for the treatment of fetal
arrhythmias (see Chapter 5) [22].
Table 6.2 The expression of cellular transporter proteins in human placenta.
Placenta
Transporter
First trimester
Second trimester
Third trimester
ABCB1
R, P
R, P
R, P, A
ABCB4
R
NA
R
ABCC1
R
NA
R, P, A
ABCC2
R, P
R, P
R, P
ABCC3
R
NA
R, P, A
ABCC4
NA
NA
R, P
ABCC5
R
R
R, P, A
ABCC6
NA
NA
NA
ABCC10
NA
NA
NA
ABCC11
NA
NA
R
ABCG2
R, P
R, P
R, P, A
NET
NA
NA
R, A
SERT
NA
NA
R, P, A
OCT1
NA
NA
R, A
OCT2
NA
NA
R
OCT3
R
NA
R, P, A
OCTN1
NA
NA
NA
OCTN2
NA
NA
R, P, A
OAT1
NA
NA
NA
OAT4
P
NA
R, P
OATP1A2
R
NA
R
OATP1B1
R
NA
ND
OATP281
P
P
R, P, A
OATP3A1
R
NA
R
OATP4A1
R
NA
R, P
A, activity; NA, data not available; ND, not detected; NET, noradrenalin transporter; OAT, organic anion
transporter; OATP, organic anion transporting polypeptide; OCT, organic cation transporter; P, protein;
R, mRNA; SERT, 5-HT.
Adapted from Myllynen P, Immonen E, Kummu M, Vahakangas K. Developmental expression of drug
metabolizing enzymes and transporter proteins in human placenta and fetal tissues. Expet Opin Drug
Metabol Toxicol 2009;5(12):1483e99; Dallman A, Liu XI, Burckart GJ, van den Anker J. Drug trans-
porters expressed in the human placenta and models for studying maternal-fetal drug transfer. J Clin
Pharmacol 2019;59(Suppl. 1):S70e81.
84
CHAPTER 6 Treating the placenta: an evolving therapeutic concept
It is conceivable if not inevitable that drugs will be developed that function as a
pure antagonist, i.e., high afﬁnity with no intrinsic activity, which occupies a speciﬁc
placental transporter, enzyme, or other target antagonizing its effects. Such a com-
pound could be used alone or in combination with other therapeutic compounds with
the sole purpose of blocking drug transfer into the fetal compartment thus leading to
maternal drug accumulation, or conversely, to block back transfer from the fetal
compartment to maternal circulation leading to drug accumulation or persistence
in the fetal compartment. Such a strategy is employed today with digoxin for fetal
arrhythmias where Pgp inhibitors (e.g., verapamil) are coadministered to enhance
fetal compartment digoxin concentrations [22]. As noted above, this strategy is of
variable success but clearly dependent upon the fetus’s gestational age [22].
6.4 The placenta as a therapeutic target today
6.4.1 Diabetes during pregnancy
Poorly or uncontrolled diabetes during pregnancy has been clearly shown to mark-
edly increase maternal and fetal risk for a spectrum of untoward effects, many that
are serious and attenuated or prevented with effective therapy [9,29]. However, a
major concern in the selection of drug therapy for maternal diabetes is strictly
Table 6.3 Therapeutic agents that are substrates for P-glycoprotein and/or
breast cancer resistance protein.
Pgp
BCRP
Azithromycin
Cyclosporine
Glyburide
Digoxin
Methotrexate
Erythromycin
Sulfated estrogens
Indinavir
Zidovudine
Levoﬂoxacin
Methylprednisolone
Morphine
Phenobarbital
Phenytoin
Ritonavir
Saquinavir
Verapamil
BCRP, breast cancer resistance protein; Pgp, P-glycoprotein.
Adapted from Hutson JR, Koren G, Matthews SG. Placental P-glycoprotein and breast cancer
resistance protein: inﬂuence of polymorphisms on fetal drug exposure and physiology. Placenta 2010;
31:351e7.
6.4 The placenta as a therapeutic target today
85
preventing fetal hypoglycemia [9,17,30e32]. The design of drug therapy for optimal
treatment of maternal diabetes is a case study for the contemporary targeting of the
placenta for successful therapeutics. In this case, the target is exploiting the known
inﬂuences the placenta has on drug distribution and overall maternal disposition to
limit fetal exposure [9,17,30,32] (Sibley, 2017 #4).
The best example of manipulation of maternal and placental function to inﬂu-
ence drug disposition for optimal maternal therapeutics is the story of glibenclamide
(GBC) (glyburide) [9,17,30,32]. GBC is an oral hypoglycemic drug that stimulates
the pancreatic beta cells to secrete insulin and is often used to treat diabetes,
including diabetes during pregnancy. This particular drug dosing strategy capitalized
on the known inﬂuences of drug protein binding, maternal drug clearance rate, and
afﬁnity for placentalefetal transporters to achieve the desired therapeutic effect.
GBC is highly bound to maternal plasma proteins (primarily albumin) to the extent
of 99.8%. This extensive degree of drug binding to circulating maternal plasma pro-
tein substantially reduces the amount of free active drug available for placental
transfer. Augmenting this effect is the drug’s relative short maternal elimination
half-life (t½), minimizing the duration of time the free GBC is present in maternal
circulation for transplacental transfer. A third and extremely important characteristic
of GBC is the drug’s afﬁnity as a substrate for multiple efﬂux proteins, Pgp,
multidrug-resistant protein 1, 2, or 3, and breast cancer resistant protein (BCRP).
Very recent data suggest that GBC may be preferentially transported from the fetal
to the maternal circulations by BCRP [9,15,18]. When all three of these character-
istics are combined, with the latter, probably the most important to limiting drug ac-
cess to the fetal compartment, highly effective and safe maternal therapeutic
regimens can be constructed with easily achieved drug structureeactivity relation-
ships targeted at speciﬁc maternal and placental function.
6.4.2 Malaria in pregnancy
Malaria during pregnancy is a medical as well as public health concern owing to
maternal (anemia, fever, cerebral infection, hypoglycemia, and death), placental,
fetal (abortion, stillbirth, and congenital infection), and neonatal (prematurity,
growth restriction, infection, and death) effects [14,33,34]. Therapy has been
complicated by the emergence and rapid spread of drug resistance, necessitating
combination therapy. In addition, malaria and HIV can be found in the same pop-
ulations and interact to the detriment of the mother, placenta, and fetus [34,35].
Finally, of special relevance are the interactions between malaria and the placenta,
as placental malaria may be asymptomatic until adverse pregnancy outcome
[36e38].
Drug development for malaria in pregnancy encounters two signiﬁcant obstacles:
malaria is a disease of developing countries and afﬂicts women during pregnancy
[33,34,39,40]. Existing treatments are poorly characterized with respect to pharmaco-
kinetics, pharmacodynamics, safety, and efﬁcacy, yet the tools for studying the exist-
ing drugs and new drug development are readily available. Further complicating this
86
CHAPTER 6 Treating the placenta: an evolving therapeutic concept
scenario is the fact that Plasmodium falciparum, the most common human malarial
species, manifests differently in pregnant women than in nonpregnant women. In
pregnant women P. falciparum expresses a different antigen variant to that found in
nonpregnant women. Malaria-infected red blood cells possess adhesive proteins on
their surface which appear to interact with chondroitin sulfate on the placental surface
[37]. These and other cellular perturbations lead to infected erythrocytes preferentially
accumulating in the intervillous space of the placenta resulting in a thickening of the
trophoblast basement membrane. This later event appears to be an adaptive mecha-
nism in response to the enormous amount of secreted cytokines released in response
to the infection. The thickened trophoblast basement membrane damages the syncy-
tiotrophoblastic surface of chorionic villi [38] leading to the negative maternal and
fetal consequences associated with this parasitic disease. Thus, an effective therapeu-
tic strategy must not only focus on parasite eradication at the placental and peripheral
levels but might concurrently target antagonism of select chemokines and cytokines
elevated with placental malaria [38].
6.4.3 HIV-1 infection in pregnancy
As noted above, referring to the placenta as a “barrier,” the placental barrier has been
discouraged for decades and for the most part falsely. This myth has been dispelled
for many decades [1,3,12]. For some, however, the placenta does serve as a barrier to
fetal transmission of viruses. Cytomegalovirus easily crosses the syncytiotropho-
blast to the fetus, whereas the HIV-1 virus crosses very poorly. In untreated HIV-1e
infected mothers, more than 90% of their offspring will be HIV-1 negative reﬂecting
the maternal and placental focus of the infection [31]. Mother-to-child transmission
of HIV-1 can be reduced to <1% with the use of antiviral drugs during pregnancy
and in the neonate. The most common antiretroviral drug used to prevent
maternal-to-child HIV-1 transmission is zidovudine (ZDV)din 1994, maternal
ZDV monotherapy was clearly shown to decrease maternal-to-child HIV-1 transmis-
sion by two thirds [41]. ZDV is metabolized to its active moiety in the placenta and
inhibits HIV-1 replication within placental cells [42].
The exact mechanism(s) of HIV-1 transmission in utero is poorly understood, but
the role of the placenta as the primary target is clear. Histological examination of
term placentas from HIV-1epositive women revealed HIV-1 infection in syncytio-
trophoblast, cytotrophoblast, and villous endothelial cells. Similar histological
examination of placenta at 16 weeks revealed syncytiotrophoblast and cytotropho-
blast infection, whereas chorionic villi were rarely involved [42]. All these data
combined underscore the importance of the placenta as the primary therapeutic
target for the prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV-1 infection. Further
supporting this contention are the data showing increased expression of human beta
defensins, a natural defense mechanism in the maternalefetal interface, in HIV-1e
seropositive mothers [43].
6.4 The placenta as a therapeutic target today
87
Like malarial infection during pregnancy, many factors inﬂuence the efﬁcacy of
maternal HIV therapy in preventing mother-to-child transmission. Understanding
and accounting for the changes in drug pharmacokinetics during pregnancy (see
Chapter 3) is of paramount importance to the efﬁcacy and safety of maternal and
fetal drug therapy. Although the placenta is well perfused, inadequate prevention,
the development of HIV-1 drug resistance, or drug-induced toxicity can occur if
maternal antiretroviral drug dose regimens do not account for the changes in drug
disposition observed throughout gestation. Subtherapeutic antiviral drug tissue
and ﬂuid concentrations can lead to inadequate fetal prevention and/or the develop-
ment of HIV-1 drug resistance, whereas too large doses may increase the risk of
maternal and/or fetal toxicity.
6.5 The placenta as a therapeutic target in the future
The ideal drug for maternal therapy would be an agent that neither reaches the fetal
compartment nor alters maternal physiology sufﬁciently to adversely affect
placental function. Similarly, the ideal maternally administered drug targeting the
fetal compartment would have no negative maternal or placental effects. To our
knowledge, this “ideal” drug does not yet existdbut soon “they” will. Furthermore,
a drug may be maternally administered to the mother to inhibit or stimulate individ-
ual or multiple placental functions to achieve the desired therapeutic goal.
The value of nanosized materials as a method for drug delivery, and more spe-
ciﬁcally targeting speciﬁc anatomic site delivery, is gaining considerable interest.
The number of nanoparticle polymer constructs supporting the engineering of
compounds with novel physical and chemical characteristics has increased dramat-
ically over the last decade [44]. Based on the ability to manufacture nanosized
compounds (e.g., drugs) of speciﬁc size, charge, and disintegration characteristics,
it is not surprising that the maternaleplacentalefetal compartments are speciﬁc
targets for ongoing research [44e47]. We envision that nanotechnology will foster
the development of a number of speciﬁc compounds that target speciﬁc placental
characteristics, i.e., targeting speciﬁc maternal sites, speciﬁc placental sites, and/or
fetal compartment penetration and binding to speciﬁc fetal sites [44e46]. Howev-
er, before these beneﬁts are fully realized, the methodical study of placental nano-
pharmaceuticals will provide tremendous insight into placental anatomy and
physiology [46]. Advances in placental imaging, particularly of transport mecha-
nisms [27,48] and other functions, should augment the rate at which such new ther-
apies are realized.
Lastly, the genomics of placental function will further expand the therapeutic
armamentarium for speciﬁc placental diseases and functions [49e51]. Genetic tech-
nology has impacted greatly on the ability to detect perinatal genetic disorders and
their susceptibility at multiple time points during gestation [49]. Pharmacogenomics
in reproductive and perinatal medicine is in its infancy [50]. Although a few clini-
cally useful drugs in perinatal medicine contain pharmacogenetic information in
88
CHAPTER 6 Treating the placenta: an evolving therapeutic concept
their ofﬁcial labeling, the relevance to contemporary perinatal care is extremely
limited. Pharmacogenomics of placental receptors, transporters, enzymes, and other
functions will be exploited for therapeutic purposes. As such, placental epigenetics
are of great interest with respect to the treatment of placental disease as well as
possible manipulation of the fetal compartment by using the placenta as the
“gateway to the fetus” [51,52]. Much more information serving to deﬁne speciﬁc
therapeutic targets is being described at a faster and faster rate as advances continue
to occur in our technical capabilities. A recent example of such advances described
differential expression of several human placental proteins between lean and obese
pregnant women that could lead to a number of therapeutic strategies targeting many
maternal, placental, and fetal perturbations [53]. This is just the beginning.
6.6 Conclusions
The placenta is the most important structure to the health and viability of the mother
and the fetus and for fetal development up to delivery. Nevertheless, the majority of
therapeutic strategies used during pregnancy today focus on manipulation of the
placenta for maternal or fetal therapeutics. Increasing information deﬁnes the impor-
tance of therapies directed at, or focused on, the placenta for maternalefetal health.
Advances in molecular biology, technology, imaging, and genomics are among just a
few avenues that are fostering a much better understanding of placental anatomy,
physiology, maturation, and pathophysiology and serving as the foundations for
effective treatment of the placenta.
References
[1] Malek A, Mattison DR. Drug development for use during pregnancy: impact of the
placenta. Expet Rev Obstet Gynecol 2010;5:437e54.
[2] Myllynen P, Kummu M, Sieppi E. ABCB1 and ABCG2 expression in the pla- centa and
fetus: an interspecies comparison. Expet Opin Drug Metabol Toxicol 2010;6:1385e98.
[3] Vahakangas K, Myllynen P. Drug transporters in the human bloodeplacental barrier. Br
J Pharmacol 2009;158:665e78.
[4] Myllynen P, Immonen E, Kummu M, Vahakangas K. Developmental expression of drug
metabolizing enzymes and transporter proteins in human placenta and fetal tissues.
Expet Opin Drug Metabol Toxicol 2009;5(12):1483e99.
[5] Miller KP, Borgeest C, Greenfeld C, Tomic D, Flaws JA. In utero effects of chemicals
on reproductive tissues in females. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2004;198:111e31.
[6] Hoover RN, Hyer M, Pfeiffer RM, Adam E, Bond B, Cheville AL, et al. Adverse health
outcomes in women exposed in utero to diethylstilbestrol. N Engl J Med 2011;365:14.
[7] Tremblay GB, Kunath T, Bergeron D, Lopointe L, Champigny C, Bader J, et al. Dieth-
ylstilbestrol regulates trophoblast stem cell differentiation as a ligand of orphan nuclear
receptor ERRB. Genes Dev 2001;15:833e8.
References
89
[8] Levine RU, Berkowitz KM. Conservative management and pregnancy out- come in
diethylstilbestrol-exposed women with and without gross genital tract abnormalities.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1993;169(5):1125e9.
[9] Pollex EK, Denice SF, Koren G. Oral hypoglycemic therapy: understanding the mech-
anisms of transplacental transfer. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 2010;23:224e8.
[10] Eshkokoli T, Sheiner E, BenZvi Z, Feinstein V, Holcberg G. Drug transport across the
placenta. Curr Pharmaceut Biotechnol 2011;12:707e14.
[11] Daston GP. Laboratory models and their role in assessing teratogenesis. Am J Med
Genet 2011;157:183e7.
[12] Ito T, Hideki A, Handa H. Teratogenic effects of thalidomide: molecular mechanisms.
Cell Mol Life Sci 2011;68:1569e79.
[13] Koren G, Pastuszak A, Ito S. Drugs in pregnancy. N Engl J Med 1998;338:1128e37.
[14] van Hasselt JG, Andrew MA, Hebert MF, Tarning J, Vicini P, Mattison DR. The status
of pharmacometrics in pregnancy: highlights from the 3(rd) American Conference on
Pharmacometrics.
Br
J
Clin
Pharmacol
2012.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
2125.2012.04280.x [Epub ahead of print].
[15] Pollex EK, Hutson JR. Genetic polymorphisms in placental transporters: implications
for fetal drug exposure to oral antidiabetic agents. Expet Opin Drug Metabol Toxicol
2011;7(3):325e39.
[16] Syme MR, Paxton JW, Keelan JA. Drug transfer and metabolism by the human placenta.
Clin Pharmacokinet 2004;43:487e514.
[17] Gedeon C, Koren G. Designing pregnancy centered medications: drugs which do not
cross the human placenta. Placenta 2006;27:861e8.
[18] Hutson JR, Koren G, Matthews SG. Placental P-glycoprotein and breast cancer resis-
tance protein: inﬂuence of polymorphisms on fetal drug exposure and physiology.
Placenta 2010;31:351e7.
[19] Nanovskaya TN, Patrikeeva S, Hemauer S, Fokina V, Mattison D, Hankins GD, et al.
Effect of albumin on transplacental transfer and distribution of rosiglitazone and
glyburide. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 2008;21(3):197e207.
[20] Evseenko DA, Paxton JW, Keelan JA. Independent regulation of apical and basolateral
drug transporter expression and function in placental trophoblasts by cytokines, ste-
roids, and growth factors. Drug Metab Dispos 2007;35:595e601.
[21] Behravan J, Piquette-Miller M. Drug transport across the placenta, role of the ABC drug
efﬂux transporters. Expet Opin Drug Metabol Toxicol 2007;3:819e30.
[22] Holcberg G, Sapir O, Tsadkin M, Huleihel M, Lazer S, Katz M, et al. Lack of interac-
tion of digoxin and P-glycoprotein inhibitors, quinidine, verapamil in human placenta
in vitro. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2003;109:133e7.
[23] Ceckova-Novotna M, Pavek P, Staud F. P-glycoprotein in the placenta: expression,
localization, regulation and function. Reprod Toxicol 2006;22:400e10.
[24] Liu L, Liu X. Contributions of drug transporters to blood-placental barrier. Adv Exp
Med Biol 2019;1141:505e48.
[25] Bloise E, Ortiga-Carvalho TM, Reis FM, Lye SJ, Gibb W, Matthews SG. ATP-binding
cassette transporters in reproduction: a new frontier. Hum Reprod Update 2016;22:
164e81.
[26] Blanco-Castaneda R, Galaviz-Hernandez C, Souto PCS, Lima VV, Giachini FR, et al.
The role of xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes in the placenta: a growing research ﬁeld.
Expet Rev Clin Pharmacol 2020;13:247e63.
90
CHAPTER 6 Treating the placenta: an evolving therapeutic concept
[27] Dallman A, Liu XI, Burckart GJ, van den Anker J. Drug transporters expressed in the
human placenta and models for studying maternal-fetal drug transfer. J Clin Pharmacol
2019;59(Suppl. 1):S70e81.
[28] Abduljalil K, Jamei M, Johnson TN. Fetal physiologically based pharmacokinetic
models: systems information on the growth and composition of fetal organs. Clin Phar-
macokinet 2019;58:235e62.
[29] Ballas J, Moore TR, Ramos GA. Management of diabetes in pregnancy. Curr Diabet
Rep 2012;12:33e42.
[30] Hebert MF, Ma X, Naraharisetti SB, Krudys KM, Umans JG, Hankins GD, et al. Are we
optimizing gestational diabetes treatment with glyburide? The pharmacologic basis for
better clinical practice. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2009;85:607e14.
[31] Zharikova OL, Fokina VM, Nanovskaya TN, Hill RA, Mattison DR, Han- kins GD,
et al. Identiﬁcation of the major human hepatic and placental enzymes responsible
for the biotransformation of glyburide. Biochem Pharmacol 2009;78:1483e90.
[32] Jain S, Zharikova OL, Ravindran S, Nanovskya TN, Mattison DR, Hankins GDV, et al.
Glyburide metabolism by placentas of healthy and gestational diabetics. Am J Perinatol
2008;25(3):169e74.
[33] White NJ, McGready RM, Nosten FH. New medicines for tropical diseases in preg-
nancy: catch-22. PLoS Med 2008;6(5):e133.
[34] Riijken MJ, McGready R, Boel ME, Poespoprodjo R, Singh N, Syafruddin D, et al. Ma-
laria in pregnancy in the Asia-Paciﬁc region. Lancet Infect Dis 2012;12:75e88.
[35] Flateau C, LeLoup G, Pialoux G. Consequences of HIV infection on malaria and ther-
apeutic implications: a systematic review. Lancet Infect Dis 2011;11:541e56.
[36] Kattenberg JH, Ochodo EA, Boer KR, Schallig HDFH, Mens PF, Leeﬂang MMG. Sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis: rapid diagnostic tests versus placental histology, mi-
croscopy and PCR for malaria in pregnant women. Malar J 2011;10:321.
[37] Higgins MK. The structure of chondroitin sulfate-binding domain important in
placental malaria. J Biol Chem 2008;28:21842e6.
[38] Mens PF, Bojtor EC, Schallig HDFH. Molecular interactions in the placenta during ma-
laria infection. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2010;152:126e32.
[39] The PME. Drug development for maternal health cannot be left to the whims of the
market. PLoS Med 2008;6(5):e140.
[40] Fisk NM, Atun R. Market failure and the poverty of new drugs in maternal health. PLoS
Med 2008;1(5):e22.
[41] Stek AM. Antiretroviral medications during pregnancy for therapy or prophylaxsis.
HIV/AIDS Rep 2009;6:68e76.
[42] Al-husaini AM. Role of placenta in the vertical transmission of human immunodeﬁ-
ciency virus. J Perinatol 2009;29:331e6.
[43] Aguilar-Jimenez W, Zapata W, Rugeles MT. Differential expression of human beta
defensins in placenta and detection of allelic variants in the DEFB1 gene from HIV-1
positive mothers. Biomedica 2011;31(1):44e54.
[44] Wick P, Malek A, Manser P, Meili D, Maeder-Althaus X, Diener L, et al. Barrier capac-
ity of human placenta for nanosized materials. Environ Health Perspect 2010;118:
432e6.
[45] Keelan JA. Nanoparticles versus the placenta. Nat Nanotechnol 2011;6:321e8.
[46] Menezes V, Malek A, Keelan JA. Nanoparticulate drug delivery in pregnancy: placental
passage and fetal exposure. Curr Pharmaceut Biotechnol 2011;12:731e42.
References
91
[47] Zhang B, Liang R, Zheng M, Cai L, Fan X. Surface-functionalized nanoparticles as efﬁ-
cient tools in targeted therapy of pregnancy complications. Int J Med Sci 2019;20:3642.
[48] Solder E, Rohr I, Kremser C, Hutzler P, Debbage PL. Imaging of placental transport
mechanisms. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2009;144:114e20.
[49] Bodurtha J, Strauss J. Genomics and perinatal care. N Engl J Med 2012;366:64e73.
[50] Alﬁrevic A, Alﬁrevic Z, Pirmohamed M. Pharmacogenetics in reproductive and peri-
natal medicine. Pharmacogenomics 2010;11:65e79.
[51] Gundacker C, Neesen J, Straka E, Ellinger I, Dolznig H, Hengstschlager. Genetics of the
human placenta: implications for toxicokinetics. Arch Toxicol 2016;90:2563e81.
[52] Novakovic B, Saffery R. DNA methylation proﬁling highlights the unique nature of the
human placental epigenome. Epigenomics 2010;2:627e38.
[53] Oliva K, Barker G, Riley C, Bailey MJ, Permezel M, Rice GE, Lappas M. The effect of
pre-existing maternal obesity on the placental proteome: two dimensional difference gel
electrophoresis coupled with mass spectrometry. J Mol Endocrinol 2012;48:139e49.
[54] Phillips TJ, Scott H, Menassa DA, Bignell AL, Sood A, Morton JS, et al. Treating the
placenta to prevent adverse effects of gestational hypoxia on fetal brain development.
Sci Rep 2017;7(1):9079.
92
CHAPTER 6 Treating the placenta: an evolving therapeutic concept
Conducting randomized
controlled pharmaceutical
trials in the pregnant
population: challenges
and solutions
7
Isabelle Hardy, William D. Fraser
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Universite´ de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada
7.1 Introduction
The development of a new drug for use in humans classically follows a strict
sequence, beginning with in-vitro and animal experiments to identify promising
novel molecules, their sites of action, and biological effects. After efﬁcacy and
safety in animals is conﬁrmed, three phases of human clinical trials need to be
completed prior obtaining approval for use in clinical practice. Phase I studies are
conducted with healthy volunteers and serve to establish the safety of the drug, its
therapeutic range, and appropriate dosage. Phase II trials involve a limited number
of participants and are conducted in precisely deﬁned conditions to demonstrate
drug efﬁcacy in a carefully selected population. Phase III trials are large, usually
multicenter trials, which include a broader population and serve to establish the
effectiveness and safety of drugs, simulating usual clinical use. After commerciali-
zation, phase IV trials are used to document drug effectiveness and adverse events at
the population level, or to investigate new dosages or indications [1]. The random-
ized controlled trial (RCT) is the gold standard for the evaluation of a new drug or
technology, and is the design usually used for phase II and III trials.
This stepwise process is essential to ensuring the development and approval of
new drugs which are both effective and safe. However, this process is difﬁcult to
apply to the development of drugs used in pregnant women. Indeed, due to the
potential teratogenic effects of new drugs on the fetus, the ethical dilemma of
knowing how much evidence is required to justify conducting a clinical trial
including pregnant women has often led to the complete exclusion of this population
from drug trials. Apart from data available in registries, there is little high-quality
evidence on the innocuity and effectiveness of common medications in the pregnant
population. Furthermore, few drugs are developed speciﬁcally to target obstetrical
diseases, and the ones which are tested or repurposed for these indications often
fail at the phase III trial level.
CHAPTER
93
Clinical Pharmacology During Pregnancy. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818902-3.00018-X
Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
This chapter will explore the speciﬁc considerations and challenges of con-
ducting randomized controlled pharmaceutical trials in pregnant women and provide
potential solutions to help safely include this population in future trials.
7.2 Ethical considerations
7.2.1 Maternal and fetal risks in pharmaceutical research
The most sensitive and controversial ethical aspect of pharmaceutical trials in the
pregnant population is the risk of harm to the embryo or fetus. Historically, this
risk has led to the systematic exclusion of pregnant women from pharmaceutical
research [2]. Although the AIDS/HIVepidemic led to the recognition that all groups
of the population should be offered inclusion in the studies of new medications
which might beneﬁt them [3], pregnant women are still vastly underrepresented in
pharmaceutical trials [4]. The ethical considerations of clinical research in the
pregnant population are discussed in detail in Chapter 8. A key point to consider
in this endeavor is that pregnant women have agency. The National Institute of
Health and the American College of Obstetrician and Gynecologists advocate that
pregnant women should no longer be considered a vulnerable population, but rather
a scientiﬁcally and ethically complex one [5,6]. Indeed, women who are pregnant
retain their full agency and can decide independently whether or not they wish to
take part in research. Furthermore, consent of the male partner is not necessary to
the participation of women in a research project [6].
In 2018, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) published a draft guidance
document which may help direct research efforts in the pregnant population. This
document outlines that pregnant women should be included in pharmaceutical trials
of any medication that might beneﬁt them, as long as there is sufﬁcient evidence
derived from animal studies and nonpregnant women to provide an estimate of
the potential risks to the mother and fetus. Research in the pregnant population is
deemed acceptable if: “The risk to the fetus is caused solely by interventions or
procedures that hold out the prospect of direct beneﬁt for the woman or the fetus;
or, if there is no such prospect of beneﬁt, the risk to the fetus is not greater than min-
imal and the purpose of the research is the development of important biomedical
knowledge which cannot be obtained by any other means” [7].
The evolution of ethical considerations concerning the integration of pregnant
women in research calls for their broader inclusion in pharmaceutical trials. Recent
recommendations by the FDA provide a key impetus to both industry and the
academic community to pursue clinical trials involving pregnant women.
7.2.2 Equipoise
Equipoise is an ethical standard that needs to be met to justify the conduct of any
clinical trial. A more precise deﬁnition of equipoise has been proposed as “a state
of genuine agnosticism or conﬂict in the expert medical community about the net
94
CHAPTER 7 Conducting randomized controlled pharmaceutical trials
preferred medically established procedure for the condition under study” [8]. A trial
is warranted when there is “equipoise,” that is when there is a reasonable uncertainty
concerning the beneﬁt of an experimental treatment over placebo or an existing
treatment. This is a delicate balance between the presence of insufﬁcient evidence
to justify a trial (in which case more preliminary/elementary research is needed)
and a state of overabundance where an additional trial would not be ethically
acceptable. Physician-researchers and members of institutional review boards
(IRBs) have the task of determining whether a trial will help resolve equipoise
[8]. Different IRBs can disagree markedly on the same protocol as to their opinion
on the presence or absence of equipoise [9]. This may reﬂect variations in the
expertise of the members on the IRB, as well as the absence of guidelines regarding
what is evidence of sufﬁcient quality to justify a trial.
7.2.3 What is sufﬁcient evidence to conduct a trial?
7.2.3.1 General considerations
In fact, the evidence required to justify the decision to conduct a phase III RCT in the
area of maternal-fetal medicine has not been adequately deﬁned. The hypothesis for
a trial is normally based on an understanding of the impact of a drug on a speciﬁc
disease process. The hypothesis should be supported both by in-vitro and animal
studies [10]. There must be sufﬁcient preliminary evidence from phase II trials to
indicate that the treatment under investigation might improve patient outcomes in
a clinically signiﬁcant way, and that it is not harmful [11]. A phase III clinical trial
is “warranted if there is sufﬁcient but not deﬁnitive evidence that the intervention to
be assessed would have a favorable risk-beneﬁt ratio in the population to be
enrolled” [9].
To determine this, the available evidence needs to be reviewed and assessed,
usually through a systematic review. The proposed RCT must add to the existing
knowledge base; thus, it is important to establish what information is missing
from the current knowledge base so that the trial can be designed to ﬁll these
knowledge gaps. A thorough understanding of the available evidence is key to
formulating the appropriate research question, in deﬁning the target population, in
estimating the effect size, and in assessing feasibility.
If available evidence is reliable and already provides a deﬁnitive answer, there is
no need for a study, although there may be a need for a study in a speciﬁc target
group or a larger study to reﬁne therapeutic strategies or deﬁne optimal dosage
[12].
A methodological question arises as to what constitutes sufﬁcient evidence to
consider that a treatment is efﬁcacious. If the effect estimate derived from a number
of small trials shows statistical evidence of an effect, what conclusion should be
drawn? Is an additional large RCT justiﬁed? This question is even more difﬁcult
to address given that studies have underlined the discrepancy between the ﬁndings
of meta-analyses and the largest trials of the same therapy [13,14]. One important
7.2 Ethical considerations
95
factor to consider when examining the results of a systematic review is the potential
for publication bias. Indeed, clinical trials with signiﬁcant ﬁndings are more likely to
be published and are published faster than negative trials [15], and phase I and II
trials are more likely to suffer from publication bias than phase III and IV trials
[16]. This has the potential to lead to an overestimation of the effect of an interven-
tion in meta-analyses of small randomized clinical trials. Therefore, when the
efﬁcacy of a treatment is established based on several small randomized clinical
trials, a robust phase III RCT may still be warranted to conﬁrm the treatment’s
effectiveness in a large population and to evaluate the presence of adverse events.
Again, at least one large RCT showing positive results is generally required to obtain
regulatory approval [17].
7.2.3.2 Level of evidence to justify a trial during public health crises
In the context of a public health emergency, special consideration must be given to
the level of evidence required to justify a clinical trial that includes pregnant women.
Indeed, when outbreaks of diseases threaten the lives of pregnant women and their
unborn children, the level of evidence required to justify a clinical trial can be
lowered. In this context, the potential beneﬁts of each molecule targeting the disease
must be carefully weighed against its potential risks. When sound biological
rationale and animal studies indicate a potential beneﬁt of a molecule against a lethal
disease, consideration may be given to “short-circuiting” the drug development
pipeline, and in such cases, it may be unethical to deprive any patient population
from a potentially life-saving drug [3].
The best example of this approach is the rapid approval of zidovudine to prevent
vertical transmission of HIV. In 1991, a multicenter RCTwas launched in the United
States and in France to evaluate the efﬁciency and safety of zidovudine. The study
was based only on animal studies and Phase I evidence. The results showed that
zidovudine lowered vertical transmission of HIV by two thirds when compared
with placebo [18]. Based on the interim results of this study, the CDC recommended
the use of zidovudine in pregnant women to prevent vertical transmission of HIV in
August 1994, three months before the publication of the trial results [19].
The importance of including pregnant women in pharmaceutical trials of agents
targeting lethal diseases is further supported by the example of the Ebola epidemic.
During the 2013e2016 Ebola outbreak, pregnant women were excluded from all 16
randomized clinical trials of antiviral treatments or vaccines. Trial investigators
justiﬁed their decision based on potential embryotoxicity and teratogenicity of the
therapeutic agents. The case fatality rate of Ebola in pregnant women is 55%, and
only one live birth from a pregnant woman infected with Ebola has ever been
reported [20]. Excluding pregnant woman from pharmaceutical trials for a disease
whose natural course is maternal and fetal death, based on the fear of causing fetal
harm, is both absurd and unacceptable. Investigators have the ethical duty to ensure
that pregnant women are given fair access to any trial of a pharmaceutical agent
targeting a disease from which they might suffer [6]. In the case of deadly diseases,
teratogenic potential alone is not a sufﬁcient reason to preclude the inclusion of
pregnant women in research.
96
CHAPTER 7 Conducting randomized controlled pharmaceutical trials
Despite serious concerns raised by the scientiﬁc community [21,78e81],
pregnant and lactating women have been almost systematically excluded from
pharmaceutical research in the current covid-19 pandemic [77]. Pregnant women
were excluded from phase III RCTs for all the commercially available vaccines
[81]. With recent evidence showing
increased risks of morbidity and mortality
from covid-19 infection in pregnancy [82], this population has become eligible
for vaccination in several countries (such as the United States of America, Canada
and United Kingdom), but deﬁnitive evidence on efﬁcacy and safety in pregnancy is
lacking. Most strikingly, pregnant and lactating patients were even excluded from
trials of agents known to be innocuous in pregnancy such as hydroxychloroquine
and colchicine [22,78]. This situation highlights the need for public policies to
mandate the inclusion of pregnant and lactating women in pharmaceutical trials.
7.2.4 Resource allocation in the context of limited research
funding
Phase III trials are costly, and as such, the number that can be conducted is limitedd
far fewer than the number of current and potential treatment approaches that could
be tested. When the scientiﬁc community gives the green light for a given trial, they
are in some ways “saying no” to others, as funds are limited and not every clinical
question warrants its own trial. This outlines the importance of evaluating every trial
protocol thoroughly before authorizing it, to ensure that both equipoise and
sufﬁcient preliminary evidence are available to justify the trial. Trials that move
forward should also be methodologically robust to ensure that they are feasible
and that their results will be interpretable.
Indeed, negative trials have a variety of costs, including ﬁnancial costs and the
exposure of participants to the potential toxicity of unproven experimental
treatments without associated beneﬁts. Nevertheless, negative trials cannot be
completely avoided, and they give us important information to abandon the use of
ineffective therapies and to help direct future research [11].
7.3 Including pregnant women in pharmaceutical trials for
nonobstetrical conditions
7.3.1 The dearth of evidence on the innocuity and efﬁciency of
drugs in the pregnant population
Pregnant women have historically been excluded from pharmaceutical research, and
as a result, limited Class I evidence is available on the safety and efﬁciency of
common medications in pregnancy. In 2002, Lo and Friedman reported that more
than 90% of the drugs approved by the FDA between 1980 and 2000 had unknown
teratogenic potential [23]. This issue is still relevant today, as a 2013 study revealed
that 95% of industry-sponsored phase IV pharmaceutical trials for treatment of
diseases likely to affect pregnant women excluded this population [4]. This is
7.3 Including pregnant women in pharmaceutical trials
97
particularly problematic as it has been estimated that 80% to 90% of women use at
least one type of medication during pregnancy [24e27]. Thus, pregnant women are
often prescribed medications which have not been adequately studied in this popu-
lation, with lack of available data on adequate dosage in pregnancy, and on potential
teratogenicity in humans. In addition, women now become pregnant at more
advanced ages, and with more medical comorbidities than they did in the past
[27,28]. The lack of evidence on the use of medications to treat chronic diseases
places women at risk of receiving suboptimal treatment for their conditions during
pregnancy [29], and of suffering from short- and long-term complications as a result.
7.3.2 Human pharmaceutical trials including pregnant women are
required
To ﬁll the knowledge gaps on the innocuity and efﬁciency of common drugs in the
obstetrical population, rigorous human trials are required. While animal studies are
an important ﬁrst step in identifying the potential risks and teratogenic effects of a
molecule [30], these data are insufﬁcient to evaluate the full safety proﬁles of drugs
[31]. Indeed, the translation of teratogenic effects between species is not entirely
reliable [32]. This is best demonstrated by the example of thalidomide, which causes
no speciﬁc teratogenic effects in mice, but produces signiﬁcant limb reduction
defects in humans [33]. Results from animal studies are also limited by the drug
dosage used, which is not always comparable to the dosage human pregnant patients
and their fetuses would be exposed to [32].
Studies are also needed to determine the best dose and the efﬁciency of medica-
tions in the pregnant population. Indeed, pregnancy causes several physiological
changes which can signiﬁcantly alter drug bioavailability and metabolism [34].
Drug dosage and efﬁciency cannot be extrapolated from studies in men and nonpreg-
nant women and should be established based on pharmacokinetic studies,
pharmacodynamic studies, and clinical trials conducted speciﬁcally in the pregnant
population [35]. The placental passage of drugs also needs to be established in hu-
man subjects, and potential beneﬁts or harm to the neonate need to be systematically
compiled [34].
7.3.3 Strategies to include pregnant women in pharmaceutical
trials for nonobstetrical conditions
7.3.3.1 Public policies to promote pharmaceutical trials in the pregnant
population
While we have highlighted that clinical trials are needed to establish the safety pro-
ﬁle, adequate dosage, and efﬁciency of common medications in pregnant women,
the pharmaceutical industry is still reluctant to include pregnant women in pharma-
ceutical trials. Potential solutions can be found by examining the example of the
pediatric population [36]. Similar to pregnant women, children and adolescents
compose an ethically and scientiﬁcally complex population. Children constitute a
98
CHAPTER 7 Conducting randomized controlled pharmaceutical trials
vulnerable population and their physiology differs from that of adults, which can
have impacts on pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics [37]. This complexity
has led to a long-standing history of exclusion of pediatric patients from pharmaceu-
tical trials [38]. In 1997, the FDA included an exclusivity incentive as part of the
Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act. This incentive provides a six-
month prolongation of patent protection and marketing exclusivity in exchange
for conducting pharmaceutical studies in the pediatric population. In 2002, the
Best Pharmaceuticals for Children Act allowed the NIH to sponsor clinical trials
of off-patent drugs in the pediatric population. In 2003, the Pediatric Research
Equity Act gave the FDA the authority to require pediatric drug studies for molecules
likely to be used in the pediatric population [39]. These regulations have been
permanently reauthorized as part of the FDA Safety and Innovation Act of 2012
and the FDA Reauthorization Act of 2017 [39,40]. Since their inception, these
regulations have substantially increased the amount of pharmaceutical research in
the pediatric population and have led to labeling changes for more than 600 pharma-
ceutical agents [39]. This new body of evidence has led to safer use of medication in
children, and has provided economic beneﬁts both for the pharmaceutical industry
and government [38]. Similar economical and legal incentives should be adopted
to increase the inclusion of pregnant women in pharmaceutical research [41].
7.3.3.2 Innovative designs to determine the safety and efﬁciency of drugs
in the pregnant population
To remedy some of the limitations of registries and case reports, researchers have
proposed innovative study designs which allow fair inclusion of pregnant women
in pharmaceutical research while optimizing the risk-beneﬁt ratio.
In their 2018 article, Roes et al. proposed that phase I studies can be conducted in
the pregnant population at the time of phase II or III study in the general population.
This design ensures that speciﬁc safety, pharmacokinetic, and pharmacodynamic
information can be obtained for pregnant patients, but only for drugs which have
proven to be sufﬁciently safe in the general population. Phase III trials including
pregnant participants can then be used to conﬁrm adequate dosage and efﬁciency
of the study drug. The authors propose the inclusion of pregnant women in phase
III trials through two scenarios. If sufﬁcient safety and efﬁcacy data are already
available, pregnant women can be included as a subpopulation of general phase
III trials. If this information is not available at the time of study inception, an
adaptive design can be put in place where pregnant women are only enrolled in
the phase III trial after preliminary data analysis has conﬁrmed drug efﬁcacy
in the general population. For drugs which have already been approved for use in
the general population, the authors support the implementation of speciﬁc pregnancy
phase I trials if observational data are insufﬁcient to determine safety, with subse-
quent inclusion of pregnant women in postmarketing phase III RCTs to conﬁrm
adequate dosage and efﬁciency [42].
In 2015, Briggs et al. outlined a framework for the fair inclusion of reproductive
age and pregnant women in phase IV clinical trials. This framework would apply to
7.3 Including pregnant women in pharmaceutical trials
99
drugs likely to be used for acute or chronic conditions in women of child-bearing
age, which have not been reported to pose teratogenic risks. They propose
conducting of “postapproval” RCTs in a population comprising women of child-
bearing age and pregnant women comparing the safety and efﬁciency of the study
drug with that of current standard therapy [41].
These new adaptive designs could help ﬁll the knowledge gaps on the use of
medication in pregnancy, and in turn improve the quality and safety of care for
pregnant women.
7.4 Improving the success of drug trials for obstetrical
conditions
7.4.1 Drug development failures in obstetrics
Failure of a drug to complete the phased process of drug development is not uncom-
mon, and a 2004 review revealed that only 11% of drugs developed between 1991
and 2000 had successfully completed this process. When comparing rates of
“success”dfrom ﬁrst in-human studies to drug approval, studies conducted in
Women’s Health had the lowest across sectors, at less than 5% [43]. This is even
more concerning, as there are few drug trials conducted in pregnancy, representing
only 0.32% of all active registered clinical trials in a 2016 review [44]. Only 7% of
these studies were funded by the pharmaceutical industry, and only three new
molecules under investigation had been developed speciﬁcally for a pregnancy indi-
cation [44]. A 2008 review of the Pharmaprojects database also revealed that only
three drugs were under preclinical development for obstetrical conditions, ﬁve times
less than were being studied for the rare disease amyotrophic lateral sclerosis [45].
Even when preclinical studies have been successfully completed and drugs show
potential in early clinical studies, they often fail in phase III. In a 2016 review of two
large pharmaceutical databases, 54% of agents failed at the phase III level. The most
common identiﬁed reasons for failure were lack of efﬁcacy and safety concerns,
accounting for 57% and 17% of failures, respectively [46].
The scarcity of drug trials in obstetrics, the lack of industry investment, and the
high risk of failure in drug development creates an urgent need to “get it right”: to
invest in the evaluation of treatments for which there is a high probability of success.
This begs the question: Can reasons for the failure of seemingly promising preg-
nancy drug trials be identiﬁed? We posit that a better selection of target molecules,
appropriate research questions and outcomes, and rigorous study designs can help
increase the odds of successful drug trials in obstetrics.
7.4.2 The importance of biological rationale
The high costs of drug development with a perceived low return on investment and
high legal risks in the ﬁeld of obstetrics have resulted in the pharmaceutical industry
developing few new drugs for obstetrical diseases [47]. Because of this, the process
100
CHAPTER 7 Conducting randomized controlled pharmaceutical trials
of “obstetrical drug development” is essentially “a repurposing” [48]. Nevertheless,
novel treatments for conditions such as preterm birth and preeclampsia are urgently
needed as these diseases are frequent and cause signiﬁcant morbidities [44].
Whether novel molecules or repurposed ones are being evaluated, drug development
in obstetrics should follow the same rigorous steps proposed in other ﬁelds, with
added considerations unique to pregnancy [48]. Potential molecules should be iden-
tiﬁed based on a good understanding of disease processes and targeted mechanisms
of action. Preclinical studies in animals will then serve to establish drug activity on
disease processes in vivo, identify potential toxicity, and establish whether the drug
traverses the placenta [47e50]. Only drugs which are shown to be both efﬁcient and
safe in animal models should be allowed to move on to early human testing. Phase I
studies in pregnancy should serve to establish drug pharmacodynamics and pharma-
cokinetics, and to conﬁrm potential transplacental passage of the target drug [48].
Only with strict compliance with these steps of development can we expect to lower
the odds of failure at the time of human phase II and III clinical trials.
7.4.3 Using adequate design and outcomes in phase II trials
Testing the biological activity, dosage, and safety proﬁle of the drug in question
requires thoroughness. An important risk factor for failure in phase III is a phase
II clinical trial that has not been done or that has been poorly conducted [50].
While single arm studies with historical controls have often been used in phase
II, RCTs have become the norm for rigorous phase II evaluation programs [51]. This
design limits selection bias and confounding factors, thus reducing the odds of over-
estimating treatment effects in phase II [52]. The goal of phase II trials is to deter-
mine if drug efﬁcacy can be measured by a number of objective or subjective
endpoints and how well this activity compares to that of a placebo or active control.
The example of the drug atosiban, an oxytocin antagonist used for tocolysis in
preterm labor, outlines the importance of choosing an adequate comparator. A multi-
center RCT published in 2000 showed that compared to the beta-agonist ritodrine,
atosiban had similar efﬁcacy to prevent birth within 48 hours of admission [53].
However, a large RCT of ritodrine versus placebo published in 1992 had shown
no beneﬁt of ritodrine on perinatal mortality, prolongation of pregnancy to term,
or birthweight [54]. As a result, atosiban was never approved in North America.
Determination of the most effective drug dose and the collection of information
pertinent to the design of a phase III program are other goals of phase II studies.
Safety remains a strong component of phase II programs. Serious toxicities may
be observed for the ﬁrst time in a phase II trial.
The choice of the primary outcome for phase II RCTs is critical. A good primary
outcome is one that is objective, reproducible, related to the disease process, and
relevant to patient health [55]. The biggest challenge in primary outcome selection
for phase II is to choose a variable that either is a clinically relevant outcome, or is
predictive of one, and for which changes can be detected within a limited population
or time frame. Indeed, while phase II studies should help to reliably predict phase III
7.4 Improving the success of drug trials for obstetrical conditions
101
success, they should not be as extensive or resource-consuming as the multicenter
RCTs used in phase III. Potential solutions to this challenge are the use of surrogate
endpoints.
Surrogate endpoints are variables which are involved in the causal pathway
toward development of a disease. Identifying good surrogate outcomes is difﬁcult
because signiﬁcant preliminary data must have demonstrated that “achievement of
substantial effects on the surrogate endpoint reliably predicts achievement of clini-
cally important effects on a clinically meaningful endpoint” [56]. For instance, viral
load is a good surrogate for HIV studies because reducing viral load reliably leads to
a reduced prevalence of AIDS. On the contrary, increased bone mineral density
proved to be a poor surrogate outcome for osteoporotic fracture risk in studies of
ﬂuoride. Bone mass increases under ﬂuoride treatment, but the bone also becomes
brittle and is more prone to fractures [57]. These examples outline that while
surrogate endpoints can be extremely useful, they should only be used when
sufﬁcient data are available to demonstrate that they reliably predict the outcome
of clinical interest [56].
7.4.4 Calculating the sample size for phase III randomized
controlled trials
Phase II trials are generally considered to be successful if a statistically signiﬁcant
difference in the primary outcome favoring the experimental treatment is identiﬁed.
These results are used to justify moving on to phase III trials, and to help calculate
their sample size [58]. Phase III trials impose great ﬁnancial and human burdens, and
as such important consideration must be given to trial logistics in order to increase
the probability of obtaining informative results.
One key aspect to consider is the calculation of sample size. Estimating sample
size requirement based on phase II trial results poses several challenges. First, the
phase II primary outcome may not be the clinically relevant primary outcome
used for the phase III trial. Secondly, the effect size estimated from a small popula-
tion is imprecise and may lead to an overestimation of the treatment effect.
Lastly, phase III clinical trials include more diverse populations and treatment
settings than phase II trials. All these factors lead to a potentially smaller treatment
effects in phase III trials than in phase II [59,60].
Furthermore, phase III trials must be adequately powered to detect minimally
important differences in clinically relevant outcomes [61]. For severe outcomes
such as death, small differences between treatment groups can lead to changes in
practice, and studies must have sufﬁcient power to detect these changes [11]. For
instance, in the SWEPIS RCT which compared induction of labor at 41 weeks
with expectant management and induction of labor at 42 weeks, a 0.4% increase
in perinatal mortality in the expectant management group led to early trial termina-
tion and a recommendation to induce labor at 41 weeks [62].
For all these reasons, sample sizes for phase III RCTs must be calculated conser-
vatively. Potential solutions include using an alpha error of 2.5% and 90% power,
102
CHAPTER 7 Conducting randomized controlled pharmaceutical trials
adjusting the effect size estimate with Bayesian assurance or frequentist-conservatist
estimation, or basing the effect size on the minimal clinically important difference
rather than phase II estimates [60,63].
Poor recruitment or high-attrition rates may also be problematic, and dropout rates
must be realistically estimated and accounted for in sample size calculation [59].
The use of conservative assumptions for the purpose of sample size calculation
for phase III RCTs can therefore help lower the risk of failure of a drug at the phase
III level because of type II error.
7.4.5 Integrating precision medicine in obstetrics
The explosion of knowledge in genetics, cell, and systems biology has completely
changed our understanding of disease pathophysiology and treatment. Diseases
which were once thought to be homogenous, such as cancer, can now be subdivided
into subgroups based on genetic characteristics [64]. Precision medicine aims to
delineate subpopulations of patients with a disease which share common
characteristicsdeither
social,
clinical,
genetic,
microbiome
proﬁles,
or
biomarkersdthat make them more susceptible to respond to a given treatment. In
breast cancer, for instance, patients whose tumor is human epidermal growth factor
receptor 2 (HER-2) positive can receive the monoclonal antibody trastuzumab
which directly targets the HER-2 protein and dramatically improves survival [65].
Despite the potential of precision medicine in several areas of medicine,
development of targeted therapies by industry has been slow, with only 66 prod-
ucts in late-stage development in a 2013 study. More than 80% of these products
had been developed for the treatment of cancer, and none targeted obstetrical
diseases [66].
The development of precision medicine in obstetrics seems particularly prom-
ising, as many pathologies of pregnancy are clinically and biologically heteroge-
neous and do not respond well to treatment. This is the case for preterm birth and
preeclampsia, which both have various clinical presentations and causes [67e70].
Further research will be required to delineate subpopulations of patients with these
diseases, and to understand the precise physiopathology behind each clinical
presentation [70e73]. Only with this knowledge, can we hope to make signiﬁcant
progress in the prevention and treatment of preterm birth and preeclampsia. While
precision medicine has the potential to impact on the design of trials, there have
been few obstetrical trials to date that have used genetic or biological markers or
risk factors to select or to stratify participants.
7.4.6 The example of the antioxidant trials
The importance of sound biological rationale and of the choice of primary outcome
in phase II trials is further supported by the failure of phase III clinical trials to
demonstrate effectiveness of antioxidants in the prevention of preeclampsia.
7.4 Improving the success of drug trials for obstetrical conditions
103
Oxidative stress is believed to play a role in a number of clinical disorders in obstet-
rics, including preeclampsia, a major contributor to maternal mortality and maternal
and perinatal morbidity. There is a substantial body of evidence linking oxidative
stress to preeclampsia, although it remains uncertain whether this is a primary or
a secondary phenomenon. In 1999, Chappell et al. reported the results of a phase
II trial of the effects of the prophylactic administration of antioxidant vitamins C
and E in pregnant women. Women with risk factors for preeclampsia were included
in the trial, the most frequent being a positive screen on uterine artery Doppler. The
trial was stopped before the full sample size could be achieved, as the proportion of
women experiencing preeclampsia, as observed in an interim analysis, was reduced
in the active treatment group. In fact, a biochemical indicator of endothelial dysfunc-
tion (PAI-1:PAI-2), and not preeclampsia, was the major endpoint of this phase II
trial [73]. However, the relationship of this marker to clinical disease was unclear.
Furthermore, at the time that the study was initiated, little information was available
as to whether the doses of vitamin C and E administered were those most likely to
produce an antioxidant effect. Thus, while the ﬁndings of this phase II study were
encouraging, it suffered from those limitations that placed subsequent phase III
studies at high risk of failure: absence of data on dose-ﬁnding, uncertain mechanism
of action, and high risk of alpha error due to early stopping of the phase II trial.
Subsequently, nine large multicenter trials, including patients at high risk of
preeclampsia and those where nulliparity was the only identiﬁed risk factor, were
conducted to assess the role of Vitamins C and E in the prevention of preeclampsia
[74]. All yielded negative results. One of the trials was led by the senior author of the
current chapter (WDF) and was stopped before recruitment was completed due to
concerns raised in the intercurrent reporting of a separate trial about possible effects
of the intervention on the risk of low birth weight [75]. Could this have been
avoided? In retrospect, given the limitations of the initial phase II study, the most
prudent approach might have been to simply attempt to replicate the ﬁndings using
a rigorous design and predesigned stopping rules, while collecting more data on
possible biological mechanisms. Or, at the very least, through international collab-
oration, could a single trial have been conducted rather than separate trials in
Canada, the UK, the US, Australia, and Brazil? The decision to conduct phase III
studies in such a context should be based on a cross disciplinary consensus,
involving both basic scientists and clinical trialists. From a global perspective, in
order to optimize the use of scarce resources, international expertise and collabora-
tion should be brought to bear on prioritizing research questions, so that only studies
meeting the most rigorous criteria at the phase II level are given priority for phase III
research. The result of this “cumulative” failure has been that even those who have
been longstanding leaders and supporters of clinical research in preeclampsia
expressed a skepticism regarding the impact of large trials. “Thus for over a decade
now, many large and expensive multicentre randomized trials have failed to show
signiﬁcant reductions in the incidence of preeclampsia, or, when positive results
occurred, the signiﬁcance was small and the number to treat large” [76].
104
CHAPTER 7 Conducting randomized controlled pharmaceutical trials
7.5 Summary
Pregnant women should be considered for inclusion in the study of any pharmaceu-
tical agent expected to provide important beneﬁts in the treatment of a disease that
affects reproductive age women. Exposing pregnant women and fetuses to new
pharmaceutical agents is considered to be acceptable by the FDA if direct beneﬁt
to the woman or fetus is expected, and if enough preliminary evidence in animals
or humans is available to anticipate potential risks. Prior to conducting a clinical
trial, evidence must be carefully evaluated using systematic reviews that sufﬁciently
take into account the potential for publication bias and type I error in individual
studies. In the context of public health emergencies, it is acceptable to conduct a
clinical trial with limited preliminary evidence.
Pregnant women are still widely excluded from pharmaceutical trials for diseases
that affect reproductive aged women. Potential solutions to increase the inclusion of
pregnant women in these trials include legal and ﬁnancial incentives, and innovative
study designs such as phase I pregnancy studies imbricated in phase II or III general
population trials, and postmarketing phase III RCTs in the pregnant population.
Few molecules are developed speciﬁcally to treat obstetrical conditions, and
many drugs fail to successfully complete the drug development process. To improve
the success of pharmaceutical research in pregnancy, new or repurposed molecules
should be selected based on a good comprehension of disease processes and on a
speciﬁc mechanism of action. The drug development pipeline should be followed
rigorously, and in-human phase I trials should only be realized after both safety
and efﬁcacy have been demonstrated in animal models. Phase II studies need to
be carefully planned to increase the likelihood of success at the phase III level. These
studies should be RCTs with an adequate comparator (placebo or standard treat-
ment), the primary outcome should be objective and relevantdeither the disorder
itself or on a marker that has been conﬁrmed to be part of disease pathophysiology,
and the study should determine the dosage most likely to provide clinical beneﬁt. To
lower the risk of type II error in phase III studies, the sample size should be
calculated conservatively to detect minimally clinically important differences in
the primary outcome. Precision medicine appears as a promising solution to treat
heterogeneous diseases such as prematurity and preeclampsia, as it allows to select
the participants most likely to beneﬁt from a given intervention.
Further collaboration between both basic science and clinical trial researchers
across centers, as well as open dialog between all experts in the ﬁeld could go a
long way in optimizing the use of scarce resources in the area of obstetrical drug
trials. For this reason, we urge all researchers active in this discipline to participate
in evaluating and critiquing the studies published by their peers. Critical review of
small or preliminary studies should make clear their merits and faults; this would
undoubtedly aid in identifying promising avenues for further research and mini-
mizing the risk for failure of any subsequent trials.
7.5 Summary
105
References
[1] Spilker B. Guide to drug development: a comprehensive review and assessment. Phil-
adelphia: Wolters Kluwer Health/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009. p. 1277.
[2] White A. Accelerating the paradigm shift toward inclusion of pregnant women in drug
research: ethical and regulatory considerations. Semin Perinatol November 2015;39(7):
537e40.
[3] Merkatz RB, Temple R, Sobel S, Feiden K, Kessler DA. Women in clinical trials of new
drugs e A change in food and drug administration policy. N Engl J Med July 22, 1993;
329(4):292e6.
[4] Shields KE, Lyerly AD. Exclusion of pregnant women from industry-sponsored clinical
trials. Obstet Gynecol November 2013;122(5):1077e81.
[5] Blehar MC, Spong C, Grady C, Goldkind SF, Sahin L, Clayton JA. Enrolling pregnant
women: issues in clinical research. Wom Health Issues January 2013;23(1):e39e45.
[6] The American College of, Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Committee Opinion No.
646: ethical considerations for including women as research participants. Obstet
Gynecol November 2015;126(5):e100e7.
[7] Pregnant FDA. Women: scientiﬁc and ethical considerations for inclusion in clinical
trials guidance for industry, vol. 14; 2018.
[8] van der Graaf R, van Delden JJ. Equipoise should be amended, not abandoned. Clin
Trials J Soc Clin Trials August 2011;8(4):408e16.
[9] Stark AR, Tyson JE, Hibberd PL. Variation among institutional review boards in eval-
uating the design of a multicenter randomized trial. J Perinatol March 2010;30(3):
163e9.
[10] Field D, Elbourne D. The randomized controlled trial. Curr Paediatr November 2004;
14(6):519e24.
[11] Strand M, Jobe AH. The multiple negative randomized controlled trials in
perinatologydwhy? Semin Perinatol August 2003;27(4):343e50.
[12] Morley R, Farewell V. Methodological issues in randomized controlled trials. Semin
Neonatol May 2000;5(2):141e8.
[13] Villar J, Carroli G, Beliza´n JM. Predictive ability of meta-analyses of randomised
controlled trials. Lancet March 1995;345(8952):772e6.
[14] LeLorier J, Gre´goire G, Benhaddad A, Lapierre J, Derderian F. Discrepancies between
meta-analyses and subsequent large randomized, controlled trials. N Engl J Med August
21, 1997;337(8):536e42.
[15] Hopewell S, Loudon K, Clarke MJ, Oxman AD, Dickersin K. Publication bias in
clinical trials due to statistical signiﬁcance or direction of trial results. In: Cochrane
Methodology Review Group, editor. Cochrane database syst rev; January 21, 2009
[Cited
2020
May
3];
Available
from:
http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/14651858.
MR000006.pub3.
[16] Hall R, de Antueno C, Webber A. Publication bias in the medical literature: a review by
a Canadian research ethics board. Can J Anesth May 2007;54(5):380e8.
[17] Ciociola AA, Cohen LB, Kulkarni P, Kefalas C, Buchman A, Burke C, et al. How drugs
are developed and approved by the FDA: current process and future directions. Am J
Gastroenterol May 2014;109(5):620e3.
[18] Connor EM, Sperling RS, Gelber R, Kiselev P, Scott G, O’Sullivan MJ, et al. Reduction
of maternal-infant transmission of human immunodeﬁciency virus type 1 with zidovu-
dine treatment. N Engl J Med November 3, 1994;331(18):1173e80.
106
CHAPTER 7 Conducting randomized controlled pharmaceutical trials
[19] CDC. Recommendations of the U.S. Public Health Service Task Force on the use of
zidovudine to reduce perinatal transmission of human immunodeﬁciency virus.
MMWR Recomm Rep Morb Mortal Wkly Rep Recomm Rep August 5, 1994;43(RR-
11):1e20.
[20] Gomes MF, de la Fuente-Nu´n˜ez V, Saxena A, Kuesel AC. Protected to death: systematic
exclusion of pregnant women from Ebola virus disease trials. Reprod Health December
2017;14(S3):172.
[21] Buekens P, Alger J, Bre´art G, Cafferata ML, Harville E, Tomasso G. A call for action for
COVID-19 surveillance and research during pregnancy. Lancet Glob Health April 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S2214-109X(20)30206-0.
[22] Indraratna PL, Virk S, Gurram D, Day RO. Use of colchicine in pregnancy: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Rheumatology February 1, 2018;57(2):382e7.
[23] Lo W. Teratogenicity of recently introduced medications in human pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol September 2002;100(3):465e73.
[24] Lupattelli A, Spigset O, Twigg MJ, Zagorodnikova K, Ma˚rdby AC, Moretti ME, et al.
Medication use in pregnancy: a cross-sectional, multinational web-based study. BMJ
Open February 2014;4(2):e004365.
[25] Mitchell AA, Gilboa SM, Werler MM, Kelley KE, Louik C, Herna´ndez-Dı´az S. Medi-
cation use during pregnancy, with particular focus on prescription drugs: 1976e2008.
Am J Obstet Gynecol July 2011;205(1):51.e1e8.
[26] Be´rard A, Abbas-Chorfa F, Kassai B, Vial T, Nguyen KA, Sheehy O, et al. The French
Pregnancy Cohort: medication use during pregnancy in the French population. In:
Lupattelli A, editor. PLos One. vol. 14; July 17, 2019. e0219095. 7.
[27] D’Alton ME, Bonanno CA, Berkowitz RL, Brown HL, Copel JA, Cunningham FG,
et al. Putting the “M” back in maternalefetal medicine. Am J Obstet Gynecol June
2013;208(6):442e8.
[28] Hirshberg A, Srinivas SK. Epidemiology of maternal morbidity and mortality. Semin
Perinatol October 2017;41(6):332e7.
[29] Morgan MA, Cragan JD, Goldenberg RL, Rasmussen SA, Schulkin J. Management of
prescription and nonprescription drug use during pregnancy. J Matern Fetal Neonatal
Med August 2010;23(8):813e9.
[30] Scialli AR. Animal studies and human risk. Reprod Toxicol November 1993;7(6):
533e4.
[31] Friedman JM. How do we know if an exposure is actually teratogenic in humans? Am J
Med Genet C Semin Med Genet August 15, 2011;157(3):170e4.
[32] Brent RL. Utilization of animal studies to determine the effects and human risks of envi-
ronmental toxicants (drugs, chemicals, and physical agents). Pediatrics April 2004;
113(4 Suppl. l):984e95.
[33] Kim JH, Scialli AR. Thalidomide: the tragedy of birth defects and the effective treat-
ment of disease. Toxicol Sci July 2011;122(1):1e6.
[34] Shefﬁeld JS, Siegel D, Mirochnick M, Heine RP, Nguyen C, Bergman KL, et al.
Designing drug trials: considerations for pregnant women. Clin Infect Dis December
15, 2014;59(Suppl. l_7):S437e44.
[35] Pariente G, Leibson T, Carls A, Adams-Webber T, Ito S, Koren G. Pregnancy-associated
changes in pharmacokinetics: a systematic review. In: Chappell LC, editor. PLOS Med.
vol. 13; November 1, 2016. e1002160. 11.
[36] Ren Z, Zajicek A. Review of the Best Pharmaceuticals for Children Act and the Pedi-
atric Research Equity Act: what can the obstetric community learn from the pediatric
experience? Semin Perinatol November 2015;39(7):530e1.
References
107
[37] Rivera DR, Hartzema AG. Pediatric exclusivity: evolving legislation and novel com-
plexities within pediatric therapeutic development. Ann Pharmacother March 2014;
48(3):369e79.
[38] Vernon JA, Shortenhaus SH, Mayer MH, Allen AJ, Golec JH. Measuring the patient
health, societal and economic beneﬁts of US pediatric therapeutics legislation. Pediatr
Drugs October 2012;14(5):283e94.
[39] Califf RM. Best Pharmaceuticals for Children Act and Pediatric Research Equity Act.
July 2016 status report to Congress. Department of Health and Human Services Food
and Drug Administration; July 2016.
[40] Walden G. FDA Reauthorization Act of 2017. Law No: 115e52 Aug 18, 2017.
[41] Briggs GG, Polifka JE, Wisner KL, Gervais E, Miller RK, Berard A, et al. Should preg-
nant women be included in phase IV clinical drug trials? Am J Obstet Gynecol
December 2015;213(6):810e5.
[42] Roes KCB, van der Zande ISE, van Smeden M, van der Graaf R. Towards an appro-
priate framework to facilitate responsible inclusion of pregnant women in drug devel-
opment programs. Trials December 2018;19(1):123.
[43] Kola I, Landis J. Can the pharmaceutical industry reduce attrition rates? Nat Rev Drug
Discov August 2004;3(8):711e6.
[44] Scafﬁdi J, Mol B, Keelan J. The pregnant women as a drug orphan: a global survey of
registered clinical trials of pharmacological interventions in pregnancy. BJOG Int J
Obstet Gynaecol January 2017;124(1):132e40.
[45] Fisk NM, Atun R. Market failure and the poverty of new drugs in maternal health. PLoS
Med January 22, 2008;5(1):e22.
[46] Hwang TJ, Carpenter D, Lauffenburger JC, Wang B, Franklin JM, Kesselheim AS. Fail-
ure of investigational drugs in late-stage clinical development and publication of trial
results. JAMA Intern Med December 1, 2016;176(12):1826.
[47] David A, Thornton S, Sutcliffe A, Williams P. Developing new pharmaceutical treat-
ments for obstetric conditions. R Coll Obstet Gynaecol Guidel May 2015;50.
[48] Malek A, Mattison DR. Drug development for use during pregnancy: impact of the
placenta. Expet Rev Obstet Gynecol July 2010;5(4):437e54.
[49] Chappell LC, David AL. Improving the pipeline for developing and testing pharmaco-
logical treatments in pregnancy. PLoS Med November 1, 2016;13(11):e1002161.
[50] Addeo A, Weiss GJ, Gyawali B. Association of industry and academic sponsorship with
negative phase 3 oncology trials and reported outcomes on participant survival: a pooled
analysis. JAMA Netw Open May 10, 2019;2(5):e193684.
[51] Seymour L, Ivy SP, Sargent D, Spriggs D, Baker L, Rubinstein L, et al. The design of
phase II clinical trials testing cancer therapeutics: consensus recommendations from the
clinical trial design task force of the national cancer Institute investigational drug steer-
ing committee. Clin Cancer Res March 15, 2010;16(6):1764e9.
[52] Sharma MR, Stadler WM, Ratain MJ. Randomized phase II trials: a long-term invest-
ment with promising returns. JNCI J Natl Cancer Inst July 20, 2011;103(14):1093e100.
[53] Moutquin J-M, Sherman D, Cohen H, Mohide PT, Hochner-Celnikier D, Fejgin M, et al.
Double-blind, randomized, controlled trial of atosiban and ritodrine in the treatment of
preterm labor: a multicenter effectiveness and safety study. Am J Obstet Gynecol May
2000;182(5):1191e9.
[54] The Canadian Preterm Labor Investigators Group. Treatment of preterm labor with the
beta-adrenergic agonist ritodrine. N Engl J Med July 30, 1992;327(5):308e12.
108
CHAPTER 7 Conducting randomized controlled pharmaceutical trials
[55] Sherman M. Design and endpoints of clinical trials, current and future. Dig Dis Sci
April 2019;64(4):1050e7.
[56] Fleming TR, Powers JH. Biomarkers and surrogate endpoints in clinical trials. Stat Med
November 10, 2012;31(25):2973e84.
[57] Grimes DA, Schulz KF. Surrogate end points in clinical research: hazardous to your
health. Obstet Gynecol May 2005;105(5, Part 1):1114e8.
[58] Go¨tte H, Schu¨ler A, Kirchner M, Kieser M. Sample size planning for phase II trials
based on success probabilities for phase III. Pharmaceut Stat November 2015;14(6):
515e24.
[59] Wang S-J, Hung HMJ, O’Neill RT. Adapting the sample size planning of a phase III trial
based on phase II data. Pharmaceut Stat April 2006;5(2):85e97.
[60] De Martini D. Empowering phase II clinical trials to reduce phase III failures. Pharma-
ceut Stat May 2020;19(3):178e86.
[61] Tarnow-Mordi W, Cruz M, Morris J. Design and conduct of a large obstetric or neonatal
randomized controlled trial. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med December 2015;20(6):
389e402.
[62] Wennerholm U-B, Saltvedt S, Wessberg A, Alkmark M, Bergh C, Wendel SB, et al.
Induction of labour at 41 weeks versus expectant management and induction of labour
at 42 weeks (Swedish Post-term Induction Study, SWEPIS): multicentre, open label,
randomised, superiority trial. BMJ November 20, 2019:l6131.
[63] King MT. A point of minimal important difference (MID): a critique of terminology and
methods. Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res April 2011;11(2):171e84.
[64] Precision medicine. Health Aff May 2018;37(5):688e9.
[65] Ko¨nig IR, Fuchs O, Hansen G, von Mutius E, Kopp MV. What is precision medicine?
Eur Respir J October 2017;50(4):1700391.
[66] Milne C-P, Garafalo S, Bryan C, McKiernan M. Personalized medicines in late-stage
development. Nat Rev Drug Discov May 2014;13(5):324e5.
[67] Newnham JP, Kemp MW, White SW, Arrese CA, Hart RJ, Keelan JA [Cited 2020 May
27]. Applying precision public health to prevent preterm birth. Front public health
[Internet], vol. 5; April 4, 2017. Available from: http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/
10.3389/fpubh.2017.00066/full.
[68] Quinney SK, Patil AS, Flockhart DA. Is personalized medicine achievable in obstetrics?
Semin Perinatol December 2014;38(8):534e40.
[69] Luizon MR, Palei AC, Cavalli RC, Sandrim VC. Pharmacogenetics in the treatment of
pre-eclampsia: current ﬁndings, challenges and perspectives. Pharmacogenomics April
2017;18(6):571e83.
[70] Burris HH, Wright CJ, Kirpalani H, Collins Jr JW, Lorch SA, Elovitz MA, et al. The
promise and pitfalls of precision medicine to resolve blackewhite racial disparities
in preterm birth. Pediatr Res January 2020;87(2):221e6.
[71] Eidem HR, Ackerman WE, McGary KL, Abbot P, Rokas A. Gestational tissue
transcriptomics in term and preterm human pregnancies: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. BMC Med Genom December 2015;8(1):27.
[72] Gao Q, Tang J, Li N, Liu B, Zhang M, Sun M, et al. What is precise pathophysiology in
development of hypertension in pregnancy? Precision medicine requires precise phys-
iology and pathophysiology. Drug Discov Today February 2018;23(2):286e99.
[73] Chappell LC, Seed PT, Briley AL, Kelly FJ, Lee R, Hunt BJ, et al. Effect of antioxidants
on the occurrence of pre-eclampsia in women at increased risk: a randomised trial.
Lancet September 1999;354(9181):810e6.
References
109
[74] Rumbold A, Duley L, Crowther CA, Haslam RR. Antioxidants for preventing
pre-eclampsia. In: Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth GROUP, editor. Cochrane
database syst rev [Internet]; January 23, 2008 [Cited 2020 May 18]; Available from:
http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/14651858.CD004227.pub3.
[75] Fraser WD, Audibert F, Bujold E, Leduc L, Xu H, Boulvain M, et al. The vitamin E
debate: implications for ongoing trials of pre-eclampsia prevention. BJOG Int J Obstet
Gynaecol June 2005;112(6):684e8.
[76] Lindheimer MD, Sibai BM. Antioxidant supplementation in pre-eclampsia. Lancet
April 2006;367(9517):1119e20.
[77] Whitehead CL, Walker SP. Consider pregnancy in COVID-19 therapeutic drug and
vaccine trials. The Lancet 2020 May;395(10237):e92.e22.
[78] Dashraath P, Nielsen-Saines K, Madhi SA, Baud D. COVID-19 vaccines and neglected
pregnancy. The Lancet 2020 Sep;396(10252):e22.
[79] Heath PT, Le Doare K, Khalil A. Inclusion of pregnant women in COVID-19 vaccine
development. Lancet Infect Dis 2020 Sep;20(9):1007e8.
[80] Klein SL, Creisher PS, Burd I. COVID-19 vaccine testing in pregnant females is
necessary. J Clin Invest 2021 Mar;1131(5):e147553.
[81] Rasmussen SA, Kelley CF, Horton JP, Jamieson DJ. Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19) Vaccines and Pregnancy: What Obstetricians Need to Know. Obstet
Gynecol. 2021 Mar;137(3):408e14.
[82] Villar J, Ariff S, Gunier RB, Thiruvengadam R, Rauch S, Kholin A, et al. Maternal and
Neonatal Morbidity and Mortality Among Pregnant Women With and Without COVID-
19 Infection: The INTERCOVID Multinational Cohort Study. JAMA Pediatr [Internet].
2021 Apr 22 [cited 2021 Jun 17]; Available from: https://jamanetwork.com/journals/
jamapediatrics/fullarticle/2779182.
110
CHAPTER 7 Conducting randomized controlled pharmaceutical trials
Pharmacogenomics
in pregnancy*
8
David M. Haas, Jennifer L. Grasch, David A. Flockhart
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, United States
8.1 Pharmacogenomics
If it were not for the great variability among individuals, medicine might as well
be a science and not an art.
Sir William Osler (1892).
While much drug development and many clinical practice guidelines do not
directly address variability in drug response, and in many cases assume that the
effects of drugs on patients can generally be predicted, the evidence indicates other-
wise. Signiﬁcant numbers of patients do not respond to many medications, and
adverse events that accompany drug therapy often compromise the quality of life
of patients, limiting compliance with therapy, and can even be fatal in rare circum-
stances. The reasons for this variability in drug response often lie in easily accessible
clinical factors including disease severity, age, weight, gender, ethnicity, or druge
drug interactions. Other factors may also be important, however, and in situations
where readily available clinical predictors such as these are inadequate, alternative
biomarkers of drug response can be used. In many situations the need for new
biomarkers is urgent, perhaps most clearly in the case of diseases such as psychiatric
disease or cancer, where considerable morbidity is incurred when therapy is ineffec-
tive or impossibly toxic for individual patients.
While improved efﬁcacy is clearly a goal of the new era of “personalized med-
icine” heralded by the development of increasingly sophisticated new biomarkers of
drug response, the occurrence of unanticipated adverse effects is also of great
concern. It is clear that considerable damage is done to the public health by such
adverse events. In one of the largest studies of in-hospital morbidity published to
date, the incidence of serious adverse drug reactions (ADRs) was 6.7%, of fatal
ADRs was 0.32%, and it was estimated that of 2 million patients, 216,000 experi-
enced serious ADRs and over 100,000 had fatal ADRs in 1 year, making these
reactions between the fourth and sixth leading cause of death [1]. The cost was
CHAPTER
* We wish to thank and recognize Dr. David A. Flockhart’s contribution to the original version of this
chapter and for his continued inspiration of advancing pharmacogenomics and individualized pharma-
cotherapy in pregnancy even after his passing.
111
Clinical Pharmacology During Pregnancy. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818902-3.00001-4
Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
estimated at more than 100 billion dollars per year in 1994. Even with advances in
alerts, electronic records, and other safety checks, it is estimated that ADRs cause an
increase of over $5 billion to US health-care payers from injectable drugs alone [2].
It follows that biomarkers that can predict, and also prevent adverse events, would
also be of great potential value.
Biomarkers of drug response in clinical practice are far from new. Tests such as
the international normalized ratio (INR) used to monitor warfarin response, the
presence of estrogen or progesterone receptors on breast tumors used to guide anti-
estrogenic therapy, and the testing of patients with HIVor hepatitis C for viral loads
are all a routine part of daily practice that health-care professionals have become
comfortable with. We have learned that clinically useful biomarkers of drug
response are of most value in situations where there is great variability in response,
and a clear clinical decision, such as a change in drug, dose, or therapeutic approach,
results from a test. It is equally clear that a test must have iterative value over exist-
ing easily available clinical predictors in order to be useful. For example, a test
designed to predict the efﬁcacy of an antihypertensive agent that had less predictive
ability than routine measurement of blood pressure would be of little value.
The advent of genomics has brought a series of powerful new tools to this
predictive science. While proteomics and metabolomics show great promise, it is
with germline genomics, the study of the genetic sequence that we inherit from
our parents, that we have the most experience. There are a number of reasons
why the science of pharmacogenetics (or pharmacogenomics) appears valuable in
this context. Not least among these are the simple facts that DNA is very stable
and easy to amplify, and that there exists a map of the human genome and of the
international hapmap (http://www.genome.gov/10001688). In addition, the cost of
DNA testing continues to drop dramatically.
While many deﬁnitions of the differences between the science of pharmacoge-
netics and that of pharmacogenomics have been put forward, a useful distinction
appears to be simply that “pharmacogenetics” refers to the study of individual
candidate genes, while “pharmacogenomics” refers to the study of whole pathways
of genes, and indeed the entire genome.
8.2 Genetics and polymorphisms
Genetic variation in the sequence of about 3 billion nucleotide pairs that make up our
DNA comes in many forms, but the most common differences between people are in
the form of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). These are single letter nucle-
otide changes and they are referred to as a “polymorphism” if they occur in 1% or
more of the population. This is because variants that are that common tend to be
stably present in a given population, whereas variants present at less than 1% tend
to drift out. There are 12e15 million of such variants, and they have been meticu-
lously cataloged by the Human Genome Project in the publicly available database
called dbSNP (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/SNP/). Since SNPs are the
112
CHAPTER 8 Pharmacogenomics in pregnancy
most common and easily accessible form of variability, they form the basis of the
ﬁrst genome-wide association studies (GWASs) testing that has been used to test
for associations between common variants in the genome and nearly every form
of human pathology (http://www.genome.gov/gwastudies/).
Other important forms of variation include deletions and insertions of sequence,
variable number tandem repeats of short sequences that are clustered together and ori-
ented in the same direction [3], and copy number variation: regions of the sequence
that are copied with high ﬁdelity within the genome itself. It has been estimated
that such regions constitute up to 12% of the entire sequence in the genome [4].
Since only about 1.5% of the human genome sequence is used for the w24,000
genes that code for proteins in humans, we presume that not all of it is relevant to
therapeutic response, and that not all of this variability has functional or clinically
meaningful consequence. That said, large numbers of variants that inﬂuence
function via “nonsynonymous” changes in coding SNPs (cSNPs) have been found,
and a growing number of functionally important variants in intronic and regulatory
regions have also been identiﬁed [5].
The use of GWASs to identify new genetic associations between SNPs and drug
response has begun and already a signiﬁcant number of important discoveries have
resulted. These include the discovery of the SLC transporter with the muscle toxicity
incurred by the use of the statin class of drugs [6], and of a gene in the IL-17 pathway
with the musculoskeletal toxicity associated with the use of aromatase inhibitors in
patients with breast cancer [7]. It is widely appreciated that a large number of new
patterns of multiple genetic associations will result from this effort [8], such that
tests that involve large numbers of variants organized into a predictive pattern
will become commonplace. The use of such predictive patterns is already common-
place in breast cancer, where arrays that test for 20e100 RNA species in a tumor at
once are routinely used to predict the value of chemotherapy in individual patients
[9]. Additionally,
there
has
been
exciting work
at
implementing
CPAC-
recommended pharmacogenetic information related to treatments into health record
problem lists to help guide clinicians [10].
Within this large ﬁeld of research, our understanding of genetic factors that affect
drug disposition far exceeds our understanding of the factors affecting response.
This is in part because pharmacokinetic changes are relatively easy to measure
whereas the “phenotype” of overall drug response is more complex. In addition,
cloning of most drug-metabolizing enzymes and drug transport proteins within
the past 20 years combined with the genetic polymorphism information generated
by the sequencing of the human genome and cataloged in dbSNP have allowed a
comprehensive characterization of variability in drug metabolism and transport.
As the practice of searching for, identifying, and then using determined genetic char-
acteristics as predictors of drug effect becomes more common, it is clear that the
entire community of health-care providersdphysicians, pharmacists, and nursesd
will have to play an increasing role as the value of carefully deﬁned, valuable clinical
phenotypes and their individual genetic and genomic associations increases.
8.2 Genetics and polymorphisms
113
8.3 Genes that inﬂuence pharmacokinetic variability
It is well recognized that pharmacokinetic variability is most apparent for drugs that
are metabolized, and that the majority of this variability is in turn due to inconsis-
tencies in the ability of enzymes in the liver and gastrointestinal tract to carry out
drug metabolism. A growing body of literature also makes clear that differences
in the activity of drug transporters in the kidney, bloodebrain barrier, liver, and at
the level of individual tissues between people contribute signiﬁcantly to pharmaco-
kinetic variability [11].
In terms of metabolic variation, the key enzymes involved include the cyto-
chrome P450 family of drug-metabolizing enzymes that carry out phase I drug
metabolism. Phase II enzymes, including the enzymes that carry out acetylation,
glucuronidation, sulfation, methylation, and the addition of glutathione, are also
important as they increase the solubility of hydrophobic small molecules, and
catalyze their removal from the body. Genetic variation in many of these pathway
enzymes contribute to drug concentrations and effects [12].
The ﬁrst genetic associations with drug therapy observed were those involving
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PDH) and sulfa drugs in African American
soldiers, and in N-acetyl transferase in patients taking isoniazid for tuberculosis.
Since then, 50 years of research on drugs metabolized by the cytochrome P450
enzymes has clearly documented CYP2B6, CYP2C9, CYP2D6, CYP2C19, and
CYP3A5 as the most important enzymes that exhibit important genetic alterations
(https://cpicpgx.org/guidelines/).
Cytochrome 2B6 is the primary metabolic route for the metabolism of drugs used
in the treatment of HIV, including the NNRTIs (nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors), nevirapine, and efavirenz [13], but also contributes importantly to the
metabolism of methadone [14], cyclophosphamide [15], and ketamine [16]. The
enzyme has reduced function in patients who carry the *6 allele [13], and this variant
has been associated with reduced rates of metabolism, and higher concentrations of
all these drugs.
CYP2C9 is widely recognized as the principal enzyme involved in the clearance
of the active S-enantiomer of warfarin. Genetic variants that notably reduce activity
result in higher S-warfarin concentrations and in turn lower required warfarin doses,
and this effect was obvious even when a GWAS testing thousands of genes was
carried out as identiﬁed [17].
CYP2D6 is the most studied of the genetically variable cytochrome P450 en-
zymes. This is one of the most highly polymorphic CYP enzymes, with over 100
allelic variants and subvariants identiﬁed [18]. Variants that result in complete
“knockout” or loss of enzyme activity are present in 7% of Caucasian populations,
and in 2%e5% of African and Asian populations [19]. In addition, the *10 allelic
variants that decreases but does not eliminate activity is present in more than 40%
of Asians, and similarly the *17 alleles reduces activity in 10%e20% of Africans
[19]. These polymorphisms result in clinically important changes in the metabolism
of w20% of drugs including codeine [20], tamoxifen [21], a large number of the
114
CHAPTER 8 Pharmacogenomics in pregnancy
beta-blocker class of drugs that are metabolized, and the majority of clinically avail-
able antidepressants, including ﬂuoxetine, paroxetine, and venlafaxine. Changes in
the concentrations of these drugs and their metabolites brought about by CYP2D6
genetic variability have been intensely investigated [22], and those with venlafaxine
appear to be sufﬁcient to result in clinically signiﬁcant changes and recommenda-
tions for dosing changes [23]. A notable example of genetic variation within the
CYP2D6 gene is the presence of copy number variation, such that up to 13 copies
of the entire gene have been shown to exist in some families, and to be passed
down through the generations in a Mendelian manner [24].
CYP2C19 is also genetically variable, with loss-of-function variants designated
as *2 and *3 that are present in 15%e30% of Asian populations, and 2%e5% of
Caucasians and Africans. While a large number of drugs are metabolized by this
enzyme [25], it is the dominant route for the metabolism of clopidogrel to its active
metabolite, and this has resulted in a huge amount of attention because of the wide-
spread use of this drug in cardiology. Pharmacogenetic variability in CYP2C19 has
been associated with alterations in platelet function during clopidogrel therapy [26]
that has been clearly associated with cardiovascular outcomes in a large number of
studies [27].
Important variations in the genetics of CYP3A5 that inﬂuence concentrations of
vincristine [28], cyclosporine, tacrolimus [29], and notably of nifedipine used in
tocolysis [30] have been described. These variants associate with higher concentra-
tions of the parent drugs and can result in clinically signiﬁcant toxicities.
While these genes represent some of those most studied among pharmacogenetic
“VIP” genes, recent results of GWASs and targeted approaches across a wide range
of genes involved in the speciﬁc diseases have resulted in the development of
clinical tests. An easily accessible catalog of such genes has been collected by
the Pharmacogenetics and Genomics Knowledge Base (PharmGKB) at www.
pharmgkb.org. These tests can be utilized in a CPIC guidance-informed panel to
help with clinical care [10].
8.4 The current state of pharmacogenetic testing
Pharmacogenetic testing has the potential to aid in the diagnosis and treatment of
multiple conditions. A recent explosion of commercially marketed tests has sur-
faced, often with direct-to-consumer marketing. In fact, as of June 2020, CPIC
had speciﬁc guidance information for 127 unique genes related to 240 unique drugs
(cpicpgx.org/genes-drugs/). Table 8.1 displays drugs noted to have required or rec-
ommended testing. An additional 125 drugs had either “actionable” or “informative”
pharmacogenetic data (cpicpgx.org/genes-drugs).
Several pharmacogenetic tests have risen to become standard of care in medical
therapy. Patients with colon cancer are often treated with antieepidermal growth
factor receptor (anti-EGFR) monoclonal antibody therapy in the form of cetuximab.
A mutation in the KRAS gene codon 12 or 13 leads to resistance to cetuximab
8.4 The current state of pharmacogenetic testing
115
therapy [31]. Thus, the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) has recom-
mended that all patients with metastatic colorectal carcinoma who are candidates for
anti-EGFR therapy should have their tumor tested for KRAS mutations. If codon 12
or 13 mutations are detected, then the patients should not receive anti-EGFR therapy
as part of their treatment [31].
The cutaneous adverse drug reaction StevenseJohnson syndrome (SJS) is a
serious concern for people taking drugs such as abacavir and carbamazepine
[32,33]. Pharmacogenetic screening for the HLA-B*5701 can help identify those
who are most at risk for developing this severe adverse drug reaction with abacavir.
Carriers of this HLA-B allele should not be given abacavir. This test is now widely
used for screening patients in need of abacavir to avoid SJS in the developed world
[34]. In addition, HLA-B*1502 testing is becoming standard of care for Asians
prescribed carbamazepine to avoid severe cutaneous drug reactions [32].
For those with chronic myelogenous leukemia, imatinib inhibits the BCR-ABL-
activated tyrosine kinase, interrupting signal transduction pathways that would
otherwise lead to leukemic transformation. In this way, imatinib has led to
Table 8.1 Fifteen drugs/therapies and their available required or
recommended pharmacogenetic tests as of June 2020.
Drug/therapy
Test
Abacavira
HLA-B*5701
Ivacaftora
CTFR
Carbamazepinea
HLA-B*1502
Carglumic acida
NAGS
Clopidogrel
CYP2C19
Divalproex sodiuma and valproic acida
POLG
Eliglustata
CYP2D6
Oxcarbazepine
HLA-B
Pegloticasea
G6PD
Pimozidea
CYP2D6
Primaquinea
G6PD
Azathioprine and mercaptopurine
TPMT, NUDT15
Rasburicasea
G6PD
Siponimoda
CYP2C9
Tafenoquinea
G6PD
Terbenazinea
CYP2D6
Thioguanine
TPMT, NUDT15
Velaglucerase alfaa
GBA
Other commonly used drugs with actionable pharmacogenetic information: warfarin, clopidogrel,
peginterferon, tamoxifen, clozapine, 5-ﬂuorouracil, venlafaxine, escitalopram, citalopram, carvedilol,
chloroquine, ﬂibanserin, duloxetine, metoclopramide, esomeprazole, glipizide, norﬂoxacin,
nitrofurantoin, phenytoin, tramadol, and codeine. Full list available from CPIC website: cpicpgx.org/
genes-drug.
a Standard of care per the CPIC guidelines requires testing before giving the drug.
116
CHAPTER 8 Pharmacogenomics in pregnancy
impressive survival beneﬁts in these patients [35]. However, a mutation in the BCR-
ABL gene negates the beneﬁts of imatinib. As imatinib is an expensive therapy,
pharmacogenetic testing is employed in this scenario to avoid prescribing a costly
therapy that would not be as beneﬁcial in patients with the mutation.
Commercially available pharmacogenetic testing panels such as Oncotype Dx
and MammaPrint have been promoted for women about to undergo chemotherapy
for breast cancer [36,37]. ASCO and other organizations have included some of
these tests in their guidelines as options to predict beneﬁt, particularly from tamox-
ifen therapy [38]. These are examples of commercially available tests that are not yet
standard of care recommendations. Other tests that similarly have data supporting
their potential role for individualizing therapy are the CYP2D6 testing for tamoxifen
[39,40] or venlafaxine [23], CYP2C19 testing for clopidogrel antiplatelet therapy
[27], and CYP2C9 and VKCoR testing for those starting warfarin therapy [41e43].
Other tests are available for different conditions and/or drug therapies. With the
advent of new pharmacogenetic tests, pharmacogenetic modeling strategies, and the
need for individualized pharmacotherapy to avoid adverse events, pharmacogenetic
testing continues to expand, with multiple vendors and labs advertising direct to
consumers.
8.5 Potential therapeutic areas for pharmacogenomics in
pregnancy
Most pregnant women take drugs for various conditions. Epidemiologic studies have
documented that over 90% of pregnant women take a prescription drug, with most
taking more than one [44e46]. Even after eliminating prenatal vitamins and supple-
mental iron, over 70% of pregnant women take a prescription drug during the course
of their pregnancies [45,46]. Polypharmacy, deﬁned as taking at least ﬁve drugs, is
also common in pregnancy [46]. Many of the drugs commonly consumed by
pregnant women are potential candidates for pharmacogenetic testing. Based on
the drug metabolism pathway or receptors that serve as targets, pregnancy therapeu-
tics may be a ripe area for pharmacogenetics.
As the cause of the majority of neonatal morbidity and mortality, preterm labor is
a major focus of obstetric care and research. Two speciﬁc pharmacogenetic studies
in preterm birth prevention using progestins have been published. One of the studies
demonstrated that response to progestin, speciﬁcally 17-OHPC, had some variability
based on genotype [47]. In fact, women in certain groups with certain haplotypes
actually had higher rates of preterm birth when they received 17-OHPC. If repli-
cated, this could have implications for identifying women who might actually be
harmed by this preventive therapy. The use of tocolytic medications to stop uterine
contractions is commonplace but of varying success [48]. Many tocolytics are sub-
strates for polymorphic drug-metabolizing enzymes. Nifedipine is a calcium chan-
nel blocker commonly used in obstetrics to stop contraction and delay birth [49].
8.5 Potential therapeutic areas for pharmacogenomics in pregnancy
117
Nifedipine is metabolized by the CYP3A family. Recent studies have documented
that CYP3A5 polymorphisms and concomitant use of known CYP3A inhibitors
can impact the concentration of nifedipine in maternal blood [30]. Another potential
pharmacogenetic target in preterm labor therapy includes indomethacin. Indometh-
acin, a nonsteroidal antiinﬂammatory drug used to inhibit contractions, is
metabolized by the polymorphic CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 [50]. SNPs in these
enzymes can affect the concentrations of these tocolytics. As these two drugs may
be the better ﬁrst-line agents for preterm labor [51], these pharmacogenetic implica-
tions should be further interrogated. Additionally related to preterm birth, women at
risk for preterm delivery are given antenatal corticosteroids to improve neonatal
outcomes. Preliminary investigations have documented that for women receiving
betamethasone for this indication, some maternal and fetal SNP variants in
CYP3A5 and CYP3A7 were associated with differences in neonatal respiratory out-
comes [52,53]. Thus, there may be key genetic variants in betamethasone metabolic
and response pathways that may aid in understanding variability in newborn
outcomes after preterm birth.
Depression is common in pregnant women. The selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs) are the ﬁrst-line agents to treat depression and other mood disor-
ders in pregnancy. The SSRI drugs are metabolized by many different polymorphic
enzymes (Table 8.2). Depression is commonly noted to be undertreated in preg-
nancy. It is possible that some of the undertreatment may be due to the combination
of pregnancy physiology impacting the drug concentration, as well as pharmacoge-
netic polymorphism causing reduced drug concentrations. The impact of SNPs in
these enzymes on the effectiveness of SSRI therapy is an area of active investigation
[54,55].
Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy (NVP) affects up to 80% of pregnant women
[56,57]. Both mild and severe cases of NVP have a signiﬁcant impact on the quality
of a woman’s life and contribute signiﬁcantly to health-care costs and time lost from
work [57,58]. Many antiemetic drugs are used with various mechanisms of action to
Table 8.2 Drug-metabolizing enzymes for SSRIs.
Drug
Enzymes responsible for metabolism
Fluoxetine (Prozac)
CYP2D6, CYP2C9
Sertraline (Zoloft)
CYP2D6, CYP2C9, CYP2b^, CYP2C19, CYP3A4
Venlafaxine (Effexor)
CYP2D6
Paroxetine (Paxil)
CYP2D6
Fluvoxamine (Luvox)
CYP1A2
Bupropion (Wellbutrin, Zyban)a
CYP2B6
Citalopram (Celexa)
CYP3A4, CYP2C19
Escitalopram (Lexapro)
CYP3A4, CYP2C19
Duloxetine (Cymbalta, Irenka)
CYP2D6
a Bupropion is not an SSRI but rather a serotoninenorepinephrine reuptake inhibitor.
118
CHAPTER 8 Pharmacogenomics in pregnancy
counter NVP. These include vitamin B6, doxylamine, promethazine, metoclopra-
mide, and ondansetron to name a few. Learning from anesthesia research, emesis
and the effectiveness of antiemetic drugs are potential pharmacogenetic targets.
Ondansetron is metabolized by CYP2D6. Extensive and ultrarapid CYP2D6
metabolizers have been linked to ondansetron failure [59]. Also, the polymorphic
serotonin receptor 5HT3 facilitates the role of serotonin as a mediator of nausea
and vomiting [60]. Variants in the 5-HT3B receptor are linked to increased nausea
and vomiting due to increased response to serotonin binding [61]. 5HT3 receptor
variants are also associated with the severity of NVP (personal communication,
data from our center). Thus, it is possible that identifying women with receptor
variants with NVP may lead providers to utilize different medication to control a
woman’s NVP. The individualized treatment of NVP using pharmacogenetics is
also an area of investigation.
Hypertension and preeclampsia are common complications of pregnancy. The
use of antihypertensive drugs during the antenatal and delivery time frame is crucial
given these complications contribution to maternal mortality and morbidity [62].
Multiple drugs are used to control hypertension in pregnancy. However, there are
few pharmacogenetic studies regarding the response to antihypertensive drugs
during pregnancy. Some genes have been shown to associate with overall drug
response but less with individual drug responses [63]. As more pregnant women
have genotypes available, further investigation into this area should follow.
These are just a few of the areas of drug therapy in pregnancy where pharmaco-
genetics may play a role [55,64e66]. As obstetrics moves into the genomics era,
active pharmacogenetic research to help individualize therapy is ongoing.
Maximizing the beneﬁt for the mother and minimizing the risks to both the mother
and fetus are the tenets of individualized pharmacotherapy. With both a mother and
fetus to consider, optimizing therapeutics in pregnancy is pivotal. As a tool, pharma-
cogenetics may provide insights to help achieve maximal beneﬁt with minimal risk.
8.6 Study designs and approaches to pharmacogenetics
trials
Gathering quality trial data in pharmacogenetics is often difﬁcult. Genetic testing is
expensive and new SNPs are discovered frequently. However, there are key compo-
nents of pharmacogenetic analyses that can help propel the ﬁeld forward.
In general, analyses of trials focus on the mean changes in outcome measures of
two or more groups. The outliers are often eliminated or statistically compensated
for. However, in the ﬁeld of pharmacogenetics, it is often those same outliers, the
subjects in the tails of the bell-shaped curve, who are the most important to analyze.
The subjects who have the most robust response to a drug or the poorest response to
a drug are often the ones who may have a genetic polymorphism in the metabolic or
receptor pathway that is causing this. For instance, for subjects who receive no
8.6 Study designs and approaches to pharmacogenetics trials
119
beneﬁt from a drug may have an SNP in an enzyme like CYP2D6 that makes them
an ultrarapid metabolizer, and thus not enough drug is available to achieve the
desired effect. In that case, knowing the CYP2D6 status ahead of time could lead
to either increased dose or choice of a different drug.
Prospectively obtaining genotype information in a randomized clinical trial
setting is difﬁcult logistically. While genotyping costs are decreasing, the approach
to genotyping needs to be considered. Assaying for particular candidate pathway
genes may be efﬁcient but could miss a key contributor. Using genome-wide asso-
ciation assays or full DNA sequencing may be too expensive and give extraneous
data. In addition, these become analytically complex. Using a pathway-informed
GWASs approach may be a practical way to limit the data needed and improve
the efﬁciency of using the information.
Because of the expense and time needed to genotype a screening population for
entry into a trial, newer adaptive trial designs have been utilized to make mid-study
adjustments [67]. These adjustments may be based on genotypes. For instance,
halfway through a drug trial, the subjects in the study could be genotyped in a batch
to save on cost. Then an interim analysis might indicate that subjects with a certain
SNP did not beneﬁt at all at current doses. An adaptive trial design can then allow for
dose adjustments for subjects with those SNPs for the remainder of the trial. In this
way, adaptive trial designs can improve the efﬁciency of trials, allowing researchers
to demonstrate effectiveness or ineffectiveness sooner, improving subject safety and
yielding substantial time and cost savings [67].
As pharmacogenetic studies become more prevalent and the cost of genotyping is
reduced, clinical trials of individualized pharmacotherapy will become more
common. Upfront genotyping and stratiﬁed randomization based on genotyping
are beginning to appear in studies. In these ways, pharmacogenomics is emerging
as an increasingly important tool that will be available for providers in the future
for individualizing drug therapy.
References
[1] Lazarou J, Pomeranz BH, Corey PN. Incidence of adverse drug reactions in hospitalized
patients: a meta-analysis of prospective studies. Jama 1998;279(15):1200e5.
[2] Lahue BJ, Pyenson B, Iwasaki K, Blumen HE, Forray S, Rothschild JM. National
burden of preventable adverse drug events associated with inpatient injectable medica-
tions: healthcare and medical professional liability costs. Am Health Drug Beneﬁts
2012;5(7):1e10.
[3] Naslund K, Saetre P, von Salome J, Bergstrom TF, Jareborg N, Jazin E. Genome-wide
prediction of human VNTRs. Genomics 2005;85(1):24e35.
[4] Sebat J, Lakshmi B, Troge J, Alexander J, Young J, Lundin P, et al. Large-scale copy
number polymorphism in the human genome. Science 2004;305(5683):525e8.
[5] Wang L, Weinshilboum RM. Pharmacogenomics: candidate gene identiﬁcation, func-
tional validation and mechanisms. Hum Mol Genet 2008;17(R2):R174e9.
120
CHAPTER 8 Pharmacogenomics in pregnancy
[6] Voora D, Shah SH, Spasojevic I, Ali S, Reed CR, Salisbury BA, et al. The SLCO1B1*5
genetic variant is associated with statin-induced side effects. J Am Coll Cardiol 2009;
54(17):1609e16.
[7] Ingle JN, Schaid DJ, Goss PE, Liu M, Mushiroda T, Chapman JA, et al. Genome-wide
associations and functional genomic studies of musculoskeletal adverse events in
women receiving aromatase inhibitors. J Clin Oncol 2010;28(31):4674e82.
[8] Motsinger-Reif AA, Jorgenson E, Relling MV, Kroetz DL, Weinshilboum R, Cox NJ,
et al. Genome-wide association studies in pharmacogenomics: successes and lessons.
Pharmacogenet. Genomics 2013;23(8):383e94.
[9] van’t Veer LJ, Bernards R. Enabling personalized cancer medicine through analysis of
gene-expression patterns. Nature 2008;452(7187):564e70.
[10] Eadon MT, Desta Z, Levy KD, Decker BS, Pierson RC, Pratt VM, et al. Implementation
of a pharmacogenomics consult service to support the INGENIOUS trial. Clin Pharma-
col Ther 2016;100(1):63e6.
[11] Cropp CD, Yee SW, Giacomini KM. Genetic variation in drug transporters in ethnic
populations. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2008;84(3):412e6.
[12] Crettol S, Petrovic N, Murray M. Pharmacogenetics of phase I and phase II drug
metabolism. Curr Pharmaceut Des 2010;16(2):204e19.
[13] Ward BA, Gorski JC, Jones DR, Hall SD, Flockhart DA, Desta Z. The cytochrome P450
2B6 (CYP2B6) is the main catalyst of efavirenz primary and secondary metabolism:
implication for HIV/AIDS therapy and utility of efavirenz as a substrate marker of
CYP2B6 catalytic activity. J Pharmacol Exp Therapeut 2003;306(1):287e300.
[14] Totah RA, Sheffels P, Roberts T, Whittington D, Thummel K, Kharasch ED. Role of
CYP2B6 in stereoselective human methadone metabolism. Anesthesiology 2008;
108(3):363e74.
[15] Takada K, Arefayene M, Desta Z, Yarboro CH, Boumpas DT, Balow JE, et al. Cyto-
chrome P450 pharmacogenetics as a predictor of toxicity and clinical response to pulse
cyclophosphamide in lupus nephritis. Arthritis Rheum 2004;50(7):2202e10.
[16] Yanagihara Y, Kariya S, Ohtani M, Uchino K, Aoyama T, Yamamura Y, et al. Involve-
ment of CYP2B6 in n-demethylation of ketamine in human liver microsomes. Drug
Metab Dispos 2001;29(6):887e90.
[17] Cooper GM, Johnson JA, Langaee TY, Feng H, Stanaway IB, Schwarz UI, et al.
A genome-wide scan for common genetic variants with a large inﬂuence on warfarin
maintenance dose. Blood 2008;112(4):1022e7.
[18] Del Tredici AL, Malhotra A, Dedek M, Espin F, Roach D, Zhu G-D, et al. Frequency of
CYP2D6 alleles including structural variants in the United States. Front Pharmacol
2018;9:305.
[19] Bernard S, Neville KA, Nguyen AT, Flockhart DA. Interethnic differences in genetic
polymorphisms of CYP2D6 in the U.S. population: clinical implications. Oncol
2006;11(2):126e35.
[20] Caraco Y, Sheller J, Wood AJ. Pharmacogenetic determination of the effects of codeine
and prediction of drug interactions. J Pharmacol Exp Therapeut 1996;278(3):1165e74.
[21] Jin Y, Desta Z, Stearns V, Ward B, Ho H, Lee KH, et al. CYP2D6 genotype, antidepres-
sant use, and tamoxifen metabolism during adjuvant breast cancer treatment. J Natl
Cancer Inst 2005;97(1):30e9.
[22] Preskorn SH. Pharmacogenomics, informatics, and individual drug therapy in psychia-
try: past, present and future. J Psychopharmacol 2006;20(4 Suppl. l):85e94.
References
121
[23] Lobello KW, Preskorn SH, Guico-Pabia CJ, Jiang Q, Paul J, Nichols AI, et al. Cyto-
chrome P450 2D6 phenotype predicts antidepressant efﬁcacy of venlafaxine: a second-
ary analysis of 4 studies in major depressive disorder. J Clin Psychiatr 2010;71(11):
1482e7.
[24] Ingelman-Sundberg M, Sim SC, Gomez A, Rodriguez-Antona C. Inﬂuence of cyto-
chrome P450 polymorphisms on drug therapies: pharmacogenetic, pharmacoepigenetic
and clinical aspects. Pharmacol Ther 2007;116(3):496e526.
[25] Desta Z, Zhao X, Shin JG, Flockhart DA. Clinical signiﬁcance of the cytochrome P450
2C19 genetic polymorphism. Clin Pharmacokinet 2002;41(12):913e58.
[26] Beitelshees AL, Horenstein RB, Vesely MR, Mehra MR, Shuldiner AR. Pharmacoge-
netics and clopidogrel response in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary
interventions. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2011;89(3):455e9.
[27] Scott SA, Sangkuhl K, Gardner EE, Stein CM, Hulot JS, Johnson JA, et al. Clinical
pharmacogenetics implementation consortium guidelines for cytochrome P450-2C19
(CYP2C19) genotype and clopidogrel therapy. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2011;90(2):
328e32.
[28] Egbelakin A, Ferguson MJ, MacGill EA, Lehmann AS, Topletz AR, Quinney SK, et al.
Increased risk of vincristine neurotoxicity associated with low CYP3A5 expression
genotype in children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2011;
56(3):361e7.
[29] Ferraris JR, Argibay PF, Costa L, Jimenez G, Coccia PA, Ghezzi LF, et al. Inﬂuence of
CYP3A5 polymorphism on tacrolimus maintenance doses and serum levels after renal
transplantation: age dependency and pharmacological interaction with steroids. Pediatr
Transplant 2011;15(5):525e32.
[30] Haas DM, Quinney SK, McCormick CL, Jones DR, Renbarger JL. A pilot study of the
impact of genotype on nifedipine pharmacokinetics when used as a tocolytic. J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med 2012;25(4):419e23.
[31] Allegra CJ, Jessup JM, Somerﬁeld MR, Hamilton SR, Hammond EH, Hayes DF, et al.
American Society of Clinical Oncology provisional clinical opinion: testing for KRAS
gene mutations in patients with metastatic colorectal carcinoma to predict response to
anti-epidermal growth factor receptor monoclonal antibody therapy. J Clin Oncol 2009;
27(12):2091e6.
[32] Aihara M. Pharmacogenetics of cutaneous adverse drug reactions. J Dermatol 2011;
38(3):246e54.
[33] Chung W-H, Hung S-I, Chen Y-T. Human leukocyte antigens and drug hypersensitivity.
Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2007;7(4):317e23.
[34] Phillips EJ, Mallal SA. Pharmacogenetics of drug hypersensitivity. Pharmacogenomics
2010;11(7):973e87.
[35] Peterson C. Drug therapy of cancer. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2011;67(5):437e47.
[36] Chen E, Tong KB, Malin JL. Cost-effectiveness of 70-gene MammaPrint signature in
node-negative breast cancer. Am J Manag Care 2010;16(12):e333e42.
[37] Mook S, Van’t Veer LJ, Rutgers EJ, Piccart-Gebhart MJ, Cardoso F. Individualization of
therapy using Mammaprint: from development to the MINDACT Trial. Cancer Geno-
mics Proteomics 2007;4(3):147e55.
[38] Harris L, Fritsche H, Mennel R, Norton L, Ravdin P, Taube S, et al. American Society of
Clinical Oncology 2007 update of recommendations for the use of tumor markers in
breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 2007;25(33):5287e312.
122
CHAPTER 8 Pharmacogenomics in pregnancy
[39] Borges S, Desta Z, Jin Y, Faouzi A, Robarge JD, Philips S, et al. Composite functional
genetic and comedication CYP2D6 activity score in predicting tamoxifen drug expo-
sure among breast cancer patients. J Clin Pharmacol 2010;50(4):450e8.
[40] Higgins MJ, Rae JM, Flockhart DA, Hayes DF, Stearns V. Pharmacogenetics of tamox-
ifen: who should undergo CYP2D6 genetic testing? J Natl Compr Cancer Netw 2009;
7(2):203e13.
[41] Grossniklaus D. Testing of VKORC1 and CYP2C9 alleles to guide warfarin dosing.
Test category: pharmacogenomic (treatment). PLoS Curr 2010;2.
[42] Moreau C, Pautas E, Gouin-Thibault I, Golmard JL, Mahe I, Mulot C, et al. Predicting
the warfarin maintenance dose in elderly inpatients at treatment initiation: accuracy of
dosing algorithms incorporating or not VKORC1/CYP2C9 genotypes. J Thromb Hae-
mostasis 2011;9(4):711e8.
[43] Zambon CF, Pengo V, Padrini R, Basso D, Schiavon S, Fogar P, et al. VKORC1,
CYP2C9 and CYP4F2 genetic-based algorithm for warfarin dosing: an Italian retro-
spective study. Pharmacogenomics 2011;12(1):15e25.
[44] Glover DD, Amonkar M, Rybeck BF, Tracy TS. Prescription, over-the-counter, and
herbal medicine use in a rural, obstetric population. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2003;
188(4):1039e45.
[45] Refuerzo JS, Blackwell SC, Sokol RJ, Lajeunesse L, Firchau K, Kruger M, et al. Use of
over-the-counter medications and herbal remedies in pregnancy. Am J Perinatol 2005;
22(6):321e4.
[46] Haas DM, Marsh DJ, Dang DT, Parker CB, Wing DA, Simhan HN, et al. Prescription
and other medication use in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 2018;131(5):789e98.
[47] Manuck TA, Lai Y, Meis PJ, Dombrowski MP, Sibai B, Spong CY, et al. Progesterone
receptor polymorphisms and clinical response to 17-alpha-hydroxyprogesterone
caproate. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2011;205(2):135.e1e9.
[48] ACOG practice bulletin. Management of preterm labor. Number 43, May 2003. Obstet
Gynecol 2003;101:1039e47.
[49] Haas DM, Caldwell DM, Kirkpatrick P, McIntosh JJ, Welton NJ. Tocolytic therapy for
preterm delivery: systematic review and network meta-analysis. BMJ 2012;345:e6226.
[50] Nakajima M, Inoue T, Shimada N, Tokudome S, Yamamoto T, Kuroiwa Y. Cytochrome
P450 2C9 catalyzes indomethacin O-demethylation in human liver microsomes. Drug
Metab Dispos 1998;26(3):261e6.
[51] Haas DM, Imperiale TF, Kirkpatrick PR, Klein RW, Zollinger TW, Golichowski AM.
Tocolytic therapy: a meta-analysis and decision analysis. Obstet Gynecol 2009;
113(3):585e94.
[52] Haas DM, Dantzer J, Lehmann AS, Philips S, Skaar TC, McCormick CL, et al. The
impact of glucocorticoid polymorphisms on markers of neonatal respiratory disease
after antenatal betamethasone administration. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2013;208(3):
215.e1e6.
[53] Haas DM, Lai D, Sharma S, Then J, Kho A, Flockhart DA, et al. Steroid pathway genes
and neonatal respiratory distress after betamethasone use in anticipated preterm birth.
Reprod Sci 2016;23(5):680e6.
[54] Porcelli S, Drago A, Fabbri C, Gibiino S, Calati R, Serretti A. Pharmacogenetics of
antidepressant response. J Psychiatry Neurosci 2011;36(2):87e113.
[55] Haas DM, Hebert MF, Soldin OP, Flockhart DA, Madadi P, Nocon JJ, et al. Pharmaco-
therapy and pregnancy: highlights from the second international conference for individ-
ualized pharmacotherapy in pregnancy. Clin Transl Sci 2009;2(6):439e43.
References
123
[56] Emelianova S, Mazzotta P, Einarson A, Koren G. Prevalence and severity of nausea and
vomiting of pregnancy and effect of vitamin supplementation. Clin Invest Med 1999;
22(3):106e10.
[57] Mazzotta P, Maltepe C, Navioz Y, Magee LA, Koren G. Attitudes, management and
consequences of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy in the United States and Canada.
Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2000;70(3):359e65.
[58] Mazzotta P, Stewart D, Atanackovic G, Koren G, Magee LA. Psychosocial morbidity
among women with nausea and vomiting of pregnancy: prevalence and association
with anti-emetic therapy. J Psychosom Obstet Gynaecol 2000;21(3):129e36.
[59] Candiotti KA, Birnbach DJ, Lubarsky DA, Nhuch F, Kamat A, Koch WH, et al. The
impact of pharmacogenomics on postoperative nausea and vomiting: do CYP2D6 allele
copy number and polymorphisms affect the success or failure of ondansetron
prophylaxis? Anesthesiology 2005;102(3):543e9.
[60] Andrews PL, Bhandari P. The 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor antagonists as antiemetics:
preclinical evaluation and mechanism of action. Eur J Cancer 1993;29A(Suppl. 1):
S11e6.
[61] Krzywkowski K, Davies PA, Feinberg-Zadek PL, Brauner-Osborne H, Jensen AA.
High-frequency HTR3B variant associated with major depression dramatically aug-
ments the signaling of the human 5-HT3AB receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2008;105(2):722e7.
[62] Hypertension in pregnancy. Report of the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists’ Task Force on Hypertension in Pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 2013;
122(5):1122e31.
[63] Luizon MR, Palei AC, Cavalli RC, Sandrim VC. Pharmacogenetics in the treatment of
pre-eclampsia: current ﬁndings, challenges and perspectives. Pharmacogenomics 2017;
18(6):571e83.
[64] Haas DM, Gallauresi B, Shields K, Zeitlin D, Clark SM, Hebert MF, et al. Pharmaco-
therapy and pregnancy: highlights from the third international conference for individu-
alized pharmacotherapy in pregnancy. Clin Transl Sci 2011;4(3):204e9.
[65] Haas DM, Renbarger JL, Denne S, Ahmed MS, Easterling TR, Feibus K, et al. Pharma-
cotherapy and pregnancy: highlights from the ﬁrst international conference for individ-
ualized pharmacotherapy in pregnancy. Clin Transl Sci 2009;2(1):11e4.
[66] Manuck TA. Pharmacogenomics of preterm birth prevention and treatment. BJOG
2016;123(3):368e75.
[67] Cirulli J, McMillian WD, Saba M, Stenehjem D. Adaptive trial design: its growing role
in clinical research and implications for pharmacists. Am J Health Syst Pharm 2011;
68(9):807e13.
124
CHAPTER 8 Pharmacogenomics in pregnancy
Anesthetic drugs
9
Harry Soljak, Sarah Armstrong
Frimley Park Hospital, Surrey, United Kingdom
9.1 Introduction
The challenges of general and regional anesthesia in pregnancy are to optimize
maternal physiological function, preserve uteroplacental blood ﬂow and oxygen
delivery while avoiding unwanted effects of fetal exposure to drugs.
The likelihood of maternal and fetal exposure to anesthetic drugs is not insignif-
icant. Current evidence suggests that between 1% and 2% of pregnant women will
undergo a nonobstetric surgical procedure during pregnancy in developed nations
[1]. If absolutely necessary, surgery should be delayed to the second trimester of
pregnancy to reduce the risk of both teratogenicity and miscarriage, although there
is currently no ﬁrm evidence to support this approach. Elective surgery and therefore
anesthesia should be avoided in pregnancy if at all possible. Postnatally, surgery
should ideally take place only after the ﬁrst six postpartum weeks to allow resolution
of the physiological changes of pregnancy. Emergency surgery must proceed regard-
less of gestational age in order to preserve the life of the mother with the possible
adverse effects to the fetus included in the consent process.
At delivery, intervention rates involving the use of general or local anesthetics
vary widely across the world. Overall epidural rates (including operative delivery
and labor analgesia) are as high as 95% in some regions in the United States. There
is also an increasing overall rate of caesarean delivery worldwide, with the Domin-
ican Republic delivering 58.1% of babies via cesarean section [2]. The increasing
incidence of these procedures means more women are exposed to anesthetic drugs.
For cesarean delivery, regional anesthesia is preferred where possible as it mini-
mizes the risks associated with general anesthesia including pulmonary aspiration
of gastric contents, failed intubation, inappropriate maternal awareness, maternal
gastric ileus postoperatively, and fetal exposure to drugs. No studies have shown a
beneﬁcial effect on the outcome of pregnancy after regional anesthesia compared
to general anesthesia. Before the initiation of any anesthetic technique, resuscitation
facilities should be available for both mother and fetus.
CHAPTER
125
Clinical Pharmacology During Pregnancy. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818902-3.00020-8
Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
9.2 General anesthesia
General anesthetics may be divided into intravenous (IV) and inhaled volatile anes-
thetics. Indications for general anesthesia in pregnancy are listed in Table 9.1 and
include urgency of delivery due to maternal or fetal indications, or operative delivery
where regional anesthesia is not appropriate. As stated in other chapters, pharmaco-
kinetic and pharmacodynamic proﬁles are altered in pregnancy and drugs for general
anesthesia should be titrated as a result.
The uteroplacental circulation is not autoregulated and so fetal perfusion is
critically dependent on maternal systolic driving pressure. Hypotension in general
anesthesia is common. This is due to the combination of decreased systemic vascular
resistance in pregnancy due to progesterone, which is exacerbated by volatile or IV
anesthetic agents, and aortocaval compression from the gravid uterus. This is further
exacerbated if the patient is in the supine position. Obstetric patients after the ﬁrst
trimester should undergo general anesthesia in the supine position with 15 left
lateral tilt to reduce aortocaval compression. Meticulous attention should be paid
to the maintenance of maternal systolic blood pressure through the use of IV ﬂuids
and vasopressors to ensure adequate placental ﬂow.
9.3 Inhalational anesthetics
The minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of volatile agents is a term used to
describe the potency of anesthetic vapors. It is deﬁned as the concentration that
prevents movement in response to skin incision in 50% of unpremedicated subjects
studied at sea level (1 atm), in 100% oxygen. Hence, it is inversely related to
potency, and the more potent the agent, the lower the MAC value.
Although it is more than 160 years since the ﬁrst use of modern anesthetics, the
mechanism of action of volatile anesthetics still remains elusive [3]. Inhaled
anesthetic agents act in different ways at the level of the central nervous system
with pre- and postsynaptic effects found. They may disrupt synaptic transmission
by interfering with the release of excitatory or inhibitory neurotransmitters from
the presynaptic nerve terminal, by altering the reuptake of neurotransmitters or by
changing the binding of neurotransmitters to the postsynaptic receptor sites [4].
There is a high correlation between lipid solubility and anesthetic potency
Table 9.1 Indications for general anesthesia in pregnancy.
• Maternal disease/trauma requiring emergency surgery unsuitable for regional technique
• Urgent delivery of fetus (fetal or maternal threat)
• Maternal refusal of regional techniques
• Contraindications to regional technique (e.g., coagulopathy, local, or systemic infection)
• Failed or inadequate regional technique
• Delivery if at risk of obstetric major hemorrhage (e.g., placenta praevia or accreta)
126
CHAPTER 9 Anesthetic drugs
suggesting inhalational anesthetics have a hydrophobic site of action and direct
interaction with the neuronal plasma membrane is likely.
In pregnancy, neural tissues show increased sensitivity to effects of volatile
anesthetics. The MAC is reduced by 30% under the inﬂuence of progesterone and
endogenous endorphins [5,6]. The 25% increased alveolar minute volume from
the ﬁrst trimester [caused by both increases in respiratory rate (by 15%) and tidal
volume (by 40%)] leads to a more rapid induction of general anesthesia than in
the nonpregnant population if an inhalational induction technique were to be
used. In most cases of general anesthesia in the parturient, preoxygenation with
100% oxygen precedes rapid sequence IV induction with cricoid pressure to secure
the airway and to reduce the likelihood of pulmonary aspiration. This is followed by
maintenance with 0.5e1.0 MAC of volatile anesthetic agents in either an air/oxygen
or nitrous oxide/oxygen mix. Nitrous oxide has a rapid alveolar uptake and remains
an important adjunct to reduce the risk of awareness during emergency cesarean
delivery. Nitrous oxide, if administered in high concentrations for long periods
(more than 50% concentration for over 24 h), has been shown to be a weak teratogen
in rodents. Studies voicing concerns regarding nitrous oxide teratogenicity are not
supported in clinical practice to date [7]. Insufﬁcient general anesthesia or analgesia
may cause awareness and substantial maternal catecholamine release which is
generally considered to be more detrimental to the fetus. Awareness during cesarean
section is much more likely than during other procedures. The ﬁfth National Audit
Project (NAP5) in the United Kingdom found an incidence of awareness of 1:670
during cesarean section compared to 1:20,000 for all procedures combined [8].
The high lipid solubility and low-molecular weight of all commonly used vola-
tile anesthetics (isoﬂurane, sevoﬂurane, and desﬂurane) facilitate rapid transfer
across the uteroplacental unit to the fetus. Prolonged induction to delivery time
has been shown to result in lower Apgar scores in the fetus [9]. Low doses of volatile
anesthetics in combination with nitrous oxide may improve uterine blood ﬂow but
may also induce uterine relaxation. After the fetus is delivered, increasing concen-
trations of nitrous oxide, systemic opioids and IVoxytocin may be used to reduce the
amount of volatile anesthetic required and to encourage uterine contraction. Nitrous
oxide is poorly soluble and may be eliminated from the blood into the alveoli very
rapidly. This effectively dilutes alveolar air, and available oxygen, so that when
room air is inspired hypoxia may result. This “diffusion hypoxia” may occur in
the neonate after delivery and so it would seem prudent to administer supplemental
oxygen to any neonate exposed to high concentrations of nitrous oxide immediately
before delivery [10].
9.4 Intravenous anesthetics
Rapid sequence induction (RSI) is the administration of a potent IVanesthetic agent
to induce unconsciousness followed by a rapidly acting neuromuscular blocking
agent to achieve motor paralysis for tracheal intubation. The choice and dose of
9.4 Intravenous anesthetics
127
IV induction agent is crucial to ensure a balance between excellent intubating con-
ditions with minimal maternal recall, and high maternal blood concentrations with
subsequent adverse maternal haemodynamic effects and fetal transfer. The lipophilic
characteristics of IV anesthetic agents enhance their transfer across the placenta.
9.4.1 Thiopentone
Thiopentone is the most extensively studied IVanesthetic agent and has been shown
to be safe in obstetric patients. It is administered in a dose of 3e7 mg/kg with 4 mg/
kg being generally agreed to be unlikely to lead to fetal depression, while doses in
excess of 7 mg/kg are liable to do so [11]. Thiopentone rapidly crosses the placenta
and has been detected in umbilical venous blood within 30 seconds of administra-
tion. However, as a result of rapid equilibration in the fetus, thiopentone does not
produce fetal neuronal levels high enough to sedate the neonate. Approximately
80% of thiopentone is protein-bound, and both maternal-fetal and fetomaternal
transfer is strongly inﬂuenced by maternal and fetal protein concentrations. High
fetal/maternal ratios suggest that thiopentone is freely diffusible but many factors
must be involved in placental transfer as demonstrated by a wide intersubject vari-
ability in umbilical cord concentrations at delivery [12]. Thiopentone does however
have some signiﬁcant disadvantages. It has been linked to maternal deaths during
cesarean section when dosing has been inappropriately high. This has been most
commonly attributed to precalculated doses being used when the anesthetist has
underestimated the severity of hypotension or cardiovascular compromise in emer-
gency situations [13]. It requires reconstituting, a process that can take time and is an
unwanted delay in an emergency situation. Another disadvantage is that once recon-
stituted, it looks very similar to antibiotics commonly used in cesarean section. The
similarity of the two drugs in syringes has been seen as a contributing factor to
administration errors at the time of induction [14].
9.4.2 Propofol
Propofol is the most widely used drug in general anesthesia and produces a rapid,
smooth induction. It attenuates the cardiovascular response to laryngoscopy and
intubation more effectively than thiopentone resulting in a more cardiovascular sta-
ble induction and intubation [15]. Increased maternal blood ﬂow increases placental
tissue uptake and facilitates rapid transfer of propofol across the placenta [16]. It is
highly protein-bound and so placental transfer may be increased by reduced protein
concentrations in the maternal blood. Some studies have shown that propofol use
may result in lower Apgar scores when compared to thiopentone even at lower doses
where maternal awareness is a distinct possibility. As a result there are currently no
major clinical advantages to its use over thiopentone in pregnancy [17]. However,
propofol is the agent used most commonly by anesthetists outside of obstetrics.
This familiarity with the drug, and now relative inexperience using thiopentone
may mean that junior anesthetists are more comfortable using propofol instead of
128
CHAPTER 9 Anesthetic drugs
thiopentone for induction of general anesthetic in the obstetric population. These
factors along with the disadvantages of thiopentone mentioned above mean that
there is now growing momentum toward a shift to propofol for obstetric general
anesthetics [18].
9.4.3 Ketamine
This phencyclidine derivative is used at a dose of 1e2 mg/kg for induction in obstet-
ric patients in <2% of general anesthetics [19]. It has a rapid onset providing
analgesia, hypnosis, and reliable amnesia and may be useful in patients with asthma
or modest hypovolaemia. It rapidly crosses the placenta and a dose of 1 mg/kg
appears to not be associated with an increase in uterine tone unlike larger doses.
Its use is limited in preeclampsia and hypertension due to its sympathomimetic ef-
fects, and due to the risk of increased uterine tone and asphyxia, it should not be used
in the ﬁrst two trimesters. There are practical concerns regarding hallucinations and
emergence phenomena although both are dose-related and are thought to occur less
frequently in obstetric patients [20]. Apgar scores and umbilical cord gases appear to
be similar as with other IV induction agents.
9.4.4 Etomidate
This carboxylated imidazole has been used in patients who are hemodynamically
unstable when it is important to maintain baseline systolic blood pressure. However,
there are currently no adequate and well-controlled studies in pregnant women.
Potential side effects include pain on injection, postoperative nausea, myoclonus,
and suppression of the adrenal suppression. Etomidate should be used during preg-
nancy only if the potential beneﬁt justiﬁes the potential risks to the fetus.
9.4.5 Benzodiazepines
This class of drugs is rarely used as sole anesthetic agents due to their relatively slow
maternal onset and offset and neonatal depressive actions. They may be used as
coinduction agents. Benzodiazepines have been associated with cleft lip and palate
in animal studies, but the association in humans is controversial and a single dose
has not been associated with teratogenicity [21,22]. Long term use should be
avoided due to the association with neonatal withdrawal.
9.4.6 Systemic opioids in pregnancy
One of the most common forms of analgesia in labor is intramuscular (IM) opioids.
Around 33% of laboring women are administered IM pethidine (Meperidine) in the
United Kingdom [23]. Pethidine is a synthetic phenylpiperidine opioid which is
highly lipid soluble so easily able to cross the placenta. It has a 10% potency
when compared to morphine and is metabolized to the toxic metabolite norpethi-
dine, which is less lipid soluble. It has been used safely for decades, but it is not
9.4 Intravenous anesthetics
129
without signiﬁcant side effects including nausea and vomiting, pruritis, sedation,
respiratory depression, urinary retention, and constipation. It has also been sug-
gested that its mechanism of action is more to do with its sedating effects rather
than its analgesic effects [24].
Another IM opioid commonly used is diamorphine. It is a synthetic diacetylated
derivative of morphine. It acts as a prodrug, being metabolized in the liver and
plasma to monoacetylmorphine which is more lipid soluble. It crosses the bloode
brain barrier before being converted, by removal of the acetyl group, to morphine
after which it can have its therapeutic effect. It is 1.5 times as potent as morphine
with a faster onset and shorter duration of action. IM diamorphine has been shown
to be mildly superior to IM pethidine as an analgesic in labor, but has also been
associated with increased duration of labor [25].
Neuraxial anesthesia or analgesia may be contraindicated or refused in labor or at
cesarean delivery necessitating the use of IV patient-controlled analgesia using
opioids drugs such as alfentanil, fentanyl, or remifentanil.
Remifentanil is one of the most extensively studied opioids for use in labor anal-
gesia. It is a short-acting mu-opioid receptor agonist [26] with the advantage of a
rapid onset and offset of action (context-speciﬁc half-life of 3 min in both maternal
and neonatal studies). It is hydrolyzed by nonspeciﬁc tissue esterases and excreted in
the urine. The RESPITE study showed that the use of remifentanil patient-controlled
analgesia (PCA) instead of IM pethidine can reduce the number of women who then
go on to require epidural analgesia in labor thus reducing the potential for compli-
cations from neuraxial analgesia [27]. However, patient satisfaction from epidurals
is still higher than using a remifentanil PCA [28]. Both remifentanil and pethidine
can cause signiﬁcant respiratory depression with remifentanil being far more likely
to cause apnoea. It is mandatory that all laboring women using either treatment have
adequate supervision and that those receiving remifentanil receive constant moni-
toring with maternal pulse oximetry and fetal heart rate monitoring.
As part of general anesthesia, short and long-acting systemic opioids may be
administered for analgesia, facilitation of intubation, and attenuation of the stress
response to surgery. Placental transfer to the fetus of systemic opioids is passive;
however, opioids such as pethidine have been safely used for pain relief in pregnancy
for decades.
Morphine rapidly crosses the placenta and has shown to be associated with a
reduction in neonatal apgar scores [29]. Fentanyl is highly lipophilic and rapidly
transferred to the placenta. It has been shown in early pregnancy to be detected in
both the placenta (which acts as a drug depot) and fetal brain [30]. Maternal
alfentanil administration has been associated with a reduction of one-minute Apgar
scores despite a relatively low fetal/maternal ratio [31,32]. Alfentanil and remifen-
tanil have shown to reduce the pressor response to laryngoscopy reducing the
systolic and mean arterial blood pressures as well as heart rate during induction
and intubation [33]. Maternal sufentanil administration results in a very high
fetal/maternal ratio of 0.81. Human placental studies have conﬁrmed this rapid
transfer across the placenta which is inﬂuenced by fetal pH and differences in
maternal and fetal plasma protein binding [34].
130
CHAPTER 9 Anesthetic drugs
9.5 Neuromuscular blocking agents
In pregnancy, individual drug metabolism is heterogeneous, reﬂecting the separate
pregnancy-related changes in each drug-metabolizing organ system. Neuromuscular
blocking agents are required for general anesthesia in cases where endotracheal
intubation is required and may be depolarizing or nondepolarizing agents. They
are highly polar, fully ionized molecules that do not cross the placenta in signiﬁcant
amounts, and fetal blood concentrations of muscle relaxants are 10%e20% of that
of maternal blood [35]. Neonatal hypotonia is rarely seen following induction of
general anesthesia with muscle relaxation.
•
Depolarizing muscle relaxants include suxamethonium which acts by depola-
rizing the plasma membrane of the skeletal muscle ﬁber making it resistant to
further stimulation by acetylcholine. It induces rapid paralysis (within
30e90 sec) with a short offset time (2e5 min) in order to safely facilitate
tracheal intubation in the presence of increased risk of aspiration, as found in the
second and third trimesters. It is metabolized by plasma cholinesterases.
•
Nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents act by competitively blocking
the binding of acetylcholine to its postsynaptic receptors. This class of drugs
includes the aminosteroids (pancuronium, vecuronium, and rocuronium) and
the benzylisoquinolines (atracurium, doxacurium, and mivacurium). These
drugs have a longer onset time (1.5e3 min) and offset time (20e60 min)
compared to suxamethonium. The aminosteroids in general undergo a combi-
nation of hepatic and renal metabolism and excretion. Atracurium is broken
down to inactive metabolites by ester hydrolysis (the minority) and spontaneous
Hoffman degradation (the majority) to laudanosine.
The marked physiological reduction of plasma cholinesterase levels in preg-
nancy (by 30% from early in the ﬁrst trimester to several weeks postpartum)
theoretically causes suxamethonium to have a prolonged effect. This is however
counterbalanced by the increased maternal volume of distribution. Maternal doses
of more than 300 mg (recommended dose 1e2 mg/kg) are required before the
drug can be detected in umbilical venous blood [36]. Fetal pseudocholinesterase
deﬁciency or repeated high doses of suxamethonium may lead to neonatal neuro-
muscular blockade [37]. Rocuronium demonstrates an unaltered onset time at a
dose of 0.6 mg/kg but shows a longer duration of action in pregnancy [38] whereas
vecuronium shows a faster onset at a standard dose of 0.2 mg/kg but also an
extended duration of action [39]. The use of rocuronium in place of suxamethonium
at a dose of 1 mg/kg has been shown to be safe in the obstetric population with no
signiﬁcant differences in outcomes for mothers and no change in the 5 or 10 min
apgar scores for the neonate [40]. Nondepolarizing muscle relaxants are often
administered in bolus form which may result in an increase in fetal blood concen-
tration over time even though the transfer rates are relatively low [41].
At cesarean delivery, usually only a single dose of suxamethonium is needed but
may be followed by small boluses of a short-acting nondepolarizing neuromuscular
9.5 Neuromuscular blocking agents
131
blocking agent to maintain neuromuscular blockade and facilitate surgery. For other
surgery requiring neuromuscular blockade, longer-acting nondepolarizing neuro-
muscular blockers may be employed, but time should be allowed for adequate
reversal of effects. Monitoring of neuromuscular function is recommended in all
cases. Magnesium sulfate is known to decrease requirements of nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blockers and prolong their effects, and this should be considered
in cases of severe preeclampsia and eclampsia where magnesium infusions may
be indicated. The combination of rocuronium at a dose of 1 mg/kg, reversed by
sugammadex at the end of the procedure, has also shown to be safe in the obstetric
population [42]. Sugammadex is a gamma cyclodextrin developed speciﬁcally to
reverse the aminosteroid nondepolarizing agents rocuronium and vecuronium. For
routine reversal, it is given at a dose of 2e4 mg/kg. It can also be given at a dose
of 16 mg/kg for the immediate reversal of neuromuscular blockade including after
administration of an RSI dose of rocuronium. It works by encapsulating rocuronium
or vecuronium preventing it from binding to the acetylcholine receptor at the neuro-
muscular junction.
9.6 Regional anesthesia
The advantages of maternal regional anesthesia for both incidental surgeries in preg-
nancy, analgesia in labor and for operative delivery, are substantial and are listed in
Table 9.2. Inﬁltration of local anesthetic may be employed, for example, in episiot-
omies and paracervical blocks. It should be noted that there are signiﬁcant contrain-
dications and complications associated with regional techniques and of which the
patient should be made aware when consenting for regional anesthesia.
Local anesthetic drugs are weak bases and exist predominantly in the ionized
form at physiological pH as their pKa exceeds 7.4. Each possesses both an aromatic
lipophilic group and a hydrophilic group, and they are classiﬁed as either esters or
Table 9.2 Advantages of regional anesthesia in obstetrics.
Greater maternal satisfaction
Facilitates instrumental delivery, avoiding cesarean section
Reduces maternal catecholamines and potentially improves placental blood ﬂow
For operative anesthesia:
• Reduces risk of GA (higher risk of maternal aspiration, ileus, awareness, and fetal
exposure to anesthetic drugs)
• Improved maternal respiratory function
• Reduced intraoperative blood loss
• Improved maternal bonding, earlier breast-feeding, and reduced incidence postnatal
depression
• Good postoperative analgesia
Increased mobility with low-dose epidural (e.g., 0.125% bupivacaine and 2 mcg/mL
fentanyl)
132
CHAPTER 9 Anesthetic drugs
amides, the name describing the linkage between the groups. Commonly used local
anesthetics in obstetrics have low-molecular weight, high-lipid solubility, and low
ionization and include bupivacaine, levobupivacaine, lidocaine and ropivacaine
(amides), and chloroprocaine (ester). These agents work by binding to the receptor
sites of sodium channels and blocking ion movement across nerve cell membranes.
Consequently they prevent the initiation and propagation of the action potential and
subsequent sensory nerve transmission. Local anesthetics cross the placenta by
simple diffusion. Due to a relative fetal acidosis, there is fetal accumulation of local
anesthetic (also known as “ion trapping”). Transfer to the fetus is also affected by
total dose, site of administration, and use of adjuvants such as epinephrine.
Choice and concentration of local anesthetic depends on the onset time of block
required, the desired indication [operative (incidental surgery or for delivery) or
labor analgesia] as well as maternal and fetal conditions. Bupivacaine has a pKa
of 8.1 compared lidocaine’s pKa of 7.9. This means that at physiological pH, bupi-
vacaine consists of a greater fraction in the ionized form which is unable to penetrate
the phospholipid membrane, resulting in a slower onset of action. The duration of
action is correlated with the extent of protein binding. Those drugs that are highly
protein-bound will have a lower materno-fetal transfer attributed to restricted
placental transfer (for example, bupivacaine is 90% protein-bound to lidocaine’s
50%). In pregnancy, altered protein binding (physiological hypoalbuminaemia
combined with an increase in a1-glycoprotein concentration) changes the unbound
fraction of the drug and reduces the doses required and at which toxicity may occur.
The sensitivity of neural tissue to local anesthetics also increases, and this contrib-
utes to the risk of toxicity.
The volume of the subarachnoid and epidural spaces is reduced in pregnancy due
to compression of the inferior vena cava causing distension of the epidural venous
plexus. This results in a greater risk of inadvertent intravascular injection and leads
to more extensive spread of local anesthetic in central neuraxial blockade, both of
which may increase the subsequent risk of complications.
9.6.1 Bupivacaine
About 0.125%e0.5% bupivacaine is used frequently in both epidural and subarach-
noid blocks. The higher the concentration, the greater the motor blockade. It has a
slower onset and longer duration than lidocaine (approximately 120e180 min).
Bupivacaine toxicity has been associated with refractory ventricular ﬁbrillation
leading to the isolation and commercial preparation of the S () enantiomer of bupi-
vacaine, levobupivacaine. This has been shown to be less neuro- and cardiotoxic
than racemic bupivacaine.
9.6.2 Lidocaine
Lidocaine has an intermediate onset time between 2-chloroprocaine and bupiva-
caine, and concentrations of 1.5%e2% are often used in neuraxial (predominantly
9.6 Regional anesthesia
133
epidural) anesthesia. Epinephrine is often used with lidocaine as an adjunct to
decrease systemic absorption, prolong the duration of the block, and increase the
intensity of the blockade (both sensory and motor). Without it there may be an
increased risk of inadequate anesthesia and a risk of local anesthetic toxicity
especially with additional lidocaine doses. Bicarbonate may also be used to buffer
lidocaine, increasing the amount of unionized drug and speeding its penetration
into the nerve tissue. The addition of bicarbonate and epinephrine to 1.8% lidocaine
has been shown to half the onset time of epidural top up for cesarean section compared
to 0.5% levobupivacaine [43]. Some studies have found differences in neonatal neuro-
behavior following lidocaine compared to bupivacaine in epidural anesthesia, but
these differences have been shown to be not clinically signiﬁcant [44,45].
9.6.3 2-Chloroprocaine
As an ester local anesthetic, 2-chloroprocaine is rapidly metabolized and placental
transfer is limited compared to amide local anesthetics. As a result, it is used widely
in the United States in the situation of epidural analgesia requiring conversion to
anesthesia for instrumental or operative delivery with a decompensating fetus as it
has an extremely rapid onset (approximately 5 min), and it is less likely to partici-
pate in ion trapping and there is less risk of toxicity. It should not be used in the sub-
arachnoid space due to the risk of adhesive arachnoiditis.
9.6.4 Ropivacaine
This amide anesthetic has an onset intermediate between lidocaine and bupivacaine,
and its safety in cesarean delivery has been established [46]. It has a duration similar
to bupivacaine (120e180 min) but exhibits less cardiac toxicity as it is supplied in
the S() enantiomer form. Ropivacaine may provide anesthesia and analgesia with
less motor blockade when compared to bupivacaine but the clinical signiﬁcance of
this in practice is uncertain [47].
9.6.5 Adjuvant opioids
The rationale behind using opioids in obstetric regional anesthesia is to minimize
maternal systemic and fetal effects of both local anesthetics and opioids. There
have been extensive numbers of studies in both human and animal studies conﬁrm-
ing the synergism between opioids and local anesthetics in neuraxial anesthesia
which may reduce the required local anesthetic dose by up to 30%. This may reduce
both the risk of local anesthetic toxicity and the incidence of motor blockade which
may be undesirable for the laboring parturient. Neuraxial opioids improve the qual-
ity of analgesia and are thought to exert their effects via a direct action on spinal and
supraspinal opioids receptors. Dose ranges of commonly used opioids are shown
below in Table 9.3.
When considering speciﬁc opioids, fentanyl is the most commonly used and
most widely studied adjuvant neuraxial opioid in obstetric anesthesia. It is a highly
134
CHAPTER 9 Anesthetic drugs
potent lipophilic phenylpiperidine derivative that rapidly binds dorsal horn receptors
in the spinal cord after neuraxial administration leading to rapid analgesia within
5 min intrathecally and 10 min epidurally. Cephalad migration and the incidence
of central respiratory depression are reduced compared to less lipid-soluble opioids
such as morphine. Sufentanil has an analgesic potency that is around ﬁve times more
potent than fentanyl and has an even more rapid onset. Early respiratory depression
however may occur due to rapid systemic absorption of these drugs, and the side
effects are equipotent with equivalent doses of either drug. Their fast onset of action
makes these opioids desirable for labor analgesia and emergency delivery but limits
their use for postoperative analgesia after a single dose.
Morphine is a hydrophilic phenanthrene derivative which is approximately 100
times less potent that fentanyl. It has a slower onset (15 min intrathecally and
30 min epidurally) compared to fentanyl and sufentanil and a signiﬁcantly longer
duration of action (12e24 h). Poor lipid solubility leads to a delay in binding to dor-
sal horn receptors in the spinal cord and may contribute to the accumulation of free
drug within the cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) which may then migrate cranially and
cause delayed respiratory depression; however, the clinical signiﬁcance of this is
limited. In both intrathecal and epidural anesthesia, morphine has been shown to
have a ceiling effect (at 100 mcg intrathecally and 3.75 mg epidurally) above which
there is little analgesic beneﬁt and an increased incidence of adverse effects [48,49].
Neuraxial morphine has been shown to be as effective as fentanyl for labor and
cesarean delivery analgesia and more effective than fentanyl in postoperative pain
relief. However, the increased incidence and magnitude of side effects such as
nausea, vomiting, sedation, urinary retention, respiratory depression, and pruritis
when compared to fentanyl limit its effect.
Diamorphine is a suitable alternative to intrathecal morphine and is primarily
used in the United Kingdom. It is more lipophilic than morphine and therefore
has a faster onset of action. Despite a short half-life in the CSF, it is metabolized
into its active components (morphine and 6-acetylmorphine) increasing its duration
of action. Intraoperative analgesia is of similar quality to fentanyl with the additional
advantage of prolonged postoperative analgesia [50]. Side effects however are dose-
dependent with pruritis occurring in up to 90% of women after a 200 mcg dose at
cesarean delivery [51]. A dose of 400 mcg has been established as the optimal
dose, with higher doses giving no signiﬁcant analgesic beneﬁt, but greatly increasing
the undesirable side effects [52].
Table 9.3 Dose ranges of commonly used neuraxial opioids.
Opioid
Epidural Dose
Intrathecal Dose
Fentanyl
50e100 mcg
10e25 mcg
Sufentanil
25e50 mcg
2.5e15 mcg
Morphine
2.0e3.0 mg
100e200 mcg
Diamorphine
4.0e6.0 mg
200e400 mcg
9.6 Regional anesthesia
135
9.6.6 Fetal effects of neuraxial opioids
Spinal and epidural opioids will diffuse into the maternal bloodstream and will be
rapidly transported to the uterus. All commercially available opioids have low-
molecular weights and rapidly cross the placenta by diffusion. The risk of neonatal
depression with morphine increases with reduced interdosing interval and with
increasing dose due to higher maternal systemic morphine levels. The risk of
neonatal depression with fentanyl appears less and has only been reported at very
high repeated epidural doses leading to maternal systemic accumulation [53].
9.7 Summary
General anesthesia utilizes pharmacological agents to render the parturient uncon-
scious and unaware. It requires a RSI with neuromuscular blockade to secure the
airway after the ﬁrst trimester due to the risk of aspiration. These drugs cross the
placenta in varying amounts and may be implicated in neonatal depression. IV
agents should be carefully titrated to minimize fetal exposure while ensuring
maternal anesthesia and analgesia. In most cases, regional anesthesia and analgesia
may be more appropriate with less potential risk of harm to both mother and fetus.
References
[1] Rasmussen AS, Christiansen CF, Uldbjerg N. Obstetric and non-obstetric surgery dur-
ing pregnancy: a 20-year Danish population-based prevalence study. BMJ Open 2019;9:
e028136. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2018-028136.
[2] Boerma T, Ronsmans C, Melesse DY. Global epidemiology of use of and disparities in
caesarean sections. Lancet 2018;392(10155):1341e8. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(18)31928-7.
[3] Sear JW. What makes a molecule an anaesthetic? Studies on the mechanisms of anaes-
thesia using a physicochemical approach. Br J Anaesth 2009;103:50e60.
[4] Hemmings Jr HC. Sodium channels and the synaptic mechanisms of inhaled
anaesthetics. Br J Anaesth 2009;103:61e9.
[5] Chan MT, Mainland P, Gin T. Minimum alveolar concentration of halothane and enﬂur-
ane are decreased in early pregnancy. Anesthesiology 1996;85:782e6.
[6] Gin T, Chan MT. Decreased minimum alveolar concentration of isoﬂurane in pregnant
humans. Anesthesiology 1994;81:829e32.
[7] Crawford JS, Lewis M. Nitrous oxide in early human pregnancy. Anaesthesia 1986;41:
900e5.
[8] Pandit J, et al. NAP5 accidental awareness during anaesthesia in the UK and Ireland.
2014.
[9] Lumley J, Walker A, Marum J, Wood C. Time: an important variable at caesarean
section. J Obstet Gynaecol Br Commonw 1970;77:10e23.
[10] Mankowitz E, Brock-Utne JG, Downing JW. Nitrous oxide elimination by the newborn.
Anaesthesia 1981;36:1014e6.
136
CHAPTER 9 Anesthetic drugs
[11] Crawford JS. Principles and practice of obstetric anaesthesia. 5th ed. Oxford: Blackwell
Science; 1984.
[12] SE C. Nonobstetric surgery during pregnancy. In: DH C, editor. Obstetric anesthesia:
principles and practice. 2nd ed. St Louis: Mosby; 1999. p. 279.
[13] Knight M, et al., MBRRACE-UK. Saving lives, improving mothers’ caredlessons
learned to inform future maternity care from the UK and Ireland conﬁdential enquiries
into maternal deaths and morbidity. 2019.
[14] Yentis SM, Randall K. Drug errors in obstetric anaesthesia: a national survey. Int J
Obstet Anesth 2013;12:246e9.
[15] Gin T, Gregory MA, Oh TE. The haemodynamic effects of propofol and thiopentone for
induction of caesarean section. Anaesth Intensive Care 1990;18:175e9.
[16] Zakowski. The placenta: anatomy, physiology and transfer of drugs. In: Chestnut, edi-
tor. Obstetric anaesthesia: principles and practice; 2004.
[17] Gin T. Propofol during pregnancy. Acta Anaesthesiol Sin 1994;32:127e32.
[18] Lucas D. Unsettled weather and the end of thiopental? Obstetric general anaesthesia af-
ter the NAP5 and MBRRACE-UK reports. Anaesthesia 2015. https://doi.org/10.1111/
anae.13034.
[19] Paech MJ, Scott KL, Clavisi O, Chua S, McDonnell N. A prospective study of aware-
ness and recall associated with general anaesthesia for caesarean section. Int J Obstet
Anesth 2008;17:298e303.
[20] Schultetus RR, Hill CR, Dharamraj CM, Banner TE, Berman LS. Wakefulness during
cesarean section after anesthetic induction with ketamine, thiopental, or ketamine and
thiopental combined. Anesth Analg 1986;65:723e8.
[21] Safra MJ, Oakley Jr GP. Association between cleft lip with or without cleft palate and
prenatal exposure to diazepam. Lancet 1975;2:478e80.
[22] Rosenberg L, Mitchell AA, Parsells JL, Pashayan H, Louik C, Shapiro S. Lack of rela-
tion of oral clefts to diazepam use during pregnancy. N Engl J Med 1983;309:1282e5.
[23] Redshaw M, Rowe R, Hockley C, Brocklehurst P. Recorded delivery: a national survey
of women’s experience of maternity care 2006. Oxford: National Perinatal Epidemio-
logical Unit, University of Oxford; 2007.
[24] Olofsson C, Ekblom A, Ekman-Ordeberg G, Hjelm A, Irested L. Lack of Analgesic ef-
fect of systemically administered morphine or pethidine on labour pain. Br J Obstet
Gynaecol 1996;103:968e72.
[25] Wee M, Tuckey J, Thomas P, Burnard S. A comparison of intramuscular diamorphine
and intramuscular pethidine for labour analgesia: a two-centre randomised blinded
controlled trial. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 2013;121(4):447e56.
[26] Hinova A, Fernando R. Systemic remifentanil for labor analgesia. Anesth Analg 2009;
109:1925e9.
[27] Wilson M, MacArthur C, et al. Intravenous remifentanil patient-controlled analgesia
versus intramuscular pethidine for pain relief in labour (RESPITE): an open-label, multi
centre, randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2018;392(10148):662e72. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31613-1.
[28] Weibel S, Jelting Y, Afshari A. Patient-controlled analgesia with remifentanil versus
alternative analgesic methods for pain relief in labour. Cochrane Library 2017.
https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD011989.pub2.
[29] Kopecky EA, Ryan ML, Barrett JF, Seaward PG, Ryan G, Koren G, Amankwah K. Fetal
response to maternally administered morphine. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2000;183:
424e30.
References
137
[30] Cooper J, Jauniaux E, Gulbis B, Quick D, Bromley L. Placental transfer of fentanyl in
early human pregnancy and its detection in fetal brain. Br J Anaesth 1999;82:929e31.
[31] Gin T, Ngan-Kee WD, Siu YK, Stuart JC, Tan PE, Lam KK. Alfentanil given immedi-
ately before the induction of anesthesia for elective cesarean delivery. Anesth Analg
2000;90:1167e72.
[32] Gepts E, Heytens L, Camu F. Pharmacokinetics and placental transfer of intravenous
and epidural alfentanil in parturient women. Anesth Analg 1986;65:1155e60.
[33] White L, et al. Induction opioids for caesarean section under general anaesthesia: a sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Int J Obstet Anaesth
2019;40:4e13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijoa.2019.04.007.
[34] Johnson RF, Herman N, Arney TL, Johnson HV, Paschall RL, Downing JW. The
placental transfer of sufentanil: effects of fetal pH, protein binding, and sufentanil
concentration. Anesth Analg 1997;84:1262e8.
[35] Ni Mhuireachtaigh R, O’Gorman DA. Anesthesia in pregnant patients for nonobstetric
surgery. J Clin Anesth 2006;18:60e6.
[36] Kvisselgaard N, Moya F. Investigation of placental thresholds to succinylcholine. Anes-
thesiology 1961;22:7e10.
[37] Owens WD, Zeitlin GL. Hypoventilation in a newborn following administration of suc-
cinylcholine to the mother: a case report. Anesth Analg 1975;54:38e40.
[38] Puhringer FK, Sparr HJ, Mitterschiffthaler G, Agoston S, Benzer A. Extended duration
of action of rocuronium in postpartum patients. Anesth Analg 1997;84:352e4.
[39] Baraka A, Jabbour S, Tabboush Z, Sibai A, Bijjani A, Karam K. Onset of vecuronium
neuromuscular block is more rapid in patients undergoing caesarean section. Can J
Anaesth 1992;39:135e8.
[40] Kosinova M. Rocuronium versus suxamethonium for rapid sequence induction of gen-
eral anaesthesia for caesarean section: inﬂuence on neonatal outcomes. Int J Obstet
Anaesth 2017;32:4e10.
[41] Iwama H, Kaneko T, Tobishima S, Komatsu T, Watanabe K, Akutsu H. Time depen-
dency of the ratio of umbilical vein/maternal artery concentrations of vecuronium in
caesarean section. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1999;43:9e12.
[42] Wiliamson R. Rocuronium and sugammadex for rapid sequence induction of obstetric
general anaesthesia. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2011. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-
6576.2011.02431.x.
[43] Allam J. Epidural lidocaine-bicarbonate-adrenaline vs levobupivacaine for emergency
Caesarean section: randomised controlled trial. Anaesthesia 2008;63(3):243e9.
[44] Kileff ME, James 3rd FM, Dewan DM, Floyd HM. Neonatal neurobehavioral responses
after epidural anesthesia for cesarean section using lidocaine and bupivacaine. Anesth
Analg 1984;63:413e7.
[45] Abboud TK, D’Onofrio L, Reyes A, Mosaad P, Zhu J, Mantilla M, Gangolly J,
Crowell D, Cheung M, Afrasiabi A, et al. Isoﬂurane or halothane for cesarean section:
comparative maternal and neonatal effects. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1989;33:578e81.
[46] Stienstra R. Techniques in regional anaesthesia and pain management. Ropivacaine
Obstet Use 2001. https://doi.org/10.1053/trap.2001.23682.
[47] Beilin Y, Halpern S. Focused review: ropivacaine versus bupivacaine for epidural labor
analgesia. Anesth Analg 2010;111:482e7.
[48] Palmer CM, Emerson S, Volgoropolous D, Alves D. Dose-response relationship of
intrathecal morphine for post-cesarean analgesia. Anesthesiology 1999;90:437e44.
138
CHAPTER 9 Anesthetic drugs
[49] Palmer CM, Nogami WM, Van Maren G, Alves DM. Post-cesarean epidural morphine:
a dose-response study. Anesth Analg 2000;90:887e91.
[50] Lane S, Evans P, Arfeen Z, Misra U. A comparison of intrathecal fentanyl and diamor-
phine as adjuncts in spinal anaesthesia for caesarean section. Anaesthesia 2005;60:
453e7.
[51] Wrench IJ, Sanghera S, Pinder A, Power L, Adams MG. Dose response to intrathecal
diamorphine for elective caesarean section and compliance with a national audit
standard. Int J Obstet Anesth 2007;16:17e21.
[52] Saravanan S. Minimum dose of intrathecal diamorphine required to prevent intraoper-
ative supplementation of spinal anaesthesia for caesarean section. Br J Anaseth 2003;
91(3):368e72.
[53] Hughes SC. Respiratory depression following intraspinal narcotics: expect it! Int J
Obstet Anesth 1997;6:145e6.
References
139
         
This page intentionally left blank
The management of
asthma during pregnancy 10
Jennifer A. Namazy1, Michael Schatz2
1Scripps Clinic, San Diego, CA, United States; 2Kaiser Permanente, San Diego, CA, United States
10.1 Introduction
Asthma is one of the most common potentially serious medical problems to compli-
cate pregnancy, and may adversely affect both maternal quality of life and perinatal
outcomes. Optimal management of asthma during pregnancy (MAP) is thus
important for both mother and baby. While the management of asthma in pregnancy
relies on guidelines that were based on studies of nonpregnant populations, special
considerations regarding the safety of medications are required.
10.2 Effect of pregnancy on the course of asthma
The prevalence of asthma during pregnancy is estimated to be 5%e8% based on US
Health surveys [1]. The prevalence of asthma also appears to be increasing in child-
bearingeaged women. An analysis of US Health plans between 2001 and 07 shows
that the prevalence was 5.5% in 2001 and 7.8% in 2007 [2].
Since the prevalence of asthma is increasing in child-bearingeaged women, it is
important to understand how to provide adequate treatment of asthma during
pregnancy.
Asthma course may worsen, improve, or remain unchanged during pregnancy,
and the overall data suggest that these various courses occur with approximately
equal frequency.
In a large prospective study of 1739 pregnant asthmatic women, severity classi-
ﬁcation (based on symptoms, pulmonary function, and medication use) worsened in
30% and improved in 23% of patients during pregnancy [3]. Asthma also appears to
be more likely to be more severe or to worsen during pregnancy in women with more
severe asthma before becoming pregnant [4].
In a recent report from US health care claims databases, between 2011 and 2015,
about 19% had severe asthma [5]. 28% of pregnant women with asthma who have
public insurance have uncontrolled asthma during pregnancy. Supporting this
ﬁnding are results of a cohort of inner-city pregnant women who experienced severe
prenatal asthma exacerbation. The authors found that pregnant asthmatics in this
cohort had a higher prevalence of long acting beta-agonist/inhaled corticosteroid
CHAPTER
141
Clinical Pharmacology During Pregnancy. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818902-3.00002-6
Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
and leukotriene modiﬁer prescriptions. They also had a higher prevalence of ciga-
rette smoking and upper respiratory infections [6].
The course of asthma may vary by stage of pregnancy. The ﬁrst trimester is
generally well tolerated in asthmatics with infrequent acute episodes. Increased
symptoms and more frequent exacerbations have been reported to occur between
weeks 17 and 36 of gestation. In contrast, asthmatic women in general tend to expe-
rience fewer symptoms and less frequent asthma exacerbations during weeks 37e40
of pregnancy than during any earlier gestational period [7].
In a prospective study of 50 enrolled women in the MAP program, 13 women had
a total of 16 exacerbations in the year followed. Having more pronounced airway
hyperresponsiveness and nonatopic state appeared to characterize these women as
having a higher risk of exacerbations during pregnancy [8].
The mechanisms responsible for the altered asthma course during pregnancy are
unknown. The myriad of pregnancy-associated changes in levels of sex hormones,
cortisol, and prostaglandins may contribute to changes in asthma course during
pregnancy. In addition, exposure to fetal antigens, leading to alterations in immune
function, may predispose some pregnant asthmatics to worsening asthma [4]. Even
fetal sex may play a role, with some data showing increased severity of symptoms in
pregnancies with a female fetus [5].
There are additional factors that may contribute to the clinical course of asthma
during pregnancy. Pregnancy may be a source of stress for many women, and this
stress can aggravate asthma. Adherence to therapy can change during pregnancy
with a corresponding change in asthma control. Most commonly observed is
decreased adherence as a result of a mother’s concerns about the safety of medica-
tions for the fetus. One study found that women with asthma signiﬁcantly decreased
their asthma medication use from 5 to 13 weeks of pregnancy. During the ﬁrst
trimester, there was a 23% decline in inhaled corticosteroid prescriptions, a 13%
decline in short-acting beta-agonist prescriptions, and a 54% decline in rescue corti-
costeroid prescriptions [6].
Physician reluctance to treat may also affect the severity of asthma during preg-
nancy. A recent study found that less than 40% of women who classiﬁed themselves
as “poorly controlled” reported use of a controller medication during pregnancy [7].
Another study identiﬁed 51 pregnant women and 500 nonpregnant women present-
ing to the emergency department with acute asthma. Although asthma severity
appeared to be similar in the two groups based on peak ﬂow rates, pregnant women
were signiﬁcantly less likely to be discharged on oral steroids (38% vs. 64%).
Presumably related to this undertreatment, pregnant women were three times
more likely than nonpregnant women to report an ongoing exacerbation 2 weeks
later [8,9].
More recent reassuring data have come from the Pregnancy Risk Assessment
Monitoring System which collected data from 34 US states of over 40, 000 women.
The prevalence of counseling on medications safe to take during pregnancy was
about 89.2% (95%CI 88.7e89.7). Counseling was more common in women who
used prescription medications before pregnancy and who reported having asthma
before pregnancy [10].
142
CHAPTER 10 The management of asthma during pregnancy
Infections during pregnancy can certainly affect the course of gestational asthma.
Some degree of decrease in cell-mediated immunity may make the pregnant patient
more susceptible to viral infection, and upper respiratory tract infections have been
reported to be the most common precipitants of asthma exacerbations during
pregnancy [11]. Sinusitis, a known asthma trigger, has been shown to be six times
more common in pregnant compared with nonpregnant women [12]. In addition,
pneumonia has been reported to be greater than ﬁve times more common in asth-
matic than nonasthmatic women during pregnancy [13]. A recent study tried to
determine whether a diagnosis of upper respiratory infection or sinusitis was more
common during pregnancy and whether pregnant women were more likely to
receive a prescription for antibiotics. This study did not conﬁrm the prior ﬁnding
that sinusitis or antibiotic use for upper respiratory infections is increased in preg-
nancy. The report did ﬁnd that respiratory comorbidities, such as asthma, increased
the risk of antibiotic use during pregnancy [14].
Obesity has been shown to be an inﬂammatory state that may play an important
role in asthma initiation and control. Obesity during pregnancy has been associated
with adverse perinatal outcomes including the following: gestational diabetes, pre-
eclampsia, thromboembolic disorders, postpartum hemorrhage, large for gestational
age, fetal death, and congenital anomalies. Higher body mass index (BMI) and
gestational weight gain have been associated with an increased risk for asthma ex-
acerbations in both nonpregnant and pregnant women [15].The mechanisms leading
to these outcomes are thought to be due to a heightened inﬂammatory response [16].
In a follow-up study of the same group of pregnant asthmatics, asthma treatment
was adjusted according to FeNO and symptoms. Authors report the beneﬁts of a
FeNO-based management are attenuated among obese mothers and those with
excess gestational weight gain [17].
Population-based studies have shown a relationship between smoking and
airway hyperresponsiveness [18,19], implying that smoking is a risk factor for
asthma. Asthma exacerbations during pregnancy are more common and more severe
in current and former smokers than in never smokers [20]. The potential for maternal
smoking to both increase the risk of uncontrolled asthma and to directly adversely
affect pregnancy suggests that discontinuation of smoking should be a high priority
goal during pregnancy.
10.3 Effect of asthma on pregnancy
One of the largest controlled studies that have evaluated outcomes of pregnancy
described 36,985 women identiﬁed as having asthma in the Swedish Medical Birth
Registry. These outcomes were compared with the total of 1.32 million births that
occurred during the years of the study (1984e95). Signiﬁcantly increased rates of
preeclampsia (OR 1.15), perinatal mortality (OR 1.21), preterm births (OR 1.15),
and low birth weight infants (OR 1.21), but not congenital malformations (OR
1.05), were found in pregnancies of asthmatic versus control women [21]. The risks
10.3 Effect of asthma on pregnancy
143
appeared to be greater in patients with more severe asthma, which was conﬁrmed in
a more recent Swedish Medical Birth Registry report [22]. A metaanalysis, derived
from a substantial body of literature spanning several decades and including very
large numbers of pregnant women (over 1,000,000 for low birth weight and over
250,000 for preterm labor), indicates that pregnant women with asthma are at a
signiﬁcantly increased risk of a range of adverse perinatal outcomes including
low birth weight, small for gestational age, preterm labor and delivery, and pre-
eclampsia [23].
A recent study based on nationwide Finnish registerebased cohort between 1996
and 2012 of over 25,000 pregnant asthmatics found that maternal asthma was asso-
ciated with perinatal mortality 1.24(95%CI 1.05e1.46), preterm birth 1.18
(1.11e1.25), low birth weight 1.29 (1.21e1.37), fetal growth restriction (SGA)
1.32 (1.24e1.40), and asphyxia 1.09(1.02e1.17) [24].
Mechanisms postulated to explain the possible increase in perinatal risks in preg-
nant asthmatic women demonstrated in previous studies have included [1] hypoxia
and other physiologic consequences of poorly controlled asthma [2], medications
used to treat asthma, and [3] pathogenic or demographic factors associated with
asthma but not actually caused by the disease or its treatment, such as abnormal
placental function.
Several prospective studies [25e33] have shown that the pregnant asthmatic with
mild to moderate severity can have excellent maternal and fetal outcomes. In
contrast, suboptimal control of asthma or more severe asthma during pregnancy
may be associated with increased maternal or fetal risk [17,20,21]. A recent prospec-
tive cohort study highlighted recurrent uncontrolled asthma as a greater contributor
to poor perinatal outcomes than asthma exacerbations [34].
10.4 Asthma management
The ultimate goal of asthma therapy in pregnancy is maintaining adequate oxygen-
ation of the fetus preventing hypoxic episodes in the mother. The management of
asthma can be summarized in four categories: assessment and monitoring, education
of patients, control of factors contributing to severity, and pharmacologic therapy.
The ﬁrst step is assessment of severity (in patients not already on controller med-
ications) or assessment of control (in patients already on controller medications).
Severity is assessed in untreated patients based on the frequency of daytime and
nighttime symptoms, rescue therapy use, activity limitation, and pulmonary function
(ideally spirometry, minimally peak ﬂow rate) (Table 10.1). Based on this, severity
assessment controller therapy is initiated. Patients should be monitored monthly for
asthma control (Table 10.2), and if not responding adequately to treatment should
have their level of treatment adjusted (Table 10.3).
144
CHAPTER 10 The management of asthma during pregnancy
Table 10.1 Classiﬁcation of asthma severity in pregnant patientsa.
Asthma
severity
Symptom
frequency
Night time
awakening
Interference
with normal
activity
FEV1 or peak ﬂow
(predicted
percentage of
personal best)
Intermittent
2 days per
week or less
Twice per
month or
less
None
More than 80%
Mild
persistent
More than
2 days per
week, but not
daily
More than
twice per
month
Minor limitation
More than 80%
Moderate
persistent
Daily
symptoms
More than
once per
week
Some
limitation
60%e80%
Severe
persistent
Throughout
the day
Four times
per week or
more
Extremely
limited
Less than 60%
FEV1, forced expiratory volume in the ﬁrst second of expiration.
a Data from Dumbrowski MP, Schatz M. ACOG Committee on Practice Bulletins - Obstetrics. ACOG
practice bulletin: clinical management guidelines for obstetrician -gynecologists number 90, February
2008: asthma in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 2008; 111:457e464.
Table 10.2 Assessment of asthma control in pregnant womena.
Variable
Well-
controlled
asthma
Asthma not
well controlled
Very poorly
controlled
asthma
Frequency of symptoms
2 days/week
>2 days/week
Throughout the
day
Frequency of night time
awakening
2 times/month
1e3 times/week
4 times/week
Interference with normal
activity
None
Some
Extreme
Use of short-acting
b-agonist for symptoms
control
2 days/week
>2 days/week
Several times/day
FEV1 or peak ﬂow (% of the
predicted or personal best
value)
>80
60e80
<60
Exacerbation requiring use
of systemic corticosteroid
(no.)
0e1 in the past
12 months
2 in the past
12 months
2 in the past
12 months
a Data from Schatz M, Dombrowski M. Asthma in pregnancy. N Engl J Med 2009;360:1862e69.
10.4 Asthma management
145
10.5 Pharmacologic therapy
Assignment of pregnancy risk letter categories, A, B, C, D, or X, was instituted by
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) over 30 years ago to help clinicians
interpret the human and animal data on pregnancy safety for an approved drug. How-
ever, in practice, there was concern about the unintended application of these letter
categories as an oversimpliﬁed grading system.
•
To address the need for updated risk categories, in December of 2014, the FDA
published a ﬁnal rule entitled “Content and Format of Labeling for Human
Prescription Drug and Biological Products: Requirements for Pregnancy and
Lactation Labeling,” which is also known simply as the “Pregnancy and
Lactation Labeling Rule” or PLLR. The PLLR removes the pregnancy letter
categories A, B, C, D, and X for all drugs. The PLLR also requires the label to
be updated when information becomes outdated. As revised, the new format
includes a narrative summary which includes available human, animal, and any
pharmacological data regarding pregnancy risk. Also included is information
about risk of the underlying maternal disease and/or risks of undertreatment of
that disease during pregnancy. In 2018, the membership of the American
Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology (AAAAI) was surveyed as to
the value, awareness, and understanding of the new PLLR. Most respondents
were not aware of the removal of the letter category system and did not ﬁnd the
new narrative summary to be clear or useful [35].
Asthma medications generally are divided into long-term control medications
and rescue therapy. Long-term control medications are used for maintenance therapy
to prevent asthma manifestations and include inhaled corticosteroids, long-acting
beta-agonists, leukotriene receptor antagonists, and asthma biologics. Rescue ther-
apy, most commonly inhaled short-acting beta-agonists, provides immediate relief
of symptoms. Oral corticosteroids can either be used as a form of rescue therapy
or as chronic therapy for severe persistent asthma.
Table 10.3 Steps of asthma therapy during pregnancya.
Step
Preferred controller medication
Alternative controller medication
1
None
e
2
Low dose ICS
LTRA, theophylline
3
Medium dose ICS
Low dose ICS þ either LABA, LTRA or
theophylline
4
Medium dose ICS þ LABA
Medium dose ICS þ LTRA or theophylline
5
High dose ICS þ LABA
e
6
High dose ICS þ LABA þ oral
prednisone
e
ICS, inhaled corticosteroids; LABA, long-acting beta-agonists; LTRA, leukotriene receptor antagonists.
a Data from Schatz M, Dombrowski M. Asthma in pregnancy. N Engl J Med 2009;360:1862e69.
146
CHAPTER 10 The management of asthma during pregnancy
10.5.1 Inhaled corticosteroids
Inhaled corticosteroids are the mainstay of controller therapy during pregnancy. The
prevalence of its use in the United States is estimated to be about 34% (among
pregnant asthmatics) [36]. Many studies have shown no increased perinatal risks
(including preeclampsia, preterm birth, low birth weight, and congenital malforma-
tions) associated with inhaled corticosteroids [37e39]. One study of over 4000
women who used inhaled corticosteroids during pregnancy found no increased risk
of perinatal mortality associated with inhaled corticosteroid use during pregnancy
[40]. Several large studies support the lack of association of inhaled corticosteroid
use with total or speciﬁc malformations. One study has suggested a relationship
between high doseeinhaled corticosteroids and total malformations, but confounding
by severity is a possible explanation, based on the relationships between exacerbations
and congenital malformations demonstrated by the same group [21].
Because it has the most published human gestational safety data, budesonide is
considered the preferred inhaled corticosteroid for asthma during pregnancy. That is
not to say that the other inhaled corticosteroid preparations are unsafe. Therefore,
inhaled corticosteroids other than budesonide may be continued in patients who
were well controlled by these agents prior to pregnancy, especially if it is thought
that changing formulations may jeopardize asthma control. Doses of inhaled corti-
costeroids are categorized as low, medium, and high (Table 10.4).
Table 10.4 Comparative daily doses for inhaled corticosteroidsa,b.
Corticosteroid
Amount
Low
dose
Medium dose
High dose
Beclomethasone
40 mcg per puff
2e6
puffs
More than 6e12
puffs
More than 12
puffs
HFA
80 mcg per puff
1e3
puffs
More than 3e6
puffs
More than 6
puffs
Budesonide
90 mcg per
inhalation
180 mcg per
inhalation
2e6
puffs
1e3
puffs
More than 6e12
puffs
More than 3e6
puffs
More than 12
puffs
More than 6
puffs
Ciclesonide
80 mcg per
actuation
160 mcg per
actuation
2e4
puffs
1e2
puffs
More than 4e8
puffs
More than 2e4
puffs
More than 8
puffs
More than 4
puffs
Flunisolide HFA
80 mcg per puff
4 puffs
More than 4e8
puffs
More than 8
puffs
Fluticasone HFA
44 mcg per puff
110 mcg per puff
220 mcg per puff
2e6
puffs
2 puffs
1 puff
e
More than 2e4
puffs
More than 1e2
puffs
e
More than 4
puffs
More than 2
puffs
Continued
10.5 Pharmacologic therapy
147
10.5.2 Inhaled beta-agonists
Inhaled short-acting beta-agonists are the rescue therapy of choice for asthma during
pregnancy. Inhaled albuterol is the ﬁrst-choice short-acting beta-agonist for pregnant
women because it has been studied the most extensively [23], although other agents
may be used if uniquely helpful or well tolerated. Lin et al. using data from the US
multicenter case control study of the National Birth Defects Prevention Study,
reported the use of bronchodilators to be associated with an increased risk of esoph-
ageal atrophy among infants (OR, 2.39%; 95% conﬁdence interval (CI), 1.23e4.66)
41]. The limitation of this study is that the results could be a result of confounding by
indication. Also, in another cohort study involving 4558 women, there was an
increased risk of cardiac defects exposed to bronchodilators during pregnancy
(OR, 1.4; 95% CI, 1.1e1.7) [30]. However, this observation may also be a result
of confounding. Asthma exacerbations may be associated with both increased use
of bronchodilators and congenital malformations. In addition, factors such as obesity
or lower household socioeconomic status may be associated with both more severe
asthma requiring more bronchodilators and congenital malformations. A recent
study showed that elevated BMI and gestational weight gain was associated with
an increased risk of asthma exacerbations during pregnancy [42] In general, patients
should use up to two treatments of inhaled albuterol (two to six puffs) or nebulized
albuterol at 20-minute intervals for most mild to moderate symptoms; higher doses
can be used for severe symptom exacerbations.
The use of long-acting beta-agonists is the preferred add-on controller therapy
for asthma during pregnancy. This therapy should be added on when patients’ symp-
toms are not controlled with the use of medium-dose inhaled corticosteroids.
Because long-acting and short-acting inhaled beta-agonists have similar pharma-
cology and toxicology, long-acting beta-agonists are expected to have a safety
proﬁle similar to that of albuterol. Two long-acting beta-agonists are available:
Table 10.4 Comparative daily doses for inhaled corticosteroidsa,b.dcont’d
Corticosteroid
Amount
Low
dose
Medium dose
High dose
Fluticasone DPI
50 mcg per
inhalation
100 mcg per
inhalation
250 mcg per
inhalation
2e6
puffs
1e3
puffs
1 puff
e
More than 3e5
puffs
More than 1e2
puffs
e
More than 5
puffs
More than 2
puffs
Mometasone
110 mcg per
actuation
220 mcg per
actuation
2 puffs
1 puff
3e4 puffs
2 puffs
More than 4
puffs
More than 2
puffs
DPI, dry powder inhaler; HFA, hydroﬂuoroalkane.
a Total daily puffs are usually divided into a twice-per-day regimen.
b Data from Ref. Expert Panel Report 3 (EPR-3): Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of
asthma-summary report 2007. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007;120:S94eS138. and Kelly HW
Comparison of inhaled corticosteroids: an update. Ann Pharmacother 2009;43:519e27.
148
CHAPTER 10 The management of asthma during pregnancy
salmeterol and formoterol. Limited observational data exist on their use during preg-
nancy. A possible association between long-acting beta-agonists and an increased
risk of severe and even fatal asthma exacerbations has been observed in nonpregnant
patients. As a result, long-acting beta-agonists are no longer recommended as mono-
therapy for the treatment of asthma and are available in ﬁxed combination prepara-
tions with inhaled corticosteroids. Data are limited on safety of long-acting beta-
agonists during pregnancy. Cossette et al. reported in a large retrospective cohort
that the lLABA use was not associated with an increased risk of congenital malfor-
mation and that the outcomes of low birth weight, preterm birth, and small for gesta-
tional age were similar between commonly used LABA, formoterol, and salmeterol
[43]. Expert panels suggest that the beneﬁts of the use of long-acting beta-agonists
appear to outweigh the risks as long as they are used concurrently with inhaled cor-
ticosteroids [44].
10.5.3 Leukotriene modiﬁers
Both zaﬁrlukast and montelukast are selective leukotriene receptor antagonists indi-
cated for the maintenance treatment of asthma. Data on the use of leukotriene recep-
tor antagonists during pregnancy are more limited than for inhaled corticosteroids.
In a recent retrospective insurance claims, cohort analysis of 1535 exposed infants
shows a risk of congenital malformations to be similar to those pregnant women
without asthma [45]. Montelukast is available as a once daily medication with doses
variable based on age. For adults, the typical dose is 10 mg daily.
10.5.4 Cromolyn and theophylline
Given the superiority of inhaled corticosteroids over cromolyn and theophylline in
the prevention of asthma symptoms, the latter are considered alternative treatments
for mild persistent asthma. Theophylline is also an alternative, but not preferred,
add-on treatment for moderate to severe persistent asthma. Reassuring data on the
use of cromolyn and theophylline in pregnant women have been published [44].
Theophylline use is also limited by its many adverse side effects and potential
drug interactions resulting in possible toxicity. Serum levels should be monitored
during pregnancy and maintained between 5 and 12 mcg/mL. Cromolyn is now
only available as a nebulizer solution.
10.5.5 Oral corticosteroids
Some patients with severe asthma may require regular oral corticosteroid use to
achieve adequate asthma control. Oral corticosteroids are also typically part of the
discharge regimen after an acute asthma episode. Doses are typically 40e60 mg
in a single dose or two divided doses for 3e10 days. Oral corticosteroid use has
been associated with an increased risk of preterm birth [18,23] and low birth weight
infants [23] in 52e185 exposed women. In fact, a metaanalysis of cohort studies be-
tween 1975 and 2012 found that pregnant asthmatic who used oral corticosteroids
10.5 Pharmacologic therapy
149
during pregnancy had an increased risk of preterm delivery and low birth weight
infants [46]. An increased risk of orofacial clefts was reported in a metaanalysis
of caseecontrol studies [47], but this increased risk was not conﬁrmed in a large
cohort study [31]. In addition, the National Birth Defects Prevention case control
study recently reported no evidence of a link between oral clefts and oral corticoste-
roids [48]. Since these risks would be less than the potential risks of a severe
asthma exacerbation, which include maternal or fetal mortality, oral corticosteroids
are recommended when indicated for the management of severe asthma during
pregnancy [44].
10.5.5.1 Asthma biologics
In 2003, Omalizumab became one of the treatment options for moderate to severe
persistent allergic asthma. It is a recombinant DNA-derived humanized IgG1k mono-
clonal antibody that speciﬁcally binds to free human immunoglobulin E in the blood.
It currently is the only asthma biologic with limited available human safety data from
the EXPECT pregnancy registry. It was a single arm observational study of 250 preg-
nant asthmatic women exposed to omalizumab within 8 weeks prior to conception or
at any time during pregnancy reported no increased risk of congenital malformations
or low birth weight. The rates of prematurity (<37 weeks gestation) and small for
gestational age were not unlike those seen in other studies of severe pregnant asth-
matics. More recent data compared those patients enrolled in EXPECT to a
disease-matched external cohort of moderate to severe asthmatics. There was no sig-
niﬁcant difference in rate of congenital malformations between the two groups [49].
Other newer medications include the following: tiotropium, mepolizumab,
reslizumab, and dupilumab. There are no human data available for any of these med-
ications. Animal studies are reassuring for tiotropium, with no congenital malforma-
tions in 800 times the maximum human daily dose. Mepolizumab has reassuring
animal data with no fetal harm at 30 times human dose administered intravenously.
There are pregnancy registries through the Mother to Baby network currently
enrolling exposed pregnant women to mepolizumab, dupilumab, and benralizumab
(mothertobaby.org).
10.6 Conclusion
Asthma is a common medical problem that may worsen during pregnancy. In addi-
tion to affecting maternal quality of life, uncontrolled asthma may lead to adverse
perinatal outcomes. Awareness of proper treatment options for asthma during preg-
nancy is important for clinicians who care for pregnant patients. However, there are
signiﬁcant gaps in knowledge regarding commonly used asthma medications.
One of the most important needs for the future is the availability of additional
safety information for asthma medications used during pregnancy that can also ac-
count for asthma control.
150
CHAPTER 10 The management of asthma during pregnancy
10.6.1 The vaccine and medication surveillance study
The Vaccines and Medication in Pregnant Surveillance System (VAMPSS) is coor-
dinated by the AAAAI and has three research arms and an independent advisory
committee. Funding has been provided by government agencies and individual
pharmaceutical companies to employ a range of observational study designs. This
includes the prospective cohort study, the case control study, and the database
retrospective cohort study. The ﬁnal component of VAMPSS is the independent
Advisory Committee which is comprised of representatives from government,
professional organizations as well as a consumer representative. This surveillance
system was developed to provide safety information on the wide range of vaccines
and medications taken by pregnant women.
References
[1] Schatz M, Dombrowski M, Wise R. Asthma morbidity during pregnancy can be
predicted by severity classiﬁcation. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2003;112:283e8.
[2] Belanger K, Hellenbrand M, Holford T, Bracken M. Effect of pregnancy on ma- ternal
asthma symptoms and medication use. Obstet Gynecol 2010;115:559e67.
[3] Schatz M, Zeiger RS, Harden KM, Hoffman CP, Forsythe AB, Chilingar LM, et al. The
course of asthma during pregnancy, post-partum, and with successive pregnancies: a
prospective analysis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1988;81:509e17.
[4] Gluck J, Gluck P. The effect of pregnancy on the course of asthma. Immunol Allergy
Clin 2000;20:729e43.
[5] Murphy VE, Gibson PG, Smith R, Clifton VL. Asthma during pregnancy: mechanisms
and treatment implications. Eur Respir J 2005;25:731e50.
[6] Enriquez R, Wu P, Grifﬁn MR, Gebretsadik T, Shintani A, Mitchel E, et al. Cessation of
asthma medication in early pregnancy. Am J Onstet Gynecol 2006;195:149e53.
[7] Louik C, Schatz M, Hernandez-Diaz S, Werler MM, Mitchell AA. Asthma in pregnancy
and its pharmacologic treatment. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2010;105:110e7.
[8] Cydulka R, Emerman C, Schreiber D, Molander K, Woodruff P, Camargo C. Acute
asthma among pregnant women presenting to the emergency depart- ment. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 1999;160:887e92.
[9] McCallister J, Benninger C, Frey H, Phillips G, Mastronarde J. Pregnancy related treat-
ment disparities of acute asthma exacerbations in the emergency department. Respir
Med 2011;105:1434e40.
[10] Murphy V, Namazy J, Powell H, Schatz M, Chambers C, Attia J, et al. A meta-analysis
of adverse perinatal outcomes in women with asthma. BJOG 2011;118:1314e23.
[11] Triche EW, Saftlas AF, Belanger K, Leaderer BP, Bracken MB. Association of asthma
diagnosis, severity, symptoms, and treatment with risk of preeclamp- sia. Obstet Gyne-
col 2004;104:585e93.
[12] Jana N, Vasishta K, Saha SC, Khunnu B. Effect of bronchial asthma on the course of
pregnancy, labour and perinatal outcome. J Obstet Gynaecol 1995;21:227e32.
[13] Stenius-Aarniala BS, Hedman J, Teramo KA. Acute asthma during pregnancy. Thorax
1996;51:411e4.
References
151
[14] Minerbi-Codish I, Fraser D, Avnun L, Glezerman M, Heimer D. Inﬂuence of asthma in
pregnancy on labor and the newborn. Respiration 1998;65:130e5.
[15] Mihrshahi S, Belousova E, Marks GB, Peat JK, Childhood Asthma Prevention Team.
Pregnancy and birth outcomes in families with asthma. J Asthma 2003;40:181e7.
[16] Stenius-Aarniala B, Piirila P, Teramo K. Asthma and pregnancy: a prospective study of
198 pregnancies. Thorax 1988;43:12e8.
[17] Dombrowski MP, Schatz M, Wise R, Momirova V, Landon M, Mabie W, et al. Asthma
during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 2004;103:5e12.
[18] Bracken MB, Triche EW, Belanger K, Saftlas A, Beckett WS, Leaderer BP. Asthma
symptoms, severity, and drug therapy: a prospective study of effects on 2205
pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 2003;102:739e52.
[19] Schatz M, Zeiger RS, Hoffman CP, Harden K, Forsythe A, Chilingar L, et al. Perinatal
outcomes in the pregnancies of asthmatic women: a prospective controlled analysis. Am
J Respir Crit Care Med 1995;151:1170e4.
[20] Firoozi F, Lemiere C, Ducharme FM, Beauchesne MF, Perreault S, Berard A, et al. Ef-
fect of maternal moderate to severe asthma on perinatal outcomes. Respir Med 2010;
104:1278e87.
[21] Blais L, Forget A. Asthma exacerbations during the ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy and the
risk of congenital malformations among asthmatic women. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2008;121:1379e84. 1384 e1371.
[22] Expert Panel Report 3 (EPR-3). Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of
asthma-summary report 2007. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007;120:S94e138.
[23] Schatz M, Dombrowski MP, Wise R, Momirova V, Landon M, Mabie W, et al. The rela-
tionship of asthma medication use to perinatal outcomes. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2004;
113:1040e5.
[24] Schatz M, Zeiger RS, Harden K, Hoffman CC, Chilingar L, Petitti D. The safety of
asthma and allergy medications during pregnancy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1997;100:
301e6.
[25] Norjavaara E, de Verdier MG. Normal pregnancy outcomes in a population- based study
including 2,968 pregnant women exposed to budesonide. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2003;
111:736e42.
[26] Martel MJ, Rey E, Beauchesne MF, Perreault S, Lefebvre G, Forget A, et al. Use of
inhaled corticosteroids during pregnancy and risk of pregnancy in- duced hypertension:
nested caseecontrol study. BMJ 2005;330:230.
[27] Kallen B, Rydhstroem H, Aberg A. Congenital malformations after the use of inhaled
budesonide in early pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 1999;93:392e5.
[28] Bakhireva LN, Jones KL, Schatz M, Johnson D, Chambers CD, Organization of Tera-
tology Information Services Research Group. Asthma medication use in pregnancy and
fetal growth. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2005;116:503e9.
[29] Breton MC, Beauchesne MF, Lemiere C, Rey E, Forget A, Blais L. Risk of peri- natal
mortality associated with inhaled corticosteroid use for the treatment of asthma during
pregnancy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;126. 772e77.e2.
[30] Kallen B, Otterblad Olausson P. Use of anti-asthmatic drugs during preg- nancy. 3.
Congenital malformations in the infants. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2007;63:383e8.
[31] Hyiid A, Molgaard-Nielesen D. Corticosteroid use during pregnancy and the risk of
orofacial clefts. CMAJ (Can Med Assoc J) 2011;183:796e804.
152
CHAPTER 10 The management of asthma during pregnancy
[32] Blais L, Beauchesne MF, Rey E, Malo JL, Forget A. Use of inhaled corticoste- roids
during the ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy and the risk of congenital malfor- mations among
women with asthma. Thorax 2007;62:320e8.
[33] Blais L, Beauchesne MF, Lemiere C, Elftouh N. High doses of inhaled cortico- steroids
during the ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy and congenital malformations. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2009;124:1229e34. e1224.
[34] Lin S, Munsie J, Herdt-Losavio M. Maternal asthma medication use and the risk of
gastroschisis. Am J Epidemiol 2008;168:73e9.
[35] Lin S, Herdt-Losavio M, Gensburg L, Marshall E, Druschel C. Maternal asth- ma medi-
cation use and the risk of congenital heart defects. Birth Defects Res (Part A) 2009;85:
161e8.
[36] Robijn AL, Jensen ME, mclaughlin K, Gibson PG, Murphy VE. Inhaled corticoste-
roid use during pregnancy among women with asthma: A systematic review and
meta-analysis.Clin Exp Allergy 2019;49(111):1403e17.
[37] Bakhireva LN, Jones KL, Schatz M, Klonoff-Cohen HS, Johnson D, Slymen DJ, et al.
Safety of leukotriene receptor antagonists in pregnancy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007;
119:618e25.
[38] Sarkar M, Koren G, Kalra S, Ying A, Smorlesi C, DeSantis M, et al. Montelu- kast use
during pregnancy; a multicentre, prospective, comparative study of infant outcomes.
Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2009;65:1259e64.
[40] Breton MC, Beauchesne MF, Lemiere C, Rey E, Forget A, Blais L. Risk of perinatal
mortality associated with inhaled corticosteroid use for the treatment of asthma during
pregnancy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;126(4):772e7.
[41] Labor S, Dalbello AM, Plavec D, et al. What is safe enough - asthma in pregnancy - a
review of current literature and recommendations. Asthma Res Pract 2018;4:11.
[42] Murphy VE, Jensen ME, Powell H, Gibson PG. Inﬂuence of maternal body mass index
and macrophage activation on asthma exacerbations in pregnancy. J Allergy Clin
Immunol Pract 2017;5(4):981e7.
[43] Cossette B, Forget A, Beauchesne MF, et al. Impact of maternal use of asthma-
controller therapy on perinatal outcomes. Thorax 2013;68:724e30.
[44] Busse WW. NAEPP expert panel report. Managing asthma during pregnancy: recom-
mendations for pharmacologic treatment e 2004 update. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2005;115:34e46.
[45] Nelsen LM, Shields KE, Cunningham ML, et al. Congenital malformations among
infants born to women receiving montelukast, inhaled corticosteroids, and other asthma
medications. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2012;129:251.
[46] Murphy VE, Namazy JA, Schatz M, Chambers C, Attia J, Gibson PG. A meta-analysis
of adverse perinatal outcomes in women with asthma. BJOG 2011;118(11):1314e23.
[47] Park-Wyllie L, Mazzotta P, Pastuszak A, Moretti ME, Beique L, Hunnisett L, et al. Birth
defects after maternal exposure to corticosteroids: prospec- tive cohort study and meta-
analysis of epidemiologic studies. Teratology 2000;62:385e92.
[48] Bandoli G, Palmsten K, Forbess Smith CJ, Chambers CD. A review of systemic corti-
costeroid use in pregnancy and the risk of select pregnancy and birth outcomes. Rheum
Dis Clin North Am 2017;43(3):489e502.
[49] Namazy JA, Blais L, Andrews EB, et al. The Xolair Pregnancy Registry (EXPECT): Peri-
natal outcomes among pregnant women with asthma treated with omalizumab (Xolair)
compared against those of a cohort of pregnant women with moderate-to-severe
asthma. J All Clin Immunol 2019;143(2).
References
153
         
This page intentionally left blank
Nausea and vomiting of
pregnancy
11
Carolyn Bottone-Post
University of Northern Colorado, Greeley, CO, United States
11.1 Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy
One of the most frequently encountered common discomforts related to pregnancy
is nausea and vomiting. Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy (NVP) is often most
difﬁcult to deal with, often debilitating to patients, relationships, work performance,
and severely impacts quality of life (QOL) if untreated or poorly controlled. While
likely multifactorial in nature, there is no “magic bullet” or formula which may be
successfully applied to all women; treatments for afﬂicted women must be consid-
ered on an individual basis [51], and prevention is likely the best approach [28]. It is
understood that NVP and hyperemesis gravidarum (HG) decrease absorption of
many drugs resulting in diminished therapeutic concentrations, while pH changes
in the stomach alter drug bioavailability [41]. Drug distribution is further altered
due to increased maternal plasma volume; a decrease in plasma protein during preg-
nancy may result in more unbound, metabolically active drug levels which affect
drug excretion [41].
11.2 Prevalence
Statistics vary regarding prevalence, but many authors agree NVP occurs in up to
70e91% of pregnancies [11,16,36]. Authors may differentiate nausea from retching
and actual vomiting and agree this debilitating process may occur anytime of the day
or night [10]. A challenge to the study of this malady is lack of consistent deﬁnitions
used among researchers [14] and data collection challenges related to inconsis-
tencies in ICD-10 hospital coding [25].
NVP often begins in the fourth to sixth week of pregnancy, reaching peak prev-
alence during weeks 8e12, and diminishing by week 20 [7,51], although approxi-
mately 10% of women continue to experience NVP throughout pregnancy [11].
Women who experience severe and prolonged NVP are said to have HG, the most
severe form of the problem. Although this extreme form of NVP occurs in only
approximately 1%e3% of the pregnant population [10,16,36], it is quite challenging
to deal with and recurs in about 75% of subsequent pregnancies [63].
CHAPTER
155
Clinical Pharmacology During Pregnancy. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818902-3.00013-0
Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
HG is generally deﬁned as severe, persistent, and prolonged NVP beginning
before 20 weeks of pregnancy and associated with dehydration, ketonuria, and
loss of 5% loss of body mass index (BMI), often requiring hospitalization to
achieve symptom relief [14,17,79]. Electrolyte disturbances and abnormalities in
liver function occur in approximately 50% of HG sufferers [2]. As the most common
reason for hospitalization in the ﬁrst half of pregnancy [2], the effects of HG severely
impact QOL, often result in orthostatic BP and heart rate changes, and may portend
postpartum depression [2,17,63]. Rarely, women with HG experience Wernicke en-
cephalopathy, splenic avulsion, esophageal rupture, and pneumothorax [48]; as such,
it is suggested when administering IV ﬂuids they be of lactated ringers solution with
added thiamine (B-1) to prevent Wernicke encephalopathy [65]. Because NVP is
such a common occurrence, providers, family members, and employers may mini-
mize its signiﬁcance [33], leading women to feel unsupported and labeled lazy or
complainers and ultimately experiencing feelings of being dismissed and not heard
by providers and family. Those who equate NVP with a protective response to pre-
serve pregnancy may, unfortunately, undertreat patients [3].
NVP and HG have global signiﬁcance, affecting relationships with signiﬁcant
others, caretaking other children, and employment. Women experience emotional
sequelae and economic burdens from these conditions and may ultimately consider
termination of the current pregnancy and prevention of any future pregnancies [18].
Women with severe NVP or HG experience diminished QOL as their symptom
severity increases; however, even mild symptoms impact women’s ability to perform
in the workplace, care for their children, and maintain satisfying relationships with
friends or partners [11,30,77]. These women may decide to delay or decline future
pregnancies and even consider termination if symptoms are severe and unrelenting
[77]. Health care professionals may dismiss symptoms as trivial [32]; however, it is
critical to intervene early to prevent development of HG [3].
11.3 Etiologies and pathogenesis
11.3.1 Genetic inﬂuences
NVP is highly heritable, impacting duration, severity, and recurrence. Women with
HG have a greater risk of recurrence with future pregnancies, compounded further in
those whose mothers or sisters experienced this problem [11]. Women with prepreg-
nancy mental health disorders may be at higher risk for HG [2]; further, there is an
increased risk of postpartum depression in women experiencing NVP or HG [8,16].
Pregnant teens aged 16e19 with NVP or HG were found to have worse Edinburgh
Postpartum Depression Scores than those without symptoms and suffered higher
rates of prenatal depression related to fatigue, insomnia, and starvation [70]. There
appears to be increased incidence of NVP in women with comorbid conditions, such
156
CHAPTER 11 Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy
as diabetes (pregestational or gestational), hypertension (HTN) (chronic or gesta-
tional), hyperlipidemia, anemia, or thyroid dysfunction [23,76], although linkages
are unclear.
11.3.2 Hormonal inﬂuences
NVP and HG are frequently thought to result from higher hCG levels, as the peak
times of occurrence often correlate to rising hCG; women at risk for NVP and
HG often have higher levels due to multiple gestations, molar pregnancies, and those
with larger placental volume. However, higher hCG levels have not been found to
consistently equate to more pronounced. However, higher hCG levels have not
been found to consistently equate to more pronounced nausea symptoms, rather,
be associated with receptor sensitivity or differences in hCG isoforms [62]. Studies
are not consistent evaluating hCG effects on NVP or HG.
Progesterone is implicated in changes in gastrointestinal (GI) motility, exerting
inhibitory effects on GI contractility. Normally, electrical cycles of the GI tract occur
at two to four times per minute; however, with delayed cycling (bradygastria), transit
time is signiﬁcantly slowed, resulting in more nausea [10,11,39]. Women with pre-
existing conditions associated with gastric dysrhythmia, such as reﬂux disorders,
Crohn’s disease, celiac disease, and irritable bowel syndrome or women receiving
progesterone may experience more NVP [39].
Estrogen also negatively impacts development of NVP; women in hyperestro-
genic states, such as multifetal gestations or those with high BMI, often experience
more NVP or worse symptoms [11]. Estrogen induces nitric oxide production result-
ing in relaxation of smooth muscle and delayed gastric transit time [24,31]; further,
sex hormone levels dramatically change esophageal, gastric, and small bowel
motility impacting NVP [45]. While the role of hCG in NVP is unclear, some sug-
gest NVP is a relative imbalance in acidic isoforms of the hormone, rather than ab-
solute hCG level [11].
Women at risk for HG have demonstrated higher serotonin levels [2,16], a hor-
mone which also modulates GI motility. This suggests serotonin receptor antagonists
might be more effective in controlling NVP; however, there is no consistent symp-
tom improvement seen with such medications [11]. Additionally, women experi-
encing HG may demonstrate heightened sensitivity to estrogen rather than
serotonin, worsening symptoms [26].
Pregnancies characterized by NVP or HG may have transient hyperthyroid states
because of similarities in the beta-subunits of hCG and thyroid-stimulating hormone
[55]. During pregnancy, rising hCG levels can physiologically stimulate the thyroid,
resulting in a mild hyperthyroidism which does not require treatment. However, the
prevalence of overt thyroid dysfunction during pregnancy is estimated by some at
2%e3% [11,31,51].
Relaxin levels also contribute to slow GI transit times by provoking electrical cy-
cle dysregulation during pregnancy [14]. In addition, relaxin progressively reduces
lower esophageal sphincter pressure throughout pregnancy, increasing incidence of
GI upset and potential GERD symptoms [10].
11.3 Etiologies and pathogenesis
157
11.3.3 Helicobacter pylori
90% of HG sufferers are suspected to have H. pylori infections as compared with a
control group rate of 50% when mucosal samples are compared [10,11]. Severity of
symptoms seems to correlate with density of infection; however, blood testing alone
fails to identify remote or current infections. Diagnostic testing may be helpful in
women without signiﬁcant NVP or HG symptom improvement [62]. Stool antigen
testing may be helpful in identifying current infection; in the presence of a known
current infection, dual antibiotic therapy is suggested with 2 weeks treatment with
a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) [7].
11.4 Burden of the disease
Many authors agree NVP and HG are leading causes of hospitalization in early preg-
nancy [32,51,65]. The economic burden of NVP was estimated at $1827 per preg-
nancy by Ref. [63] and/or approximately $1.8 billion in 2012 in the United States
[11,17]. Multiple unscheduled visits to care providers, telephone contacts, and uti-
lization of ambulance or EMT services increase costs for caring for NVP and HG
patients [25,53]. Diminished job effectiveness and time lost from work contribute
to the economic and psychological burden women suffered [48]. Negative experi-
ences HG may meet criteria for posttraumatic stress disorder [32], suggesting a rela-
tionship between degree of symptoms, hospitalization, and risk of prenatal and
postpartum anxiety and depression [37].
While the impact on QOL is more difﬁcult to measure, most authors agree there
are signiﬁcant negative effects on partner and parenting relationships, job perfor-
mance, and fulﬁllment of household responsibilities [11,30]. However, QOL
studies related to NVP and HG are subject to profound recall bias complicating
research [64]. Providers must acknowledge grieving processes associated with
loss of normal, uncomplicated pregnancy experiences and instead offer support
to deal with disruption of QOL by signiﬁcant symptoms [68]. Heitman et al.
[77] reported while even mild NVP negatively impacted women’s lives, with severe
symptoms, women were less likely to consider future pregnancies. Authors agreed
all modes of therapeutic management should be utilized before therapeutic abor-
tion is considered [23]. Evaluating length of stay per hospital admission and
improved quantiﬁcation of symptom severity assist approximations of current
cost burden [21,25], as use of incorrect diagnosis codes may result in underreport-
ing admissions for NVP, compounding errors in determining ﬁnancial burden [23].
11.5 Cultural implications
It is interesting to note some cultures lack words to describe NVP; as a result, dimin-
ished self-worth and self-esteem and being thought of negatively by family may
158
CHAPTER 11 Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy
result [29]. Difﬁculty describing the experience of NVP and HG among pregnant
women in some cultures is made more difﬁcult by food insecurities, taboos, cultural
mores, and norms. Precluding pregnant women from consuming potentially tainted
foods, especially meat, milk, and vegetables, may be perceived as problematic, espe-
cially younger women with less education, subject to direction from powerful and
inﬂuential family members. Women may not know or understand the basis of foods
recommended or prohibited; however, adherence may be rooted in cultural and
evolutionary factors [18]. NVP occurs more commonly in women from India,
Pakistan, Asian, and New Zealand compared to other populations [11]. Some au-
thors attribute NVP to an evolutionary mechanism resulting in better precautions
around behaviors and intake and promoting additional social support [3,45,53];
however, this may result in undertreatment of symptoms.
11.6 Risk factors
NVP occurs more often in women who are obese, younger, primigravidas, and non-
smokers [63]. Other risk factors include multiple gestations, molar pregnancies and
pregnancies with female infants, and factors related to an increase in hCG levels
[7,53]. Younger women had a higher risk of NVP and had a two times higher likeli-
hood of hospital admission [23]. Smoking seems to exert a protective effect against
NVP [11], perhaps due to decreased placental size [23] suggested lower socioeco-
nomic status (SES) as a risk for worse NVP; others, however, found no evidence
of association of SES, BMI, or smoking status with NVP [7]. Additionally, women
with a history of motion sickness or migraines may experience worse symptoms;
avoiding ﬂickering lights and high-humidity environments may be helpful preven-
tive tactics [3,65].
11.7 Quantiﬁcation
The PUQE, or Pregnancy Unique Quantiﬁcation of Emesis scoring system, is a
frequently employed system used to assess the severity of NVP based on the pres-
ence of nausea, vomiting, and retching during a 24-h period. It has been repeatedly
validated for use [11,33,50]. This three-question survey differentiates between
nausea, vomiting, and retching, with a maximum of 15 points possible, helping
categorize severity of NVP into “mild” (6 points), “moderate” (7e12 points),
and “severe” (13 points). It also contains a QOL question with no points attached
(see Fig. 11.1). Rhodes Index Score (see Fig. 11.2) is also a valid and reliable tool for
self-quantiﬁcation of postoperative nausea and vomiting and is also used to
determine the extent of NVP [20]. Future work includes the MinSafeStart mobile
11.7 Quantiﬁcation
159
application, currently being developed in Norway, to help quantify symptoms of
NVP and optimize treatment [47].
11.8 Effects on fetus
Some authors purport no association between HG and lower APGAR scores or peri-
natal mortality [2]. [3] implies a possible but unclear connection between the
severity of NVP and low birthweight (LBW), small for gestational age (SGA),
and preterm births. While there are multifactorial etiologies suspected, children of
women with severe NVP and HG may experience developmental disabilities such
as seen with Autism Spectrum Disorder including impaired social, verbal, and
nonverbal communication abilities [66].
FIGURE 11.1
Pregnancy Unique Quantiﬁcation of Emesis scoring system.
160
CHAPTER 11 Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy
FIGURE 11.2
Rhodes index rhodes-index-of-nausea-vomiting-and-retching-3.png.
11.8 Effects on fetus
161
11.9 Late complications related to NVP
Authors suggested there was an increased risk of preeclampsia, proteinuria, and/or
HTN with NVP, which appeared related to elevated hCG levels; however, there
appeared to be a lower risk for LBW or SGA infants with NVP [14], while other au-
thors suggested that mild-to-moderate NVP was associated with improved out-
comes, such as fewer miscarriages and fetal malformations, less prematurity, and
better attainment of developmental milestones [17,34].
11.10 Approaches to treatment
Generally, authors agree treatment must be individualized for every patient and
could relate to individual metabolic activity as well as differences in drug bioavail-
ability [11]; 1- [23,30]; further, authors agree that prevention and early treatment of
symptoms is better than identifying which treatments are effective after symptoms
arise [33,39]. It is appropriate to utilize simpler interventions, such as lifestyle
changes, before employing higher level interventions such as pharmaceuticals
[63]. However, there is a dearth of evidence-based study related to effective life-
style changes [39] and few medication studies that included the vulnerable popula-
tion of pregnant women. This results from regulatory change following the
Thalidomide disaster in 1961 [67]. While there are adverse drug events websites
for reporting complications around drugs used in pregnancy, most premarketing hu-
man clinical trials exclude pregnant women, promoting reliance on less rigorous
studies [69].
Authors generally agree that avoidance of medications in the ﬁrst trimester is
advisable [10,11]; however [23], studies suggest nearly half the women who were
admitted for symptomatic control of NVP had not previously received a prescription
medication. Clinicians following treatment guidelines may prevent initial or recur-
rent hospital admissions and related resource utilization [56]. Following a logical,
stepwise plan using antiemetics and additional strategies will be helpful to combat
NVP and HG [36].
11.11 Lifestyle alterations
NVP is described as a self-limiting problem for many for which authors recommend
lifestyle alterations. These may include avoiding known triggers, such as certain
foods, heated foods, cooking odors, perfumes, or activities which provoke NVP
for the individual [2,7,28]. Frequent small, bland, low-fat meals and snacking on
carbohydrate-rich items such as crackers and dry toast may be helpful, while others
162
CHAPTER 11 Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy
suggest consumption of a small protein meal at bedtime may reduce symptoms
[33,65]. Other recommendations include separating food intake from ﬂuid intake
so as not to overﬁll the stomach and avoiding overly sweet or very cold beverages
[5,7]. Pregnant women often begin prenatal vitamin supplements in early pregnancy,
but may ﬁnd relief taking two children’s chewable vitamins daily instead, supple-
menting with folic acid, and temporarily stopping oral iron preparations may help
prevent GI upset [3,7,10,65]. Avoiding extreme fatigue and excessive stress may
be helpful; additionally, consuming high-protein liquids especially to prevent dehy-
dration or consuming electrolyte solutions, eating fresh fruits and vegetables, and
consuming cold foods may prevent or correct gastric dysmotility syndromes
[10,11,28]. While bland, simple carbohydrates are usually well tolerated, these
may provoke rapid blood sugar ﬂuctuations, and protein foods or beverages should
be additionally offered [28].
Women who experience signs of circulatory disturbances, such as dizziness, may
experience symptom improvement when wearing medium range compression hose
(23e32 mm Hg at the ankle), which should be applied before arising each morning
for maximum relief [45]. It was suggested women make the most of the times when
symptom free and increase rest when symptoms are prominent [53], as rest helps
diminish symptoms [68].
11.12 Complementary and alternative medicine
11.12.1 Nonpharmacologic treatments
Acupressure, massage, and hypnotherapy have been suggested for decreasing NVP
[7,11,28,73,74]; however, some conclude there is insufﬁcient evidence that hypno-
therapy helps NVP [65]. Proponents of hypnosis cite several small studies with
encouraging results where hypnosis was helpful to reduce sensitivity of nausea cen-
ters in the brain; however, training may be cost prohibitive [28]. Mindfulness therapy
is suggested in conjunction with B-6 use [12]. Acupressure especially is considered
safe, easy to self-administer, cost-effective, and helpful to some women. Application
of Sea Bands is easy for patients, who place their middle three ﬁngers on inside of
the wrist with the edge of the third ﬁnger on the wrist crease. The appropriate pres-
sure point known as the Nei-Kuan or P-6 point is just under the edge of the index
ﬁnger between the two central tendons. Sea Bands are applied with the button exert-
ing downward pressure on both wrists at the Nei-Kuan point [23]. Authors suggest
additional research is needed to assure the efﬁcacy of acupuncture and acupressure
in pregnancy. While there is safety in providing acustimulation or mild electrical
stimuli to the P-6 pressure point for the treatment of NVP, there are mixed results
on the effectiveness [28,46,65]. Aromatherapy has not been demonstrated effective
for treatment of NVP, except for lemon aroma [22].
11.12 Complementary and alternative medicine
163
11.12.2 Vitamins
Authors agree use of vitamin B-6, or pyridoxine, may be helpful primarily in pre-
venting onset of nausea and may be used in doses up to 200 mg daily [2,7,57]. B-6
levels are related to protein and not caloric consumption [31] and may exert a syn-
ergistic effect with antihistamines; others suggest dosages up to 1000 mg daily
may be used [28]. Similarly, the use of folic acid supplements in place of prenatal
vitamin use or changing to two children’s chewable vitamins without iron is sug-
gested [23].
11.12.3 Herbal supplements
Herbal treatments employed for NVP generally have an associated and unfounded
perception of gentleness and safety, such as using chamomile (Matricaria chamo-
milla) for reducing nausea [2,28], or cranberry and raspberry leaf [35]. Herbal treat-
ments must be treated as seriously as medications since they contain chemically
active ingredients that have indications, precautions, and contraindications much
like their prescription counterparts, with risks that may include allergy, dehydration,
hypotension, arrhythmia, or anticoagulant effects [28,59].
11.12.4 Ginger (Zingiber ofﬁcinale)
Pharmaceutical grade ginger is considered a safe and effective remedy for NVP
[7]. Ginger contains gingerols and shogaols which act as dopamine and serotonin
antagonists and improve gastric motility and transit time. While the exact mecha-
nism of action is not known, studies suggest anticholinergic and antiserotonergic
properties, which improve gastric tone, motility, and transit time [43,51], may be
helpful to decrease nausea but not overall vomiting episodes [28]. It is available as
a tea, syrup, candied, or in fresh root form, but levels of the active herb vary widely
depending on preparations; the highest dosage of gingerols is found in dried ginger
powder (7e14 mg/gm), followed by fresh ginger (2e2.8 mg/gm) and powdered tea
products (0.8 mg/gm) [43]. Dosages of 200e1000 mg daily in divided doses have
been recommended [10,41] however, dosages from 600 to 2500 mg daily may also
be used [34]. Studies have found ginger to be very helpful in NVP, but caution it
may provoke heartburn [20,57]. Interpretation of study results is hampered by dif-
ferences in herb preparation and form [43]. Results from a small study suggest the
combination of ginger with B-6 is more effective than placebo, but there were no
signiﬁcant differences when participants were treated with one of these supple-
ments alone [58]. Ginger should be avoided by women on anticoagulants as it
may inhibit their action leading to more bleeding [11]; however, other studies
have not demonstrated any effects on platelet aggregation or interactions with an-
ticoagulants [43]. While there is no evidence of fetal risk associated with use of
ginger [65], more research on safety and efﬁcacy is suggested [23].
164
CHAPTER 11 Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy
11.12.5 Lemon
Formulations containing lemon, whether in drops, oils, or candies, have been found
helpful for nausea in a variety of settings, but conﬂict regarding timing of doses, for-
mulations, and delivery presents a barrier to use [5,63]. Lemon aroma has been
found helpful for combating NVP and nausea in bone marrow transplant patients.
In a small study, lemon consumption and inhalation was found helpful for nausea
without causing harm; further, oral use may reduce halitosis associated with ketonu-
ria for symptom improvement [9].
11.12.6 Pomegranate and spearmint
Pomegranate (Punica granatum L.) and spearmint (Mentha spicata L.) have been used
extensively in traditional Persian medicine for their unique properties. Pomegranate
syrup is purported to improve gastric tone and act as a remedy against H. pylori and ul-
cers. It is reported to decrease platelet dysfunction and reduce oxidative stress in the
placenta, although there have been no well-constructed studies conﬁrming these prop-
erties. Spearmint underwent a small randomized control, double-blind study utilizing
oil disbursed in a bowl of water and placed near a bed before sleep. The study suggested
while there was improvement of NVP in the spearmint group, it was not signiﬁcant [1].
While not well studied, mint is reported to reduce smooth muscle spasm and improve
dysmotility symptoms [28]. Utilizing mint essential for its aroma was found to signiﬁ-
cantly decrease NVP, but no impact on maternal anxiety was noted [6].
11.12.7 Quince (Cydonia oblonga)
This highly astringent fruit is employed successfully in Iranian traditional medicine
and is endorsed for antioxidant, antifungal, antibacterial, and antiinﬂammatory
properties, and may be consumed as a raw fruit, concentrated paste, or syrup [35].
In a multicentered randomized controlled trial, quince performed better in prevent-
ing and treating NVP than B-6 [35].
11.13 Pharmacologic therapies
In general, treatment for NVP soon after presentation of symptoms may halt or delay the
appearance of HG. Women who have previously experienced HG should begin treat-
ment early before the onset of symptoms, with consideration of alternate administration
routes when treatment is begun. Further, if several medications are used simultaneously,
clinicians must be diligent to avoid adverse or compound drug reactions [3].
11.13.1 Fluid rehydration
This may be helpful for refractory vomiting or in HG associated with ketonuria,
weight loss, and electrolyte disturbances [7,51,53]. Use of lactated ringers or
11.13 Pharmacologic therapies
165
normal saline solutions, not glucose solutions alone, was recommended for ﬂuid
replacement [23]. Due to signiﬁcant risk of serious complications such as infec-
tion, thromboembolic events, bacteremia, and sepsis, PICC line placement is not
recommended [65].
11.13.2 Enteral versus parenteral nutrition
Authors suggest enteral feedings provide more relief than parenteral feedings [2,65]
and promote use of Pedialyte or sports beverages when no evidence of severe dehy-
dration exists [53]. Parenteral hydration should be considered if enteral feedings fail
but should be used as a last resort [28].
11.13.3 Diclegis
This is the only medication used for NVP which holds a Food and Drug Adminis-
tration (FDA) indication and approval since 2013. The formulation includes
10 mg doxylamine and 10 mg Vitamin B-6 in a timed-release formula; it seems
more effective if started early in pregnancy to prevent NVP rather than for relieving
acute symptoms [7,40]. Diclegis inhibits the action of histamine at H-1 receptor sites
and studies suggest no increase in fetal malformations when used in the ﬁrst
trimester [40]. Proponents of the drug suggest Diclegis is one of the most extensively
studied medications for pregnancy use, with most evidence suggesting its efﬁcacy
due to an abundance of data from the market withdrawal of Bendectin in 1983
[44]. Diclegis does not contain Dicyclomine, a component not found efﬁcacious
and was subsequently removed.
Since most women take between two and four tablets daily, Diclegis is costly,
ranging from about $220.00 to $570.00 for 100 tablets [27,60] and $136.00 for a
generic version [27]. The components of Diclegis may be bought separately as
10 mg Doxylamine and 10 mg B-6 for signiﬁcantly less but lack the timed-release
of Doxylamine and may be less effective. Common side effects include dizziness,
dry mouth, and fatigue; less common side effects include urinary retention, vertigo,
tinnitus, insomnia, and facial dyskinesia. It should be used cautiously in women with
asthma, narrow-angle glaucoma, ulcer, GI obstruction, or bladder neck obstruction
(Drug and Therapeutic Bulletin, 2019).
11.13.3.1 Bonjesta
This medication was approved by the FDA in 2016 and has a dual action of a
rapid release phase of medication providing appreciable blood levels quickly
then employs a delayed release phase providing extended relief [38,51]. It is
composed of an enteric coated core of 10 mg each doxylamine and pyridoxine,
covered by an immediate release layer of the same, providing a total of 20 mg
doxylamine and 20 mg pyridoxine. It appears both bonjesta and diclegis have
similar side effect proﬁles, including somnolence, headache, dizziness, and dry
mouth.
166
CHAPTER 11 Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy
11.13.3.2 Antacids
While there are no teratogenic effects from this group, they have limited effect on
NVP [7]. Pregnant women should avoid bicarbonate of soda formulation because
of the potential for causing systemic pH changes. Calcium, aluminum, and
magnesium-based products are considered safe in pregnancy [10]; however, pro-
longed use of magnesium trisilicate (Gaviscon) has been associated with the forma-
tion of renal stones, hypotonia, and fetal respiratory distress [11].
11.13.3.3 Diphenhydramine/dimenhydrinate/meclizine
Benadryl, Dramamine, and Meclizine are H-1 receptor antagonist antihistamines,
which are considered safe for use in pregnancy; however, since they may cause
excessive drowsiness, they are often used primarily for episodes of breakthrough
NVP [7,23]. They additionally provide indirect action on the vestibular system,
providing some inhibition of muscarinic receptors to diminish stimulation of brain
vomiting centers [11,57]. Other common side effects include drowsiness, restless-
ness, dry mouth, and constipation [57]. While there appears to be no increased
risk of major malformations related to use, there is also no manufacturers support
for use of the produce in pregnancy [39].
11.13.3.4 Cimetidine/ranitidine
These H-2 receptor antagonists were generally considered safe for use in pregnancy
as there is no known risk for major malformations [7,10,11]. However, in September
of 2019, the generic form of Ranitidine was recalled by the manufacturer because
testing found low levels of N-nitrosodimethylamine in the drug, a known
carcinogen.
11.13.3.5 Omeprazole
Prilosec is a PPI used in pregnancy for treating reﬂux disease; additionally, it may be
helpful in reducing NVP and mitigating the effects of recurrent vomiting episodes
[7]; however, there may be an association with dose-related embryonic and fetal
development [10]. When H. pylori is suspected, PPIs may be employed [23].
11.13.3.6 Metoclopramide
Reglan is a dopamine and serotonin receptor antagonist which may improve gastric
dysrhythmia [2,11]. Gastric emptying time is more rapid due to the release of
acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junctions [57]. It is considered safe for use in
the ﬁrst trimester but may incite signiﬁcant drowsiness and dry mouth [7,10]. Pa-
tients may experience more dystonia or increased risk of tardive dyskinesia with
chronic use, especially if taken after 12 weeks gestation [11,57]. While it appears
that no signiﬁcant risk of malformations occurs with exposure in pregnancy, we
must remember there is no manufacture support for use of the product in pregnancy
[39,52]. Trimethobenzamide, commonly known as Tigan, is another dopamine
antagonist not as commonly used in pregnancy because of increased risk of maternal
hepatotoxicity, depression, and extrapyramidal symptoms [57].
11.13 Pharmacologic therapies
167
11.13.3.7 Promethazine
Phenergan is a dopamine antagonist which may promote improvements in gastric
dysrhythmia [2]. An advantage to this medication is its availability in both oral
and rectal suppository forms, enabling patients with more severe symptoms to utilize
the drug at home. Sedation is a signiﬁcant but expected side effect. Three clinical
trials speak to its safety and effectiveness during pregnancy; side effects include rest-
lessness, tenseness, tardive dyskinesia, muscular rigidity, or dystonia [7] however, it
is suggested for cautious use after the ﬁrst trimester due to its slower excretion from
neonatal and fetal tissue [10]. It should be used with caution in patients with seizure
disorders, as it may lower the seizure threshold [57]. Dosage recommendations vary
but typically include 12.5 mg rectal suppository or 25 mg orally every 4e6 h [28].
11.13.3.8 Droperidol
Droperidol, known commonly as Inapsine is a dopamine antagonist which may posi-
tively impact gastric dysrhythmia [2]; however, it is rarely used during pregnancy
because of potential maternal safety issues. It is associated with maternal QT prolon-
gation and/or torsades de pointes in higher doses [61].
11.13.3.9 Mirtazapine
Mirtazapine, known as “Remeron” and used as an antidepressant in major depressive
disorders, is a SerotonineNorepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitor (SNRI) which stimu-
lates certain noradrenergic, serotonergic, histaminic, and muscarinic receptors to
produce positive effects on mood, reduction of anxiety and nausea, as well as stim-
ulate the appetite without increasing the risk of birth defects [2]. Animal studies have
shown adverse fetal effects; however, there are no well-controlled human studies for
corroboration. Older case reports recommend Remeron for intractable symptoms of
HG. However, it is recommended for use if clear patient beneﬁts override potential
risks [54]. Rare side effects may include anxiety, agitation, and suicidal ideation;
case reports suggest a higher chance of serotonin syndrome, especially if multiple
serotonergic medications are used simultaneously [2]. Symptoms of serotonin syn-
drome include diarrhea, hyperreﬂexia, diaphoresis, fever, confusion, ataxia, tremor,
and rarely, rhabdomyolysis.
11.13.3.10 Ondansetron/zofran
This is one of the most effective and highly used antiemetics during pregnancy [2]
and one more controversial, due to a perception of high teratogenic risk when used in
pregnancy [39]. It is a serotonin antagonist at the 5HT3 receptor which blocks sero-
tonin action in the small bowel and is often used for severe nausea related to chemo-
therapy. It is proposed that cardiac defects in humans may be related to dysrhythmias
and disruption of the hERG channel during critical periods of embryonic develop-
ment [19]. Researchers reevaluated data from the National Birth Defects Prevention
study and Birth Defects study evaluating over 12,000 and 20,000 patients in two case
control studies looking at 30 major anomalies in live births; results suggest
168
CHAPTER 11 Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy
ondansetron use has not been found to increase open neural tube defects or anen-
cephaly and hypospadias; however, there was a small increase in cleft palate
(adjusted OR 1.6) and renal agenesis (adjusted OR 1.8) [49].
While found more effective than other antiemetic medications, use during
pregnancy is considered off-label and is only approved for nausea and vomiting
resulting from chemotherapy, radiation, and surgery [49,57]. Common side
effects include headache, constipation and fatigue and rarely serotonin syndrome
and prolongation of QT interval in women with undiagnosed cardiac defects [40].
The dysrhythmia-promoting potential of ondansetron, even when used as recom-
mended, is associated with ventricular arrhythmia, such as torsades de pointes
[19].
Oral Zofran tablets or orally disintegrating tablets and transdermal patches are
suitable for home and outpatient use, while IV and SQ formulations help hospital-
ized patients achieve rapid symptom relief [7,11]. Weekly applications of the Gra-
nisetron transdermal patch suggested better compliance with similar symptom
improvements [42]. There is debate regarding the safety of 5HT3 antagonists;
limited data suggest a possible risk of cleft palate and cardiac anomalies
[7,11,72], while others suggest its safety [30,39]. Conservative use of ondansetron
includes avoidance of use earlier than 10 weeks gestation, and using after other treat-
ments fail, following patient discussion regarding the risk versus beneﬁts
[3,15,73,72].
Use of ondansetron may pose maternal risk for cardiac rhythm disturbances,
particularly when NVP or HG results in metabolic derangement such as low potassium
levels [19]. Patients may also have a higher risk of serotonin syndrome with concom-
itant use of SSRIs, SNRIs, and MAO inhibitors [61]. It remains one of the more expen-
sive treatments for NVP/HG; however, patients may use discount coupons for
signiﬁcant savings. There is no manufactures support for use in pregnancy [39].
11.13.3.11 Glucocorticoids
Authors vary on the utility of glucocorticoids for HG. It has not been shown to
reduce hospitalization rates for severe, refractory HG, and may carry with it an
increased risk of oral clefts when used in the ﬁrst trimester [2,7,11,57]. Generally,
steroids should be utilized as adjuvant therapy for women with intractable NVP
or HG [57]; typical use includes methylprednisolone 16 mg orally every 8 h for
2 weeks (taper); use for more than 6 weeks is discouraged [28].
11.13.3.12 Hospitalization considerations
There are two categories of severity of NVP and HG: the milder grade demonstrates
nausea and vomiting without signiﬁcant weight loss or metabolic changes. Women
with the more severe grade experience more than three daily episodes of vomiting
combined with profound feelings of sickness, continual feelings of nausea, and
weight loss of more than 3 Kg or 5% of body weight, with metabolic derangements
including dehydration, ketonuria, alkalosis from chloride loss, and potentially low
potassium levels [57,62]. Once patients are normovolemic and able to tolerate
11.13 Pharmacologic therapies
169
oral feedings, they may be discharged to home with a suitable prescription for anti-
emetics and instructions to follow-up with their obstetric provider [57,61].
11.13.3.13 Marijuana use
As more states legalize marijuana (MJ), the risk exists that pregnant women
suffering from NVP and HG will equate legalized with “safe” in pregnancy.
Indeed, MJ lobbying efforts have been successful in many areas to prevent signage
in pot shops cautioning pregnant women from using MJ. MJ lobbyists and related
organizations generate signiﬁcant dollars for their efforts; in 2015, $295,000 was
spent on lobbying efforts, while in 2019, $5.32 million was generated and spent
[13]. A study of 279,000 women by Kaiser Permanente conducted in California
and utilizing universal screenings reﬂected changes in MJ use among pregnant
woman suffering from NVP. The baseline self-reported use rate during the year
before pregnancy was 8.3%; prevalence rate for mild NVP was 15.3% with this
group having an adjusted odds ratio (OR) of 2.37 for MJ use; prevalence rate
for severe NVP was 2.3% with this group having adjusted OR for MJ use of 3.8
[71]. It is prudent therefore that women presenting with symptoms of cyclic vom-
iting and compulsive bathing have cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome (CHS)
added to their differential diagnoses [4,78]. MJ is not recommended for use during
pregnancy or lactation.
11.14 Differential diagnoses
Women presenting in the early ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy should be evaluated via
ultrasound for molar pregnancies, multiple fetuses, and GERD [62]. Women pre-
senting with nausea and vomiting after 9 weeks gestation should be evaluated for
other diagnoses not related to NVP, particularly in the presence of abdominal
pain, fever, headache, or abnormal neurologic exam [57]. If present, other clinical
symptoms must be evaluated, such as thyroid goiters, GI viral syndrome and severe
constipation or diarrhea, HTN, and preeclampsia, to facilitate proper treatment.
Finally, as MJ use in pregnancy escalates, CHS should be considered [36,62].
11.15 Conclusion
Because there is a lack of evidence from clinical trials, we lack consensus on the effec-
tiveness of various modalities for combating NVP and HG. Nonpharmacologic, herb-
al, vitamins, and pharmacologic remedies for NVP must undergo more rigorous
evaluations in parallel clinical trials to determine efﬁcacy [15,63]. Further, FDA
consideration of pregnant women in postmarketing clinical trials could be ethically
feasible and positively impact care and provide crucial data about this vulnerable
population [69]. Additionally, as our ability to quantify NVP and HG improves, our
ability to determine the ﬁnancial impact and burden of disease will improve [25].
170
CHAPTER 11 Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy
Updates to clinical practice guidelines will help in treatment of NVP and HG;
however, clinicians need further encouragement to follow them [50]. We must
carefully attend to any mental health issue, preexisting or evoked by intensity of
NVP symptoms [68]. Further, nontraditional modalities, such as homeopathy
and traditional Chinese medicine should be considered, especially for those with
fewer symptoms [28,75]. We must remind patients there are no safety data on
MJ use in pregnancy [36]. Finally, an individual approach to NVP, guided by
efﬁcacy and safety data, corresponding to expert guidelines will beneﬁt patients
as they navigate this problem.
References
1. Abdolhosseini S, Hashem-Dabaghian F, Mokaberinejad R, Sadeghpour O, Mehrabani M.
Effects of pomegranate and spearmint syrup on nausea and vomiting during pregnancy: a
randomized controlled clinical trial. Iran Red Crescent Med J 2017;19(10):e135e142.
https://doi.org/10.5812/ircmj.13542.
2. Abramowitz A, Miller ES, Wisner KL. Treatment options for hyperemesis gravidarum.
Arch Wom Ment Health 2017;20(3):363e72. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00737-016-
0707-4.
3. ACOG practice bulletin no. 189: Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
2018;131(1):e15e30. https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000002456.
4. Andrews KH, Bracero LA. Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome during pregnancy: a case
report. J Reprod Med 2019;60(9e10):430e2.
5. Argenbright CA. Complementary approaches to pregnancy induced nausea and
vomiting. Int J Childbirth Educ 2017;32(1):6e9.
6. Amzajerdi A, Keshavarz M, Montazeri A, Bekharadi S. Effect of mint aroma on nausea,
vomiting and anxiety in pregnant women. J Fam Med Prim Care 2018;19(8):2597e601.
https://doi.org/10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_480_19:10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_480_19.
7. Azzam H, Barrett J, Biringer A, Campbell K, Duperron L, Dy J, et al. The management of
nausea and vomiting of pregnancy: clinical practice guideline. J Obstet Gynaecol Can
2016;38(12):1127e37.
8. Bahadirli A, Sonmez MB, Cagdas OM, Bahadirli NB, Memis SD, Dogan B, Sevincok L.
The association of temperament with nausea and vomiting during early pregnancy.
J Obstet Gynaecol 2019;39(7):969e74.
9. Biyik I, Keskin F. The lollipop with lemon aroma may be promising in nausea and vom-
iting in pregnancy. Gynecol Obstetr Reproduct Med 2019;1. https://doi.org/10.21613/
GORM.2019.973.
10. Body CMD, Christie JAMD. Gastrointestinal diseases in pregnancy. Gastroenterol Clin
N Am 2016;45(2):267e83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gtc.2016.02.005.
11. Bustos M, Venkataramanan R, Caritis S. Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy - what’s
new? Auton Neurosci: Basic and Clinical 2016;202:62e72. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.autneu.2016.05.002.
12. Campbell K, Rowe H, Azzam H, Lane CA. The management of nausea and vomiting of
pregnancy. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 2016;38(12):1127e37. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jogc.2016.08.009.
References
171
13. Center for Responsive Politics. Open secrets website. 2020. Retrieved from, https://
www.opensecrets.org/federal-lobbying/industries/summary?id¼N09.
14. Chortatos A, Haugen M, Iversen PO, Vikanes A˚ , Eberhard-Gran M, Bjelland EK, et al.
Pregnancy complications and birth outcomes among women experiencing nausea only
or nausea and vomiting during pregnancy in the Norwegian mother and child cohort
study. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 2015;15(1):138. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12884-
015-0580-6.
15. Collins KL, Wilson M, Vincent EC, Safranek S. How safe and effective is ondansetron
for nausea and vomiting in pregnancy. J Fam Pract 2019;68(7):e12e14.
16. Colodro-Conde L, Cross SM, Lind PA, Painter JN, Gunst A, Jern P, et al. Cohort proﬁle:
nausea and vomiting during pregnancy genetics consortium (NVP genetics consortium).
Int J Epidemiol 2017;46(2):e17. https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyv360.
17. Colodro-Conde L, Jern P, Johansson A, Sa´nchez-Romera J, Lind PA, Painter JN, et al.
Nausea and vomiting during pregnancy is highly heritable. Behav Genet 2016;46(4):
481e91. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10519-016-9781-7.
18. Craig R, Jeyanthi Pelto G, Willford AC, Stoltzfus RJ. Using a cultural-ecological frame-
work to explore dietary beliefs and practices during pregnancy and lactation among
women in Adivasi communities in the Nilgiris Biosphere Reserve, India. Ecol Food
Nutr 2018;57(3):165e86. https://doi.org/10.1080/03670244.2018.1445088.
19. Danielsson B, Webster WS, Ritchie HE. Ondansetron and teratogenicity in rats: evidence
for a mechanism mediated via embryonic hERG blocade. Reprod Toxicol 2018;81:
237e45.
20. Dass A, Satyanarayan N, Rajjapan S. Implementing standardized Rhodes Index to mea-
sure the efﬁcacy of ginger extract (Zingiber ofﬁcinale) in pregnancy induced nausea and
vomiting.
Int
J
Pharmacol
Res
2015;5(10):222e5.
https://doi.org/10.7439/ijpr.
v5i10.2589.
21. Einarson TR, Piwko C, Koren G. Prevalence of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy in the
USA: a meta analysis. J Populat Therap Clin Pharmacol 2013;20(2):e163. Retrieved
from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23863545.
22. Fattah A, Hesarinejad Z, Gharaii NJ, Nasibi M. The effect of aromatherapy on nausea
and vomiting during pregnancy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Pediatr
2019;7(3):9061e70.
23. Fiaschi L, Nelson-Piercy C, Deb S, King R, Tata L. Clinical management of nausea and
vomiting in pregnancy and hyperemesis gravidarum across primary and secondary care:
a population-based study. BJOG An Int J Obstet Gynaecol 2019;126(10):1201e11.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1471-0528.15662.
24. Fredette NC, Meyer MM, Prossnitz ER. Role of GPER in estrogen-dependent nitric ox-
ide formation and vasodilation. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2018;176:65e72. doi. org/
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2017.05.006.
25. Gadsby R, Rawson V, Dziadulewicz E, Rousseau B, Collongs H. Nausea and vomiting of
pregnancy and resource implications: the NVP Impact Study. Br J Gene Pract 2019;
69(680):e217e23. https://doi.org/10.3399/bjgp18X700745. Mar;.
26. Gadsby R, Barnie-Adshead AM. What causes the nausea and vomiting of pregnancy and
hyperemesis gravidarum. 2014. Semantic Scholar retrieved from: https://www.
semanticscholar.org/paper/What-Causes-the-Nausea-and-Vomiting-of-Pregnancy-E-
Gadsby-Barnie-Adshead/57dbfd2de39c8c7d7b7daf4134ec20ebca92bf9a.
27. Good R. Retrieved from: https://www.goodrx.com/diclegis?dosage¼10mg-10mg&
form¼tablet&label_override¼doxylamineþ%2Fþpyridoxine&quantity¼100; 2020.
172
CHAPTER 11 Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy
28. Gordon A, Love A. Chapter 54 - nausea and vomiting in pregnancy. Integr Med 2018:
542e9. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-35868-2.00054-2. Elsevier Inc.
29. Groleau D, Benady-Chorney J, Panaitoiu A, Jimenez V. Hyperemesis gravidarum in the
context of migration: when the absence of cultural meaning gives rise to blaming the
victim. BMC Preg Childbirth 2019;19(1):197. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12884-019-
2344-1.
30. Haas DM. Helping pregnant women and clinicians understand the risk of ondansetron for
nausea and vomiting during pregnancy. J Am Med Assoc 2018;320(23):2425e6. https://
doi.org/10.1001/jama.2018.19328.
31. Hassan A, Dubey AK, Bhat MP. Pyridoxine: the ‘Ba.Six of use in nausea and vomiting of
pregnancy. J Clin Diagn Res 2019;13(5):BE01e6.
32. Havnen GC, Truong MB, Do MH, Heitmann K, Holst L, Nordeng H. Women’s perspec-
tives on the management and consequences of hyperemesis gravidarum e a descriptive
interview study. Scand J Prim Health Care 2019;37(1):30e40. https://doi.org/10.1080/
02813432.2019.1569424.
33. Heitmann K, Solheimsnes A, Havnen GC, Nordeng H, Holst L. Treatment of nausea and
vomiting during pregnancy da cross-sectional study among 712 Norwegian women. Eur
J Clin Pharmacol 2016;72(5):593e604. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00228-016-2012-6.
34. Hinkle SN, Mumford SL, Grantz KL, Silver RM, Mitchell EM, Sjaarda LA, et al. Asso-
ciation of nausea and vomiting during pregnancy with pregnancy loss: a secondary anal-
ysis of a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Inter Med 2016;176(11):1621e7. https://
doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.5641.
35. Jafari-Dehkordi E, Hashem-Dabaghian F, Aliasl F, Aliasl J, Taghavi-Shirazi M,
Sadeghpour O, et al. Comparison of quince with vitamin B6 for treatment of nausea
and vomiting in pregnancy: a randomized clinical trial. J Obstet Gynaecol 2017;37(8):
1048e52. https://doi.org/10.1080/01443615.2017.1322046.
36. King TK, Brucker MC, Jevitt C, Osborne K, editors. Varney’s midwifery. 6th ed. Bur-
lington, Massachusetts: Jones & Bartlett Learning; 2019.
37. Kjeldgaard H, Eberhard-Gran M, Benth J, Vikanes A˚ . Hyperemesis gravidarum and the
risk of emotional distress during and after pregnancy. Arch Wom Ment Health 2017;
20(6):747e56. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00737-017-0770-5.
38. Koren G. P56 Breakthrough in the treatment of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy; the
ﬁrst dual release combination of doxylamine-pyridoxine. Arch Dis Child 2019;104(6):
e40. https://doi.org/10.1136/archdischild-2019-esdppp.94.
39. Koren G. Safety considerations surrounding use of treatment options for nausea and
vomiting in pregnancy. Expet Opin Drug Saf 2017;16(11):1227e34. https://doi.org/
10.1080/14740338.2017.1361403.
40. Koren G. Treating morning sickness in the United Statesdchanges in prescribing are
needed. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2014;211(6):602e6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.
2014.08.017.
41. Lassiter NT, Manns-James LE. Pregnancy. In: Brucker MC, King T, editors. Pharma-
cology for women’s health. 2nd ed. 2017. p. 1025e44.
42. Le TN, Adler MT, Ouillette H, Berens P, Smith JA. Observational case series evaluation
of the granisetron transdermal patch system (sancuso) for the management of nausea/
vomiting of pregnancy. Am J Perinatol 2017;34(9):851e5. https://doi.org/10.1055/
s-0037-1598652.
43. Lete I, Allue J. The effectiveness of ginger in the prevention of nausea and vomiting dur-
ing pregnancy and chemotherapy. Integr Med Insights 2016;11:11e7.
References
173
44. Madjunkova S, Maltepe C, Koren G. The delayed-release combination of doxylamine
and pyridoxine (diclegis/diclectin) for the treatment of nausea and vomiting of
pregnancy. Pediatr Drugs 2014;16(3):199e211. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40272-014-
0065-5.
45. Mendoza E, Amsler F. A randomized crossover trial on the effect of compression stock-
ings on nausea and vomiting in early pregnancy. Int J Wom Health 2017;9:89e99.
https://doi.org/10.2147/IJWH.S120809.
46. Moon HY, Kim MR, Hwang DS, Jang JB, Lee J, Shin JS, Ha I, Lee YJ. Safety of
acupuncture during pregnancy: a retrospective cohort study in Korea. Br J Obstet Gynae-
col 2020;127:79e86.
47. Ngo E. Use of a mobile application to promote better treatment of nausea and vomiting in
pregnancy. Reprod Toxicol 2018;80:143e4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.reprotox.2018.
07.035.
48. Oliveira L, Capp S, You W, Riffenburgh R, Carstairs S. Ondansetron compared with dox-
ylamine and pyridoxine for treatment of nausea in pregnancy: a randomized controlled
trial. Obstet Gynecol 2014;124(4):735e42. https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.000000000
0000479.
49. Parker SE, Van Bennekom C, Anderka M, Mitchell AA. Ondansetron for treatment of
nausea and vomiting of pregnancy and the risk of speciﬁc birth defects. Obstet Gynecol
2018;132(2):385e94.
50. Persaud N, Meaney C, El-Emam K, Moineddin R, Thorpe K. Doxylamine-pyridoxine for
nausea and vomiting of pregnancy randomized placebo controlled trial: prespeciﬁed an-
alyses and reanalysis. PloS One 2018;13(1):e0189978. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0189978.
51. Pontius E, Vieth JT. Complications in early pregnancy. Emerg Med Clin 2019;37(2):
219e37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.emc.2019.01.004.
52. RCOG Green Top Guidelines. The management of nausea and vomiting in pregnancy
and
hyperemesis
gravidarum.
2016.
Retrieved
from:
https://www.rcog.org.uk/
globalassets/documents/guidelines/green-top-guidelines/gtg69-hyperemesis.pdf.
53. Revell MA. Self-care of nausea and vomiting in the ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy. Int J
Childbirth Educ 2017;32(1):35.
54. Rohde A, Dembinski J, Dorn C. Mirtazapine (Remergil) for treatment resistant hyperem-
esis gravidarum: rescue of a twin pregnancy. Arch Gynecol Obstet 2003;268:219e21.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00404-003-0502-0.
55. Ross DL. September 4). Hyperthyroidism during pregnancy: clinical manifestations,
diagnosis, and causes. In: Post TW, editor. UpToDate. Waltham, MA: WoltersKluwer
Health; 2018. Available from: http://www.uptodate.com.
56. Sabbatini AK, Kocher KE, Basu A, Hsia RY. In-hospital outcomes and costs among pa-
tients hospitalized during a return visit to the emergency department. Jama 2016;315(7):
663e71. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2016.0649.
57. Saborio OEG, Hines BK, Wesselman J. Safe management of nausea and vomiting during
pregnancy in the emergency department. Adv Emerg Nurs J 2019;41(4):336e47.
58. Sharifzadeh F, Kashanian M, Koopayehzadeh J, Rezaian F, Sheikhansari N, Eshraghi N.
A comparison between the effects of ginger, pyridoxine (vitamin B-6) and placebo for
the treatment of the ﬁrst trimester nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 2018;31(19):2509e14.
59. Shawahna R, Taha A. Which potential harms and beneﬁts of using ginger in the manage-
ment of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy should be addressed? a consensual study
174
CHAPTER 11 Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy
among pregnant women and gynecologists. BMC Compl Alternative Med 2017;17(1):
204. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12906-017-1717-0.
60. Shenvi C. Diclegis: drug makes a 30-year comeback. MEDPAGE Today; January 4, 2015.
Retrieved from: https://www.medpagetoday.com/emergencymedicine/emergencymedicine/
49368.
61. Smith JA, Fox KA, Clark S. Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy: treatment and outcome.
In: Post TW, editor. UpToDate. Waltham, MA: WoltersKluwer Health; February 20,
2020. Available from: http://www.uptodate.com.
62. Smith JA, Fox KA, Clark S. Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy: clinical ﬁndings and
evaluation. In: Post TW, editor. UpToDate. Waltham, MA: WoltersKluwer Health;
February 20, 2020. Available from: http://www.uptodate.com.
63. Sridharan K, Sivaramakrishnan G. Interventions for treating nausea and vomiting in
pregnancy: a network meta-analysis and trial sequential analysis of randomized clinical
trials. Expet Rev Clin Pharmacol 2018;11(11):1143e50. https://doi.org/10.1080/
17512433.2018.1530108.
64. Temming L, Franco A, Istwan N, Rhea D, Desch C, Stanziano G, Jpy S. Adverse preg-
nancy outcomes in women with nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 2014;27(1):84e8.
65. Tsakridis I, Mamopoulos A, Athanasiadis A, Dagklis T. The management of nausea and
vomiting of pregnancy: synthesis of national guidelines. Obstet Gynecol Surv 2019;
74(3):161e9.
66. Whitehouse AJO, Alvares GA, Cleary D, Harun A, Stojanoska A, Taylor LJ, et al. Symp-
tom severity in autism spectrum disorder is related to the frequency and severity of
nausea and vomiting during pregnancy: a retrospective case-control study. Mol Autism
2018;9(1):37. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13229-018-0223-7.
67. Willey C, Calip GS. How did research on medication safety in pregnancy deﬁne, develop
and advance the ﬁeld of pharmacoepidemiology? Clin Therapeut 2019;41(12):2464e6.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinthera.2019.11.004.
68. Wise J. Women with nausea and vomiting in pregnancy should be offered more support,
say RCOG guidelines. Br Med J June 23, 2016. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.i3509.
69. Wood ME, Andrade SE, Toh S. Safe expectations: current state and future expectations.
Clin Therapeut 2019;41(12):2467e76.
70. Yilmaz E, Yilmaz Z, Cakmak B, Karsli MF, Gultekin IB, Guneri Dogan N, et al. Nausea
and vomiting in early pregnancy of adolescents: relationship with depressive symptoms.
J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol 2016;29(1):65e8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpag.2015.
06.010.
71. Young-Wolff KC, Sarovar V, Tucker L, Avalos LA, Tucker L, Conway A,
Armstrong MA, Goler N. Association of nausea and vomiting in pregnancy with prenatal
marijuana use. JAMA Internal Med 2018;178(10):1423e4. https://doi.org/10.1001/
jamainternmed.2018.3581.
72. Zambelli-Weiner A, Via C, Yuen M, Weiner DJ, Kirby RS. First trimester ondansetron
exposure and risk of structural birth defects. Reprod Toxicol 2019;83:14e20. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.reprotox.2018.10.010.
73. Adlan A, Chooi KY, Mat Adenan NA. Acupressure as adjuvant treatment for the inpa-
tient management of nausea and vomiting in early pregnancy: A double-blind random-
ized controlled trial. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 2017;43(4):662e8. https://doi.org/10.1111/
jog.13269.
References
175
74. Allais G, Chiarle G, Sinigaglia S, Airola G, Schiapparelli P, Bergandi F, et al. Acupunc-
ture treatment of migraine, nausea, and vomiting in pregnancy. Neurol Sci 2019;40(S1):
213e5. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-019-03799-2.
75. Dean E. Morning sickness. Nurs Stand 2016;30(50):15. https://doi.org/10.7748/
ns.30.50.15.s16.
76. Fiaschi L, Nelson-Piercy V, Tata LJ. Hospital admission for hyperemesis gravidarum: a
nationwide study of occurrence, reoccurrence and risk factors among 8.2 million
pregnancies.
Hum
Reprod
2016;31(8):1675e84.
https://doi.org/10.1093/humrep/
dew128.
77. Heitmann K, Nordeng H, Havnen GC, Solheimsnes A, Holst L. The burden of nausea
and vomiting during pregnancy: severe impacts on quality of life, daily life functioning
and willingness to become pregnant again e results from a cross-sectional study. BMC
Pregnancy Childb 2017;17(1):75. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12884-017-1249-0.
78. Young-Wolff KC, Sarovar V, Tucker L, Avalos LA, Alexeeff S, Conway A, et al. Trends
in marijuana use among pregnant women with and without nausea and vomiting in preg-
nancy, 2009e2016. Drug Alcohol Depend 2019;196:66e70. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.drugalcdep.2018.12.009.
79. World Health Organization International Statistical Classiﬁcation of Diseases and
Related Health Problems 10th Revision (ICD-10)-WHO Version for 2016. Retrieved
from: https://icd.who.int/browse10/2016/en#/O20-O2.
176
CHAPTER 11 Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy
Clinical pharmacology of
anti-infectives during
pregnancy
12
Jeremiah D. Momper, Brookie M. Best
University of California, Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, San Diego,
CA, United States
Serious infections can occur during pregnancy and must be treated to prevent
maternal and fetal adverse outcomes. While some anti-infectives have been studied
in pregnancy, many agents have inadequate data available to evaluate safety,
efﬁcacy, and appropriate dosing, posing a challenge for drug and dose selection.
Important safety data have been summarized elsewhere [1,2]. This chapter focuses
on pharmacology and pharmacokinetic studies for drugs used to treat or prevent in-
fections in pregnancy. Drug disposition characteristics that may alter drug exposure
in pregnancy should be considered in selecting a treatment regimen. For drugs that
are primarily renally eliminated, clearance may increase later in pregnancy yielding
lower plasma concentrations of the drugs [3]. For drugs primarily metabolized by the
liver or by a combination of pathways, changes in exposure during pregnancy may or
may not occur depending on the speciﬁc enzyme systems involved [3]. Further, drug
interactions are a major concern when simultaneously treating multiple infections,
such as HIVand tuberculosis. For drugs that are highly protein bound, the dilutional
effect on albumin in late pregnancy may increase the free or unbound drug concen-
tration. Finally, the duration of exposure for both the mother and the fetus when a
drug is given during pregnancy should be considered when selecting therapy, as
about ﬁve half-lives must pass for most of the drug to be eliminated from the
body. Drugs with short half-lives for which clearance is increased during pregnancy
may need to be dosed more frequently. These alterations in disposition can be
additive or antagonistic, complicating attempts to predict whether drug exposure
will change signiﬁcantly in pregnancy. Therefore, pharmacokinetic studies in
pregnant women are necessary to fully understand changes in exposure and the
implications for appropriate dose selection. In the absence of pharmacokinetic
studies in pregnant women, close monitoring of drug therapy is warranted, including
measurement of plasma concentrations and individual optimization of doses when
possible.
CHAPTER
177
Clinical Pharmacology During Pregnancy. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818902-3.00022-1
Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
12.1 Antibacterial therapy
Penicillins are the antibiotics of choice during pregnancy. They cross the placenta
and small amounts are excreted in breast milk. Penicillin G and V are 45%e68%
and 75%e89% bound to plasma proteins, respectively, are partially metabolized
(<30%) to inactive metabolites, and parent drug and metabolites are excreted in
the urine via ﬁltration and tubular secretion. One pharmacokinetic study of a dose
of one million international units (IU) of penicillin G intravenously (IV) every 4 h
in pregnant women concluded that this produced adequate maternal penicillin
concentrations for prophylaxis against Group B Streptococcus [4]. Current guide-
lines recommend an initial dose of 5 million IU, followed by 2.5e3 million IU every
4 h [5]. Another study of a single 2.4 million IU intramuscular dose of penicillin G
for prevention of congenital syphilis showed high variability and some subtherapeu-
tic concentrations; authors suggested that higher doses may need to be studied [6].
Current syphilis treatment guidelines in pregnancy recommend use of penicillins,
but state optimal doses are unknown [7]. A study of a single oral dose of penicillin
V in both pregnant and nonpregnant (control) women demonstrated signiﬁcantly
decreased area under the concentration time curve (AUCda measure of overall
exposure), shorter half-life, and increased penicillin clearance in pregnant women.
The authors concluded shorter dose intervals (1 million IU every 6 h instead of every
8 h) or higher doses of penicillin V may be needed during pregnancy [8]. Studies of
higher than standard doses have not been described. In pregnant women with a
penicillin allergy history, desensitization protocols have been safely applied [9].
Amoxicillin, ampicillin, dicloxacillin, and ticarcillin are all mainly eliminated
via renal ﬁltration and tubular secretion, with about 10% metabolized. Oxacillin
is about half metabolized and half eliminated unchanged in the urine. Piperacillin
is 10%e20% excreted via bile into the feces, with the rest eliminated unchanged
in the urine. Nafcillin, unlike all the other penicillins, is 60% metabolized, undergoes
enterohepatic recirculation, and both parent and metabolites are excreted in the bile.
Plasma protein binding is about 20% for amoxicillin, ampicillin, and piperacillin, is
about 50% for ticarcillin, and is 70%e99% for nafcillin, oxacillin, and dicloxacillin.
One study of a single oral 500 mg dose of amoxicillin in pregnant women for post-
exposure prophylaxis against anthrax showed increased clearance during pregnancy
compared to postpartum, and concluded that anthrax preventative concentrations
will not be feasible in pregnant women [10]. Studies of IV amoxicillin have recom-
mended a dose during labor or during preterm premature rupture of membranes of
2 g followed by 1 g every 4 h [11e13]. Two older reported studies of ampicillin
pharmacokinetics following 500 mg doses during pregnancy found decreased
exposure and suggested increased loading doses (because of the large increase in
distribution volume)
were
likely
needed
[14,15].
Finally,
two
studies
of
piperacillinetazobactam in pregnant women found increased clearance and distribu-
tion volume during pregnancy, and suggested that higher than standard doses may be
needed during pregnancy [16,17].
Cephalosporins can be safely used to treat various infections during pregnancy,
and older agents are preferred due to more data and experience in pregnancy. Speciﬁc
178
CHAPTER 12 Clinical pharmacology of anti-infectives during pregnancy
doses depend on the infection site and offending microbe. They are classiﬁed by anti-
bacterial activity. Examples of ﬁrst-generation agents are: cefadroxil, cephalexin,
cephradine, and cefazolin; second-generation agents: cefoxitin, cefotetan, cefaclor,
cefprozil, cefuroxime, cefuroxime axetil; and third/fourth/ﬁfth-generation agents:
cefotaxime, ceftazidime, ceftriaxone, ceftizoxime, ceﬁxime, cefditoren, cefdinir,
cefpodoxime, ceftibuten, cefepime, and ceftaroline. As a class, they all cross the
placenta well [18e20], and small amounts are found in breast milk. Many are 60%
e90% protein bound in plasma, except for cefaclor, cephalexin, cefadroxil, cefpodox-
ime, cefotaxime, ceftizoxime, ceftazidime, and cefuroxime, which are less than 50%
protein bound.
For ﬁrst-generation agents, one study of cephalothin in pregnant women
concluded that pregnancy alterations in exposure were insigniﬁcant and no dose
changes were warranted [21]. Cephalothin is 10%e40% metabolized, with the
rest excreted unchanged in urine, while the other ﬁrst-generation agents are not
metabolized and are wholly excreted unchanged in urine. In contrast, studies of
cephradine and cefazolin in pregnant women showed increased clearance and
distribution volumes, decreased AUCs and shorter half-lives, concluding that doses
in pregnancy should be increased, possibly by reducing dose intervals rather than by
increasing dose amounts [22,23].
Cefuroxime, a second-generation cephalosporin, has lower plasma concentra-
tions and a shorter half-life during pregnancy compared to postpartum [20]. For
cefoxitin, at 19e21 weeks gestation, plasma concentrations were similar to those
seen in nonpregnant adults [24], while at term, clearance of cefoxitin is signiﬁcantly
increased [25]. The second-generation agents are primarily excreted unchanged in
the urine.
Several later generation cephalosporins have been studied in pregnant women.
Cefoperazone at term showed a larger distribution volume, lower peak concentra-
tion, and decreased protein binding (74% vs. 88%) during pregnancy compared to
nonpregnant adults, but also showed that pregnancy did not greatly affect clearance,
half-life, or trough concentrations (Ctrough) [26]. Of note, unlike most other
cephalosporins, cefoperazone is metabolized in the liver and excreted in the bile.
Ceftazidime clearance increases and concentrations decrease throughout pregnancy
compared to postpartum; clearance is primarily renal excretion of unchanged drug
[24,27]. Ceftazidime readily crosses the placenta [28]. Cefotaxime is metabolized
to an active metabolite, and both parent drug and metabolite are eliminated in urine.
All other cephalosporins are not appreciably metabolized, and are primarily excreted
unchanged in the urine. While increased dose amounts and more frequent dosing
have been proposed to attain adequate drug concentrations for many cephalosporins,
pharmacokinetic studies of such increased doses are lacking.
Carbapenems imipenem-cilastatin and meropenem cross the placenta, have low
protein binding, and are excreted mainly unchanged in the urine. Little is known
about breast milk penetration. A case report of a breast-feeding mother receiving
meropenem for treatment of a postpartum urinary tract infection calculated an infant
daily exposure from breast milk of 97 mg/kg/d corresponding to an infant weight-
adjusted percentage of maternal dosage of 0.18% [29]. Clearance and distribution
12.1 Antibacterial therapy
179
volume of imipenem after a single 500 mg IV dose were signiﬁcantly increased in
early and late pregnancy compared to postpartum, and increased doses may be
needed in pregnancy [30]. No pharmacokinetic studies of meropenem, doripenem,
and ertapenem in pregnancy are reported. Carbacephems aztreonam and loracarbef
pharmacokinetics have not been studied in pregnancy either. Loracarbef is 25%
protein bound, is not metabolized, and is excreted unchanged in the urine. Placental
and breast milk penetration are unknown. Aztreonam is about 60% protein bound
and is mainly eliminated unchanged in the urine, with 6%e16% metabolized. It
crosses the placenta well [31], and breast milk penetration is unknown. Beta-
lactamase inhibitors, given in combination with penicillins or cephalosporins,
include sulbactam, tazobactam, and clavulanic acid. All are about 30% protein
bound. Sulbactam and tazobactam cross the placenta and undergo some metabolism
while most drug is excreted unchanged in urine. Both have signiﬁcantly decreased
exposure during pregnancy [16,32]. For clavulanic acid, half is metabolized, half is
excreted in urine, and low amounts cross the placenta [33].
Macrolides, such as erythromycin, azithromycin, and clarithromycin, are used to
treat various infections in pregnant women. Placental concentrations are less than
7% of maternal concentrations [34,35]. Erythromycin breast milk concentrations
are about 50% of maternal concentrations, and it is compatible with breastfeeding.
It is 73%e81% protein bound, is a substrate and inhibitor of both cytochrome P450
(CYP) 3A4 and permeability glycoprotein (Pgp), concentrates in bile and liver, and
is excreted in the bile. Clarithromycin is also a substrate and inhibitor of CYP 3A4
and Pgp, while azithromycin is not metabolized and has no effect on CYP enzymes.
Limited information is available on penetration of azithromycin and clarithromycin
into breast milk, and both have low protein binding. A study on transfer of azithro-
mycin into breast milk estimated an absolute infant dose of 4.5 mg/kg of body
weight (95% prediction interval: 0.6e7.0 mg/kg) and a relative cumulative infant
dose of 15.7% of the maternal dose (95% prediction interval: 2.0%e27.8%) [36].
One pharmacokinetic study of azithromycin found increased distribution volume
but unchanged AUC and elimination half-life in pregnancy versus nonpregnant
women, suggesting standard doses should be appropriate in pregnancy [37]. No
data are available on the clinical pharmacology of ﬁdaxomicin in pregnant women.
Vancomycin is used for gram-positive bacterial infections. It is administered
intravenously to treat systemic infections, widely distributed, 55% protein bound,
and excreted renally. It crosses the placenta at concentrations similar to maternal
concentrations [38]. It is excreted in breast milk; infants would likely not absorb
vancomycin, but their gut ﬂora may be altered. Data in pregnancy are limited, so
use should be reserved for serious infections. Other polypeptides, colistin, polymyxin
B, and teicoplanin, have even less data regarding use in pregnancy, and should only
be used for compelling indications.
Chloramphenicol is well absorbed and widely distributed, is 60% bound to
plasma proteins, with higher placental than maternal concentrations [39]. It is
hepatically glucuronidated, and is a potent CYP 3A4 and 2C19 inhibitor. Due to
neonatal toxicity, “gray baby syndrome” and agranulocytosis, use during pregnancy,
especially near term, should be avoided unless absolutely necessary.
180
CHAPTER 12 Clinical pharmacology of anti-infectives during pregnancy
Tetracyclines, including tetracycline, demeclocycline, doxycycline, minocycline,
omadacycline, eravacycline, and sarecycline, are generally not recommended in
pregnancy due to strong binding to developing teeth and bones. Tetracycline and
doxycycline are enterohepatically recirculated and eliminated mainly in feces
(doxycycline) or urine (tetracycline). Minocycline is partially hepatically metabo-
lized. These agents chelate cations, cross the placenta, and penetrate into breast
milk, but are considered compatible with breastfeeding. No pharmacokinetic studies
in pregnancy have been reported.
Lincomycin and clindamycin are hepatically metabolized, cross the placenta with
25%e50% of maternal concentrations found in cord blood, and cross into breast milk
but are considered compatible with breastfeeding. Clindamycin, given at 900 mg
every 8 h for Group B Streptococcus, was evaluated in pregnant women. The authors
found that this standard dose may be subtherapeutic [40]. Higher doses have not been
studied in this population. These drugs should be avoided during pregnancy unless
other ﬁrst-line agents are ineffective or not tolerated.
Linezolid and tedizolid are oxazolidinone antibiotics used to treat gram-positive
infections. Linezolid is widely distributed, metabolized by both enzymatic
(presumably CYP-mediated) and nonenzymatic processes, and about 30% is
eliminated unchanged in the urine. Data in pregnancy are very limited. A case
report of a pregnant patient with multidrug-resistant TB showed lower linezolid
exposure during pregnancy relative to postpartum [41]. Placental and breast
milk penetration in humans are unknown. No pharmacokinetic data in pregnancy
are available for tedizolid. Dalfopristin-quinupristin is also used for gram-positive
infections. Both agents are metabolized to several active metabolites by non-CYP
processes, but these agents potently inhibit CYP 3A4. The parent compounds and
metabolites are mainly eliminated in the feces, with 15%e20% of each parent drug
eliminated unchanged in the urine. Placental and breast milk transfer are unknown,
and no pharmacokinetic studies in pregnancy are available.
Aminoglycosides, including streptomycin, neomycin, kanamycin, amikacin,
gentamicin, tobramycin, and plazomicin, are administered intravenously and elimi-
nated unchanged in the urine. They cross the placenta, and may accumulate in the
fetus [42,43]. Gentamicin clearance and dose requirements are increased during
pregnancy, which corresponded more with increased distribution volumes than
increased renal function [44]. If used, plasma concentration monitoring is necessary
to individualize doses. These agents should be avoided in pregnancy unless needed
for life-threatening infections because of fetal oto- and nephrotoxicity risks.
Sulfonamides, including sulﬁsoxazole, sulfadiazine, sulfamethoxazole, sulfasa-
lazine, and sulfadoxine (see malaria section), are generally used in combination
with other antibiotics for various infections, and may be used in pregnancy if
penicillins and cephalosporins are not effective. Near term, these drugs should be
avoided due to increased risk of hyperbilirubinemia in the neonate; likewise, they
are contraindicated in nursing. They readily cross the placenta [45,46] and mostly
also penetrate into breast milk. Sulfonamides are hepatically acetylated and are
substrates and inhibitors of CYP 2C9.
12.1 Antibacterial therapy
181
Trimethoprim is used alone or in combination with sulfamethoxazole for various
infections. It is extensively distributed, it inhibits CYP 2C8, and is mostly eliminated
unchanged in the urine. It is slowly transported in low concentrations across the
placenta [45], but breast milk concentrations are higher than maternal plasma con-
centrations and caution should be exercised in lactating women. Trimethoprim is a
second-line agent that can be used in pregnancy if ﬁrst-line agents are ineffective.
Folic acid supplementation (0.5 mg daily) should be used along with trimethoprim
in the ﬁrst trimester.
Fluoroquinolones include ciproﬂoxacin, gatiﬂoxacin, levoﬂoxacin, lomeﬂoxacin,
moxiﬂoxacin, norﬂoxacin, oﬂoxacin, sparﬂoxacin, delaﬂoxacin, gemiﬂoxacin,
cinoxacin, and nalidixic acid. Absorption of ﬂuoroquinolones is decreased with
concomitant cation administration, including calcium, magnesium, iron, and zinc.
Lomeﬂoxacin, levoﬂoxacin, norﬂoxacin, and oﬂoxacin are mainly excreted
unchanged in the urine. Sparﬂoxacin is metabolized by CYP 1A2. Grepaﬂoxacin
is glucuronidated by uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) enzymes
and metabolized by CYP 1A2. Delaﬂoxacin is glucuronidated by UGT 1A1, UGT
1A3, and UGT 2B15 and renally eliminated. Moxiﬂoxacin is glucuronidated and
sulfated, but does not undergo CYP metabolism. Ciproﬂoxacin is partially excreted
unchanged, is partially metabolized by CYP 1A2, and is an inhibitor of CYP 1A2.
Low amounts of quinolones cross the placenta [47], while much higher amounts
penetrate into breast milk [48]. No other pharmacokinetic studies in pregnancy
are available. Because of arthropathy risks, quinolones should be avoided in preg-
nancy and lactation unless needed for complicated, resistant infections.
Metronidazole is used in pregnancy for treatment of symptomatic bacterial vag-
inosis or asymptomatic disease in women at high risk for preterm delivery. It is
effective for eradication of infection, but does not decrease risk of preterm birth
[49,50]. It is well absorbed, widely distributed including fetal [51] and breast
milk concentrations as high as maternal concentrations [52e54], and is both
oxidized and glucuronidated in the liver by unknown enzymes. Pharmacokinetic
studies in early pregnancy and at term showed 15%e30% reductions in AUC
compared to historical controls [55,56], but a study in 20 pregnant women taking
500 mg twice daily for 3 days showed weight-corrected exposure was similar in
different stages of pregnancy and to reported values in nonpregnant adults [57].
Nimorazole, tinidazole, and ornidazole do not have enough data in human pregnancy
to assess appropriate use.
Nitrofurantoin has been used in pregnancy for decades for urinary tract infec-
tions. It undergoes some hepatic metabolism, but is mostly concentrated unchanged
in urine. Less than 1% crosses into breast milk [58], and placental exposure is also
low. It is contraindicated near term due to risk of hemolytic reactions, particularly in
glucose-6-phosphatase dehydrogenase (G6PD) deﬁciency. Fosfomycin is used as a
single 3 g dose for uncomplicated urinary tract infections. It is not metabolized,
and is excreted unchanged in urine and feces. No pharmacokinetic studies in
pregnancy have been reported, though an observational cohort study did not ﬁnd
182
CHAPTER 12 Clinical pharmacology of anti-infectives during pregnancy
an increased risk of an adverse pregnancy outcome after ﬁrst-trimester fosfomycin
exposure [59]. Methenamine mandelate and methenamine hippurate are antiseptics
used for urinary tract infections. They cross the placenta, into breast milk, and are
excreted unchanged in urine. Experience in pregnancy is very limited, and they
should be avoided.
Atovaquone (see malaria section) and pentamidine are used for Pneumocystis
jirovecii infections. Pentamidine crosses the placenta in animals; breast milk
penetration is unknown. Elimination is mainly renal, but several metabolites formed
by unknown pathways are also present. The half-life is 2e4 weeks. Pharmacokinetic
studies of atovaquone in pregnancy have shown more than 50% lower exposure in
pregnant women compared to healthy volunteers [60,61]. Higher doses of atova-
quone during pregnancy have been suggested [62].
12.2 Antifungal therapy
For treatment of fungal infections, topical therapy with older agents is considered
safe in pregnancy. For topical and mucosal use, nystatin, clotrimazole, and micona-
zole are drugs of choice, with negligible systemic absorption. Other topical “-azoles”
are second line, and other topical antifungals should be avoided due to lack of data in
pregnancy. Systemic treatment with ﬂuconazole, ketoconazole, itraconazole, and
miconazole should be avoided unless the indication is compelling. No pregnancy
pharmacokinetic studies are available. Voriconazole, posaconazole, and isavucona-
zonium are teratogenic in rodents. A case report is available describing a pregnant
woman who received voriconazole for life-threatening refractory invasive aspergil-
losis in the second and third trimesters. No adverse fetal outcome was noted at birth
or at 6-month follow-up [63]. However, voriconazole remains contraindicated in
pregnancy, and should be considered only in life-threatening cases when no alterna-
tives are available. For treatment of vaginal candidiasis after local treatment has
failed, low-dose oral ﬂuconazole (150 mg once daily) may be tried. For serious,
disseminated fungal infections, amphotericin B is preferred.
Amphotericin B is poorly absorbed and administered intravenously for systemic
fungal infections. Its metabolism is unknown, and it is eliminated slowly with a
1e15 day half-life. It crosses the placenta and may be retained in placental and other
tissues. Pharmacokinetics of the original or the liposomal formulations in pregnancy
have not been studied. Use should be limited in pregnancy to dangerous systemic
mycoses.
Flucytosine is active against Cryptococcus neoformans and candida species. It is
widely distributed, and mostly eliminated unchanged in the urine. No pregnancy
studies are available. Use during pregnancy should be reserved for severe dissemi-
nated fungal infection. Griseofulvin and terbinaﬁne should not be used orally during
pregnancy because data for systemic therapy during pregnancy with these agents are
limited and skin mycoses do not require urgent oral treatment.
12.2 Antifungal therapy
183
12.3 Malaria
Pregnancy increases susceptibility to and severity of malaria, and maternal malaria
increases risks for prematurity, low birth weight, spontaneous abortion, and
stillbirth. Prophylaxis and treatment medications must be tailored to the local pattern
of antimalarial drug resistance [64,65]. The goal for prophylaxis and treatment
regimens is >95% efﬁcacy, but many regimens are associated with much lower
cure rates during pregnancy; failure rates >10 or 15% are common [66].
Chloroquine (CQ) is a drug of choice for malaria during pregnancy if the parasite
is sensitive. It is well absorbed orally and distributes widely throughout the body. CQ
crosses the placenta easily and penetrates into breast milk, delivering low infant
doses of w3%, compatible with breastfeeding [67,68]. It is partially metabolized
hepatically by CYP 3A4 and 2D6, and inhibits activity of 2D6. The major metabo-
lite, desethylchloroquine (DECQ) has some activity. The half-life is 1e2 months.
CQ should be given with food to minimize gastrointestinal upset. Pharmacokinetic
studies in Tanzania and Papua New Guinea demonstrated signiﬁcantly lower
exposure (25%e45%) to CQ and DECQ during pregnancy, suggesting higher doses
may be warranted [69,70]. A study in Thailand showed nonsigniﬁcant 11%e18%
exposure decreases during pregnancy [71]. Above standard CQ doses in pregnancy
have not been studied.
Proguanil (PG) alone or combined with CQ is a prophylaxis drug of choice in
some regions. It is a prodrug, converted by CYP 2C19 to the active compound,
cycloguanil (CG). CYP 2C19 poor metabolizers cannot make enough active metab-
olite for effective use. About 3% of Caucasians and 20% of Asians and Kenyans are
poor metabolizers. The half-life is 12e21 h, but longer in poor metabolizers. Four
pharmacokinetic studies in pregnant women from the Western border of Thailand
and Zambia all demonstrate increased clearance and reduced plasma concentrations
of CG by about twofold in pregnancy [60,61,72,73]; one study recommends
increasing PG dose by 50% in late pregnancy, though no data are available for
this suggested dose in pregnancy [72]. One postulated mechanism for decreased
CG in late pregnancy is inhibition of CYP 2C19 by estrogen. Atovaquone is often
combined with PG, and exposure is approximately half in pregnancy versus
nonpregnant [60,61].
Meﬂoquine is used for CQ/PG-resistant malaria. It is well absorbed and widely
distributed, including penetration into breast milk. It is partially hepatically metab-
olized by CYP 3A4, and is a substrate and inhibitor of Pgp. Elimination is very slow,
mainly via bile and feces, with a half-life of 13e33 days. Two studies have reported
decreased plasma meﬂoquine concentrations during pregnancy, suggesting higher
pregnancy doses need to be evaluated [74,75].
Sulfadoxine-Pyrimethamine is used in combination as a second choice antima-
larial in the second and third trimesters of pregnancy. Sulfadoxine should be avoided
near term due to risk of infant kernicterus. Both are widely distributed and cross the
placenta and into breast milk. Both are metabolized; sulfadoxine half-life is 200 h,
while pyrimethamine is 80e123 h. Three different pharmacokinetic studies showed
184
CHAPTER 12 Clinical pharmacology of anti-infectives during pregnancy
